 Introductory Chapter
 Chapter I: Exterior Form Of North America
 Chapter Summary
 Chapter II: Origin Of The Anglo-Americans—Part I
 Chapter Summary
 Chapter II: Origin Of The Anglo-Americans—Part II
 Chapter III: Social Conditions Of The Anglo-Americans
 Chapter Summary
 Chapter IV: The Principle Of The Sovereignty Of The People In America
 Chapter Summary
 Chapter V: Necessity Of Examining The Condition Of The States—Part I
 Chapter V: Necessity Of Examining The Condition Of The States—Part II
 Chapter V: Necessity Of Examining The Condition Of The States—Part III
 Chapter VI: Judicial Power In The United States
 Chapter Summary
 Chapter VII: Political Jurisdiction In The United States
 Chapter Summary
 Chapter VIII: The Federal Constitution—Part I
 Chapter Summary
 Summary Of The Federal Constitution
 Chapter VIII: The Federal Constitution—Part II
 Chapter VIII: The Federal Constitution—Part III
 Chapter VIII: The Federal Constitution—Part IV
 Chapter VIII: The Federal Constitution—Part V
 Chapter IX: Why The People May Strictly Be Said To Govern In The
  United
 Chapter X: Parties In The United States
 Chapter Summary
 Parties In The United States
 Chapter XI: Liberty Of The Press In The United States
 Chapter Summary
 Chapter XII: Political Associations In The United States
 Chapter Summary
 Chapter XIII: Government Of The Democracy In America—Part I
 Chapter XIII: Government Of The Democracy In America—Part II
 Chapter XIII: Government Of The Democracy In America—Part III
 Chapter XIV: Advantages American Society Derive From Democracy—Part I
 Chapter XIV: Advantages American Society Derive From Democracy—Part II
 Chapter XV: Unlimited Power Of Majority, And Its Consequences—Part I
 Chapter Summary
 Chapter XV: Unlimited Power Of Majority, And Its Consequences—Part II
 Chapter XVI: Causes Mitigating Tyranny In The United States—Part I
 Chapter Summary
 Chapter XVI: Causes Mitigating Tyranny In The United States—Part II
 Chapter XVII: Principal Causes Maintaining The Democratic
  Republic—Part I
 Chapter XVII: Principal Causes Maintaining The Democratic
  Republic—Part II
 Chapter XVII: Principal Causes Maintaining The Democratic
  Republic—Part III
 Chapter XVII: Principal Causes Maintaining The Democratic
  Republic—Part IV
 Chapter XVIII: Future Condition Of Three Races In The United
  States—Part I
 Chapter XVIII: Future Condition Of Three Races—Part II
 Chapter XVIII: Future Condition Of Three Races—Part III
 Chapter XVIII: Future Condition Of Three Races—Part IV
 Chapter XVIII: Future Condition Of Three Races—Part V
 Chapter XVIII: Future Condition Of Three Races—Part VI
 Chapter XVIII: Future Condition Of Three Races—Part VII
 Chapter XVIII: Future Condition Of Three Races—Part VIII
 Chapter XVIII: Future Condition Of Three Races—Part IX
 Chapter XVIII: Future Condition Of Three Races—Part X
 Conclusion




 Book One




 Introductory Chapter


Amongst the novel objects that attracted my attention during my stay in
the United States, nothing struck me more forcibly than the general
equality of conditions. I readily discovered the prodigious influence
which this primary fact exercises on the whole course of society, by
giving a certain direction to public opinion, and a certain tenor to
the laws; by imparting new maxims to the governing powers, and peculiar
habits to the governed. I speedily perceived that the influence of this
fact extends far beyond the political character and the laws of the
country, and that it has no less empire over civil society than over
the Government; it creates opinions, engenders sentiments, suggests the
ordinary practices of life, and modifies whatever it does not produce.
The more I advanced in the study of American society, the more I
perceived that the equality of conditions is the fundamental fact from
which all others seem to be derived, and the central point at which all
my observations constantly terminated.

I then turned my thoughts to our own hemisphere, where I imagined that
I discerned something analogous to the spectacle which the New World
presented to me. I observed that the equality of conditions is daily
progressing towards those extreme limits which it seems to have reached
in the United States, and that the democracy which governs the American
communities appears to be rapidly rising into power in Europe. I hence
conceived the idea of the book which is now before the reader.

It is evident to all alike that a great democratic revolution is going
on amongst us; but there are two opinions as to its nature and
consequences. To some it appears to be a novel accident, which as such
may still be checked; to others it seems irresistible, because it is
the most uniform, the most ancient, and the most permanent tendency
which is to be found in history. Let us recollect the situation of
France seven hundred years ago, when the territory was divided amongst
a small number of families, who were the owners of the soil and the
rulers of the inhabitants; the right of governing descended with the
family inheritance from generation to generation; force was the only
means by which man could act on man, and landed property was the sole
source of power. Soon, however, the political power of the clergy was
founded, and began to exert itself: the clergy opened its ranks to all
classes, to the poor and the rich, the villein and the lord; equality
penetrated into the Government through the Church, and the being who as
a serf must have vegetated in perpetual bondage took his place as a
priest in the midst of nobles, and not infrequently above the heads of
kings.

The different relations of men became more complicated and more
numerous as society gradually became more stable and more civilized.
Thence the want of civil laws was felt; and the order of legal
functionaries soon rose from the obscurity of the tribunals and their
dusty chambers, to appear at the court of the monarch, by the side of
the feudal barons in their ermine and their mail. Whilst the kings were
ruining themselves by their great enterprises, and the nobles
exhausting their resources by private wars, the lower orders were
enriching themselves by commerce. The influence of money began to be
perceptible in State affairs. The transactions of business opened a new
road to power, and the financier rose to a station of political
influence in which he was at once flattered and despised. Gradually the
spread of mental acquirements, and the increasing taste for literature
and art, opened chances of success to talent; science became a means of
government, intelligence led to social power, and the man of letters
took a part in the affairs of the State. The value attached to the
privileges of birth decreased in the exact proportion in which new
paths were struck out to advancement. In the eleventh century nobility
was beyond all price; in the thirteenth it might be purchased; it was
conferred for the first time in 1270; and equality was thus introduced
into the Government by the aristocracy itself.

In the course of these seven hundred years it sometimes happened that
in order to resist the authority of the Crown, or to diminish the power
of their rivals, the nobles granted a certain share of political rights
to the people. Or, more frequently, the king permitted the lower orders
to enjoy a degree of power, with the intention of repressing the
aristocracy. In France the kings have always been the most active and
the most constant of levellers. When they were strong and ambitious
they spared no pains to raise the people to the level of the nobles;
when they were temperate or weak they allowed the people to rise above
themselves. Some assisted the democracy by their talents, others by
their vices. Louis XI and Louis XIV reduced every rank beneath the
throne to the same subjection; Louis XV descended, himself and all his
Court, into the dust.

As soon as land was held on any other than a feudal tenure, and
personal property began in its turn to confer influence and power,
every improvement which was introduced in commerce or manufacture was a
fresh element of the equality of conditions. Henceforward every new
discovery, every new want which it engendered, and every new desire
which craved satisfaction, was a step towards the universal level. The
taste for luxury, the love of war, the sway of fashion, and the most
superficial as well as the deepest passions of the human heart,
co-operated to enrich the poor and to impoverish the rich.

From the time when the exercise of the intellect became the source of
strength and of wealth, it is impossible not to consider every addition
to science, every fresh truth, and every new idea as a germ of power
placed within the reach of the people. Poetry, eloquence, and memory,
the grace of wit, the glow of imagination, the depth of thought, and
all the gifts which are bestowed by Providence with an equal hand,
turned to the advantage of the democracy; and even when they were in
the possession of its adversaries they still served its cause by
throwing into relief the natural greatness of man; its conquests
spread, therefore, with those of civilization and knowledge, and
literature became an arsenal where the poorest and the weakest could
always find weapons to their hand.

In perusing the pages of our history, we shall scarcely meet with a
single great event, in the lapse of seven hundred years, which has not
turned to the advantage of equality. The Crusades and the wars of the
English decimated the nobles and divided their possessions; the
erection of communities introduced an element of democratic liberty
into the bosom of feudal monarchy; the invention of fire-arms equalized
the villein and the noble on the field of battle; printing opened the
same resources to the minds of all classes; the post was organized so
as to bring the same information to the door of the poor man’s cottage
and to the gate of the palace; and Protestantism proclaimed that all
men are alike able to find the road to heaven. The discovery of America
offered a thousand new paths to fortune, and placed riches and power
within the reach of the adventurous and the obscure. If we examine what
has happened in France at intervals of fifty years, beginning with the
eleventh century, we shall invariably perceive that a twofold
revolution has taken place in the state of society. The noble has gone
down on the social ladder, and the roturier has gone up; the one
descends as the other rises. Every half century brings them nearer to
each other, and they will very shortly meet.

Nor is this phenomenon at all peculiar to France. Whithersoever we turn
our eyes we shall witness the same continual revolution throughout the
whole of Christendom. The various occurrences of national existence
have everywhere turned to the advantage of democracy; all men have
aided it by their exertions: those who have intentionally labored in
its cause, and those who have served it unwittingly; those who have
fought for it and those who have declared themselves its opponents,
have all been driven along in the same track, have all labored to one
end, some ignorantly and some unwillingly; all have been blind
instruments in the hands of God.

The gradual development of the equality of conditions is therefore a
providential fact, and it possesses all the characteristics of a divine
decree: it is universal, it is durable, it constantly eludes all human
interference, and all events as well as all men contribute to its
progress. Would it, then, be wise to imagine that a social impulse
which dates from so far back can be checked by the efforts of a
generation? Is it credible that the democracy which has annihilated the
feudal system and vanquished kings will respect the citizen and the
capitalist? Will it stop now that it has grown so strong and its
adversaries so weak? None can say which way we are going, for all terms
of comparison are wanting: the equality of conditions is more complete
in the Christian countries of the present day than it has been at any
time or in any part of the world; so that the extent of what already
exists prevents us from foreseeing what may be yet to come.

The whole book which is here offered to the public has been written
under the impression of a kind of religious dread produced in the
author’s mind by the contemplation of so irresistible a revolution,
which has advanced for centuries in spite of such amazing obstacles,
and which is still proceeding in the midst of the ruins it has made. It
is not necessary that God himself should speak in order to disclose to
us the unquestionable signs of His will; we can discern them in the
habitual course of nature, and in the invariable tendency of events: I
know, without a special revelation, that the planets move in the orbits
traced by the Creator’s finger. If the men of our time were led by
attentive observation and by sincere reflection to acknowledge that the
gradual and progressive development of social equality is at once the
past and future of their history, this solitary truth would confer the
sacred character of a Divine decree upon the change. To attempt to
check democracy would be in that case to resist the will of God; and
the nations would then be constrained to make the best of the social
lot awarded to them by Providence.

The Christian nations of our age seem to me to present a most alarming
spectacle; the impulse which is bearing them along is so strong that it
cannot be stopped, but it is not yet so rapid that it cannot be guided:
their fate is in their hands; yet a little while and it may be so no
longer. The first duty which is at this time imposed upon those who
direct our affairs is to educate the democracy; to warm its faith, if
that be possible; to purify its morals; to direct its energies; to
substitute a knowledge of business for its inexperience, and an
acquaintance with its true interests for its blind propensities; to
adapt its government to time and place, and to modify it in compliance
with the occurrences and the actors of the age. A new science of
politics is indispensable to a new world. This, however, is what we
think of least; launched in the middle of a rapid stream, we
obstinately fix our eyes on the ruins which may still be described upon
the shore we have left, whilst the current sweeps us along, and drives
us backwards towards the gulf.

In no country in Europe has the great social revolution which I have
been describing made such rapid progress as in France; but it has
always been borne on by chance. The heads of the State have never had
any forethought for its exigencies, and its victories have been
obtained without their consent or without their knowledge. The most
powerful, the most intelligent, and the most moral classes of the
nation have never attempted to connect themselves with it in order to
guide it. The people has consequently been abandoned to its wild
propensities, and it has grown up like those outcasts who receive their
education in the public streets, and who are unacquainted with aught
but the vices and wretchedness of society. The existence of a democracy
was seemingly unknown, when on a sudden it took possession of the
supreme power. Everything was then submitted to its caprices; it was
worshipped as the idol of strength; until, when it was enfeebled by its
own excesses, the legislator conceived the rash project of annihilating
its power, instead of instructing it and correcting its vices; no
attempt was made to fit it to govern, but all were bent on excluding it
from the government.

The consequence of this has been that the democratic revolution has
been effected only in the material parts of society, without that
concomitant change in laws, ideas, customs, and manners which was
necessary to render such a revolution beneficial. We have gotten a
democracy, but without the conditions which lessen its vices and render
its natural advantages more prominent; and although we already perceive
the evils it brings, we are ignorant of the benefits it may confer.

While the power of the Crown, supported by the aristocracy, peaceably
governed the nations of Europe, society possessed, in the midst of its
wretchedness, several different advantages which can now scarcely be
appreciated or conceived. The power of a part of his subjects was an
insurmountable barrier to the tyranny of the prince; and the monarch,
who felt the almost divine character which he enjoyed in the eyes of
the multitude, derived a motive for the just use of his power from the
respect which he inspired. High as they were placed above the people,
the nobles could not but take that calm and benevolent interest in its
fate which the shepherd feels towards his flock; and without
acknowledging the poor as their equals, they watched over the destiny
of those whose welfare Providence had entrusted to their care. The
people never having conceived the idea of a social condition different
from its own, and entertaining no expectation of ever ranking with its
chiefs, received benefits from them without discussing their rights. It
grew attached to them when they were clement and just, and it submitted
without resistance or servility to their exactions, as to the
inevitable visitations of the arm of God. Custom, and the manners of
the time, had moreover created a species of law in the midst of
violence, and established certain limits to oppression. As the noble
never suspected that anyone would attempt to deprive him of the
privileges which he believed to be legitimate, and as the serf looked
upon his own inferiority as a consequence of the immutable order of
nature, it is easy to imagine that a mutual exchange of good-will took
place between two classes so differently gifted by fate. Inequality and
wretchedness were then to be found in society; but the souls of neither
rank of men were degraded. Men are not corrupted by the exercise of
power or debased by the habit of obedience, but by the exercise of a
power which they believe to be illegal and by obedience to a rule which
they consider to be usurped and oppressive. On one side was wealth,
strength, and leisure, accompanied by the refinements of luxury, the
elegance of taste, the pleasures of wit, and the religion of art. On
the other was labor and a rude ignorance; but in the midst of this
coarse and ignorant multitude it was not uncommon to meet with
energetic passions, generous sentiments, profound religious
convictions, and independent virtues. The body of a State thus
organized might boast of its stability, its power, and, above all, of
its glory.

But the scene is now changed, and gradually the two ranks mingle; the
divisions which once severed mankind are lowered, property is divided,
power is held in common, the light of intelligence spreads, and the
capacities of all classes are equally cultivated; the State becomes
democratic, and the empire of democracy is slowly and peaceably
introduced into the institutions and the manners of the nation. I can
conceive a society in which all men would profess an equal attachment
and respect for the laws of which they are the common authors; in which
the authority of the State would be respected as necessary, though not
as divine; and the loyalty of the subject to its chief magistrate would
not be a passion, but a quiet and rational persuasion. Every individual
being in the possession of rights which he is sure to retain, a kind of
manly reliance and reciprocal courtesy would arise between all classes,
alike removed from pride and meanness. The people, well acquainted with
its true interests, would allow that in order to profit by the
advantages of society it is necessary to satisfy its demands. In this
state of things the voluntary association of the citizens might supply
the individual exertions of the nobles, and the community would be
alike protected from anarchy and from oppression.

I admit that, in a democratic State thus constituted, society will not
be stationary; but the impulses of the social body may be regulated and
directed forwards; if there be less splendor than in the halls of an
aristocracy, the contrast of misery will be less frequent also; the
pleasures of enjoyment may be less excessive, but those of comfort will
be more general; the sciences may be less perfectly cultivated, but
ignorance will be less common; the impetuosity of the feelings will be
repressed, and the habits of the nation softened; there will be more
vices and fewer crimes. In the absence of enthusiasm and of an ardent
faith, great sacrifices may be obtained from the members of a
commonwealth by an appeal to their understandings and their experience;
each individual will feel the same necessity for uniting with his
fellow-citizens to protect his own weakness; and as he knows that if
they are to assist he must co-operate, he will readily perceive that
his personal interest is identified with the interest of the community.
The nation, taken as a whole, will be less brilliant, less glorious,
and perhaps less strong; but the majority of the citizens will enjoy a
greater degree of prosperity, and the people will remain quiet, not
because it despairs of amelioration, but because it is conscious of the
advantages of its condition. If all the consequences of this state of
things were not good or useful, society would at least have
appropriated all such as were useful and good; and having once and for
ever renounced the social advantages of aristocracy, mankind would
enter into possession of all the benefits which democracy can afford.

But here it may be asked what we have adopted in the place of those
institutions, those ideas, and those customs of our forefathers which
we have abandoned. The spell of royalty is broken, but it has not been
succeeded by the majesty of the laws; the people has learned to despise
all authority, but fear now extorts a larger tribute of obedience than
that which was formerly paid by reverence and by love.

I perceive that we have destroyed those independent beings which were
able to cope with tyranny single-handed; but it is the Government that
has inherited the privileges of which families, corporations, and
individuals have been deprived; the weakness of the whole community has
therefore succeeded that influence of a small body of citizens, which,
if it was sometimes oppressive, was often conservative. The division of
property has lessened the distance which separated the rich from the
poor; but it would seem that the nearer they draw to each other, the
greater is their mutual hatred, and the more vehement the envy and the
dread with which they resist each other’s claims to power; the notion
of Right is alike insensible to both classes, and Force affords to both
the only argument for the present, and the only guarantee for the
future. The poor man retains the prejudices of his forefathers without
their faith, and their ignorance without their virtues; he has adopted
the doctrine of self-interest as the rule of his actions, without
understanding the science which controls it, and his egotism is no less
blind than his devotedness was formerly. If society is tranquil, it is
not because it relies upon its strength and its well-being, but because
it knows its weakness and its infirmities; a single effort may cost it
its life; everybody feels the evil, but no one has courage or energy
enough to seek the cure; the desires, the regret, the sorrows, and the
joys of the time produce nothing that is visible or permanent, like the
passions of old men which terminate in impotence.

We have, then, abandoned whatever advantages the old state of things
afforded, without receiving any compensation from our present
condition; we have destroyed an aristocracy, and we seem inclined to
survey its ruins with complacency, and to fix our abode in the midst of
them.

The phenomena which the intellectual world presents are not less
deplorable. The democracy of France, checked in its course or abandoned
to its lawless passions, has overthrown whatever crossed its path, and
has shaken all that it has not destroyed. Its empire on society has not
been gradually introduced or peaceably established, but it has
constantly advanced in the midst of disorder and the agitation of a
conflict. In the heat of the struggle each partisan is hurried beyond
the limits of his opinions by the opinions and the excesses of his
opponents, until he loses sight of the end of his exertions, and holds
a language which disguises his real sentiments or secret instincts.
Hence arises the strange confusion which we are witnessing. I cannot
recall to my mind a passage in history more worthy of sorrow and of
pity than the scenes which are happening under our eyes; it is as if
the natural bond which unites the opinions of man to his tastes and his
actions to his principles was now broken; the sympathy which has always
been acknowledged between the feelings and the ideas of mankind appears
to be dissolved, and all the laws of moral analogy to be abolished.

Zealous Christians may be found amongst us whose minds are nurtured in
the love and knowledge of a future life, and who readily espouse the
cause of human liberty as the source of all moral greatness.
Christianity, which has declared that all men are equal in the sight of
God, will not refuse to acknowledge that all citizens are equal in the
eye of the law. But, by a singular concourse of events, religion is
entangled in those institutions which democracy assails, and it is not
unfrequently brought to reject the equality it loves, and to curse that
cause of liberty as a foe which it might hallow by its alliance.

By the side of these religious men I discern others whose looks are
turned to the earth more than to Heaven; they are the partisans of
liberty, not only as the source of the noblest virtues, but more
especially as the root of all solid advantages; and they sincerely
desire to extend its sway, and to impart its blessings to mankind. It
is natural that they should hasten to invoke the assistance of
religion, for they must know that liberty cannot be established without
morality, nor morality without faith; but they have seen religion in
the ranks of their adversaries, and they inquire no further; some of
them attack it openly, and the remainder are afraid to defend it.

In former ages slavery has been advocated by the venal and
slavish-minded, whilst the independent and the warm-hearted were
struggling without hope to save the liberties of mankind. But men of
high and generous characters are now to be met with, whose opinions are
at variance with their inclinations, and who praise that servility
which they have themselves never known. Others, on the contrary, speak
in the name of liberty, as if they were able to feel its sanctity and
its majesty, and loudly claim for humanity those rights which they have
always disowned. There are virtuous and peaceful individuals whose pure
morality, quiet habits, affluence, and talents fit them to be the
leaders of the surrounding population; their love of their country is
sincere, and they are prepared to make the greatest sacrifices to its
welfare, but they confound the abuses of civilization with its
benefits, and the idea of evil is inseparable in their minds from that
of novelty.

Not far from this class is another party, whose object is to
materialize mankind, to hit upon what is expedient without heeding what
is just, to acquire knowledge without faith, and prosperity apart from
virtue; assuming the title of the champions of modern civilization, and
placing themselves in a station which they usurp with insolence, and
from which they are driven by their own unworthiness. Where are we
then? The religionists are the enemies of liberty, and the friends of
liberty attack religion; the high-minded and the noble advocate
subjection, and the meanest and most servile minds preach independence;
honest and enlightened citizens are opposed to all progress, whilst men
without patriotism and without principles are the apostles of
civilization and of intelligence. Has such been the fate of the
centuries which have preceded our own? and has man always inhabited a
world like the present, where nothing is linked together, where virtue
is without genius, and genius without honor; where the love of order is
confounded with a taste for oppression, and the holy rites of freedom
with a contempt of law; where the light thrown by conscience on human
actions is dim, and where nothing seems to be any longer forbidden or
allowed, honorable or shameful, false or true? I cannot, however,
believe that the Creator made man to leave him in an endless struggle
with the intellectual miseries which surround us: God destines a calmer
and a more certain future to the communities of Europe; I am
unacquainted with His designs, but I shall not cease to believe in them
because I cannot fathom them, and I had rather mistrust my own capacity
than His justice.

There is a country in the world where the great revolution which I am
speaking of seems nearly to have reached its natural limits; it has
been effected with ease and simplicity, say rather that this country
has attained the consequences of the democratic revolution which we are
undergoing without having experienced the revolution itself. The
emigrants who fixed themselves on the shores of America in the
beginning of the seventeenth century severed the democratic principle
from all the principles which repressed it in the old communities of
Europe, and transplanted it unalloyed to the New World. It has there
been allowed to spread in perfect freedom, and to put forth its
consequences in the laws by influencing the manners of the country.

It appears to me beyond a doubt that sooner or later we shall arrive,
like the Americans, at an almost complete equality of conditions. But I
do not conclude from this that we shall ever be necessarily led to draw
the same political consequences which the Americans have derived from a
similar social organization. I am far from supposing that they have
chosen the only form of government which a democracy may adopt; but the
identity of the efficient cause of laws and manners in the two
countries is sufficient to account for the immense interest we have in
becoming acquainted with its effects in each of them.

It is not, then, merely to satisfy a legitimate curiosity that I have
examined America; my wish has been to find instruction by which we may
ourselves profit. Whoever should imagine that I have intended to write
a panegyric will perceive that such was not my design; nor has it been
my object to advocate any form of government in particular, for I am of
opinion that absolute excellence is rarely to be found in any
legislation; I have not even affected to discuss whether the social
revolution, which I believe to be irresistible, is advantageous or
prejudicial to mankind; I have acknowledged this revolution as a fact
already accomplished or on the eve of its accomplishment; and I have
selected the nation, from amongst those which have undergone it, in
which its development has been the most peaceful and the most complete,
in order to discern its natural consequences, and, if it be possible,
to distinguish the means by which it may be rendered profitable. I
confess that in America I saw more than America; I sought the image of
democracy itself, with its inclinations, its character, its prejudices,
and its passions, in order to learn what we have to fear or to hope
from its progress.

In the first part of this work I have attempted to show the tendency
given to the laws by the democracy of America, which is abandoned
almost without restraint to its instinctive propensities, and to
exhibit the course it prescribes to the Government and the influence it
exercises on affairs. I have sought to discover the evils and the
advantages which it produces. I have examined the precautions used by
the Americans to direct it, as well as those which they have not
adopted, and I have undertaken to point out the causes which enable it
to govern society. I do not know whether I have succeeded in making
known what I saw in America, but I am certain that such has been my
sincere desire, and that I have never, knowingly, moulded facts to
ideas, instead of ideas to facts.

Whenever a point could be established by the aid of written documents,
I have had recourse to the original text, and to the most authentic and
approved works. I have cited my authorities in the notes, and anyone
may refer to them. Whenever an opinion, a political custom, or a remark
on the manners of the country was concerned, I endeavored to consult
the most enlightened men I met with. If the point in question was
important or doubtful, I was not satisfied with one testimony, but I
formed my opinion on the evidence of several witnesses. Here the reader
must necessarily believe me upon my word. I could frequently have
quoted names which are either known to him, or which deserve to be so,
in proof of what I advance; but I have carefully abstained from this
practice. A stranger frequently hears important truths at the fire-side
of his host, which the latter would perhaps conceal from the ear of
friendship; he consoles himself with his guest for the silence to which
he is restricted, and the shortness of the traveller’s stay takes away
all fear of his indiscretion. I carefully noted every conversation of
this nature as soon as it occurred, but these notes will never leave my
writing-case; I had rather injure the success of my statements than add
my name to the list of those strangers who repay the generous
hospitality they have received by subsequent chagrin and annoyance.

I am aware that, notwithstanding my care, nothing will be easier than
to criticise this book, if anyone ever chooses to criticise it. Those
readers who may examine it closely will discover the fundamental idea
which connects the several parts together. But the diversity of the
subjects I have had to treat is exceedingly great, and it will not be
difficult to oppose an isolated fact to the body of facts which I
quote, or an isolated idea to the body of ideas I put forth. I hope to
be read in the spirit which has guided my labors, and that my book may
be judged by the general impression it leaves, as I have formed my own
judgment not on any single reason, but upon the mass of evidence. It
must not be forgotten that the author who wishes to be understood is
obliged to push all his ideas to their utmost theoretical consequences,
and often to the verge of what is false or impracticable; for if it be
necessary sometimes to quit the rules of logic in active life, such is
not the case in discourse, and a man finds that almost as many
difficulties spring from inconsistency of language as usually arise
from inconsistency of conduct.

I conclude by pointing out myself what many readers will consider the
principal defect of the work. This book is written to favor no
particular views, and in composing it I have entertained no designs of
serving or attacking any party; I have undertaken not to see
differently, but to look further than parties, and whilst they are
busied for the morrow I have turned my thoughts to the Future.




 Chapter I: Exterior Form Of North America




 Chapter Summary


North America divided into two vast regions, one inclining towards the
Pole, the other towards the Equator—Valley of the Mississippi—Traces of
the Revolutions of the Globe—Shore of the Atlantic Ocean where the
English Colonies were founded—Difference in the appearance of North and
of South America at the time of their Discovery—Forests of North
America—Prairies—Wandering Tribes of Natives—Their outward appearance,
manners, and language—Traces of an unknown people.

Exterior Form Of North America

North America presents in its external form certain general features
which it is easy to discriminate at the first glance. A sort of
methodical order seems to have regulated the separation of land and
water, mountains and valleys. A simple, but grand, arrangement is
discoverable amidst the confusion of objects and the prodigious variety
of scenes. This continent is divided, almost equally, into two vast
regions, one of which is bounded on the north by the Arctic Pole, and
by the two great oceans on the east and west. It stretches towards the
south, forming a triangle whose irregular sides meet at length below
the great lakes of Canada. The second region begins where the other
terminates, and includes all the remainder of the continent. The one
slopes gently towards the Pole, the other towards the Equator.

The territory comprehended in the first region descends towards the
north with so imperceptible a slope that it may almost be said to form
a level plain. Within the bounds of this immense tract of country there
are neither high mountains nor deep valleys. Streams meander through it
irregularly: great rivers mix their currents, separate and meet again,
disperse and form vast marshes, losing all trace of their channels in
the labyrinth of waters they have themselves created; and thus, at
length, after innumerable windings, fall into the Polar Seas. The great
lakes which bound this first region are not walled in, like most of
those in the Old World, between hills and rocks. Their banks are flat,
and rise but a few feet above the level of their waters; each of them
thus forming a vast bowl filled to the brim. The slightest change in
the structure of the globe would cause their waters to rush either
towards the Pole or to the tropical sea.

The second region is more varied on its surface, and better suited for
the habitation of man. Two long chains of mountains divide it from one
extreme to the other; the Alleghany ridge takes the form of the shores
of the Atlantic Ocean; the other is parallel with the Pacific. The
space which lies between these two chains of mountains contains
1,341,649 square miles. *a Its surface is therefore about six times as
great as that of France. This vast territory, however, forms a single
valley, one side of which descends gradually from the rounded summits
of the Alleghanies, while the other rises in an uninterrupted course
towards the tops of the Rocky Mountains. At the bottom of the valley
flows an immense river, into which the various streams issuing from the
mountains fall from all parts. In memory of their native land, the
French formerly called this river the St. Louis. The Indians, in their
pompous language, have named it the Father of Waters, or the
Mississippi.

a
[ Darby’s “View of the United States.”]


The Mississippi takes its source above the limit of the two great
regions of which I have spoken, not far from the highest point of the
table-land where they unite. Near the same spot rises another river, *b
which empties itself into the Polar seas. The course of the Mississippi
is at first dubious: it winds several times towards the north, from
whence it rose; and at length, after having been delayed in lakes and
marshes, it flows slowly onwards to the south. Sometimes quietly
gliding along the argillaceous bed which nature has assigned to it,
sometimes swollen by storms, the Mississippi waters 2,500 miles in its
course. *c At the distance of 1,364 miles from its mouth this river
attains an average depth of fifteen feet; and it is navigated by
vessels of 300 tons burden for a course of nearly 500 miles.
Fifty-seven large navigable rivers contribute to swell the waters of
the Mississippi; amongst others, the Missouri, which traverses a space
of 2,500 miles; the Arkansas of 1,300 miles, the Red River 1,000 miles,
four whose course is from 800 to 1,000 miles in length, viz., the
Illinois, the St. Peter’s, the St. Francis, and the Moingona; besides a
countless multitude of rivulets which unite from all parts their
tributary streams.

b
[ The Red River.]


c
[ Warden’s “Description of the United States.”]


The valley which is watered by the Mississippi seems formed to be the
bed of this mighty river, which, like a god of antiquity, dispenses
both good and evil in its course. On the shores of the stream nature
displays an inexhaustible fertility; in proportion as you recede from
its banks, the powers of vegetation languish, the soil becomes poor,
and the plants that survive have a sickly growth. Nowhere have the
great convulsions of the globe left more evident traces than in the
valley of the Mississippi; the whole aspect of the country shows the
powerful effects of water, both by its fertility and by its barrenness.
The waters of the primeval ocean accumulated enormous beds of vegetable
mould in the valley, which they levelled as they retired. Upon the
right shore of the river are seen immense plains, as smooth as if the
husbandman had passed over them with his roller. As you approach the
mountains the soil becomes more and more unequal and sterile; the
ground is, as it were, pierced in a thousand places by primitive rocks,
which appear like the bones of a skeleton whose flesh is partly
consumed. The surface of the earth is covered with a granite sand and
huge irregular masses of stone, among which a few plants force their
growth, and give the appearance of a green field covered with the ruins
of a vast edifice. These stones and this sand discover, on examination,
a perfect analogy with those which compose the arid and broken summits
of the Rocky Mountains. The flood of waters which washed the soil to
the bottom of the valley afterwards carried away portions of the rocks
themselves; and these, dashed and bruised against the neighboring
cliffs, were left scattered like wrecks at their feet. *d The valley of
the Mississippi is, upon the whole, the most magnificent dwelling-place
prepared by God for man’s abode; and yet it may be said that at present
it is but a mighty desert.

d
[ See Appendix, A.]


On the eastern side of the Alleghanies, between the base of these
mountains and the Atlantic Ocean, there lies a long ridge of rocks and
sand, which the sea appears to have left behind as it retired. The mean
breadth of this territory does not exceed one hundred miles; but it is
about nine hundred miles in length. This part of the American continent
has a soil which offers every obstacle to the husbandman, and its
vegetation is scanty and unvaried.

Upon this inhospitable coast the first united efforts of human industry
were made. The tongue of arid land was the cradle of those English
colonies which were destined one day to become the United States of
America. The centre of power still remains here; whilst in the
backwoods the true elements of the great people to whom the future
control of the continent belongs are gathering almost in secrecy
together.

When the Europeans first landed on the shores of the West Indies, and
afterwards on the coast of South America, they thought themselves
transported into those fabulous regions of which poets had sung. The
sea sparkled with phosphoric light, and the extraordinary transparency
of its waters discovered to the view of the navigator all that had
hitherto been hidden in the deep abyss. *e Here and there appeared
little islands perfumed with odoriferous plants, and resembling baskets
of flowers floating on the tranquil surface of the ocean. Every object
which met the sight, in this enchanting region, seemed prepared to
satisfy the wants or contribute to the pleasures of man. Almost all the
trees were loaded with nourishing fruits, and those which were useless
as food delighted the eye by the brilliancy and variety of their
colors. In groves of fragrant lemon-trees, wild figs, flowering
myrtles, acacias, and oleanders, which were hung with festoons of
various climbing plants, covered with flowers, a multitude of birds
unknown in Europe displayed their bright plumage, glittering with
purple and azure, and mingled their warbling with the harmony of a
world teeming with life and motion. *f Underneath this brilliant
exterior death was concealed. But the air of these climates had so
enervating an influence that man, absorbed by present enjoyment, was
rendered regardless of the future.

e
[ Malte Brun tells us (vol. v. p. 726) that the water of the Caribbean
Sea is so transparent that corals and fish are discernible at a depth
of sixty fathoms. The ship seemed to float in air, the navigator became
giddy as his eye penetrated through the crystal flood, and beheld
submarine gardens, or beds of shells, or gilded fishes gliding among
tufts and thickets of seaweed.]


f
[ See Appendix, B.]


North America appeared under a very different aspect; there everything
was grave, serious, and solemn: it seemed created to be the domain of
intelligence, as the South was that of sensual delight. A turbulent and
foggy ocean washed its shores. It was girt round by a belt of granite
rocks, or by wide tracts of sand. The foliage of its woods was dark and
gloomy, for they were composed of firs, larches, evergreen oaks, wild
olive-trees, and laurels. Beyond this outer belt lay the thick shades
of the central forest, where the largest trees which are produced in
the two hemispheres grow side by side. The plane, the catalpa, the
sugar-maple, and the Virginian poplar mingled their branches with those
of the oak, the beech, and the lime. In these, as in the forests of the
Old World, destruction was perpetually going on. The ruins of
vegetation were heaped upon each other; but there was no laboring hand
to remove them, and their decay was not rapid enough to make room for
the continual work of reproduction. Climbing plants, grasses, and other
herbs forced their way through the mass of dying trees; they crept
along their bending trunks, found nourishment in their dusty cavities,
and a passage beneath the lifeless bark. Thus decay gave its assistance
to life, and their respective productions were mingled together. The
depths of these forests were gloomy and obscure, and a thousand
rivulets, undirected in their course by human industry, preserved in
them a constant moisture. It was rare to meet with flowers, wild
fruits, or birds beneath their shades. The fall of a tree overthrown by
age, the rushing torrent of a cataract, the lowing of the buffalo, and
the howling of the wind were the only sounds which broke the silence of
nature.

To the east of the great river, the woods almost disappeared; in their
stead were seen prairies of immense extent. Whether Nature in her
infinite variety had denied the germs of trees to these fertile plains,
or whether they had once been covered with forests, subsequently
destroyed by the hand of man, is a question which neither tradition nor
scientific research has been able to resolve.

These immense deserts were not, however, devoid of human inhabitants.
Some wandering tribes had been for ages scattered among the forest
shades or the green pastures of the prairie. From the mouth of the St.
Lawrence to the delta of the Mississippi, and from the Atlantic to the
Pacific Ocean, these savages possessed certain points of resemblance
which bore witness of their common origin; but at the same time they
differed from all other known races of men: *g they were neither white
like the Europeans, nor yellow like most of the Asiatics, nor black
like the negroes. Their skin was reddish brown, their hair long and
shining, their lips thin, and their cheekbones very prominent. The
languages spoken by the North American tribes are various as far as
regarded their words, but they were subject to the same grammatical
rules. These rules differed in several points from such as had been
observed to govern the origin of language. The idiom of the Americans
seemed to be the product of new combinations, and bespoke an effort of
the understanding of which the Indians of our days would be incapable.
*h

g
[ With the progress of discovery some resemblance has been found to
exist between the physical conformation, the language, and the habits
of the Indians of North America, and those of the Tongous, Mantchous,
Mongols, Tartars, and other wandering tribes of Asia. The land occupied
by these tribes is not very distant from Behring’s Strait, which allows
of the supposition, that at a remote period they gave inhabitants to
the desert continent of America. But this is a point which has not yet
been clearly elucidated by science. See Malte Brun, vol. v.; the works
of Humboldt; Fischer, “Conjecture sur l’Origine des Americains”; Adair,
“History of the American Indians.”]


h
[ See Appendix, C.]


The social state of these tribes differed also in many respects from
all that was seen in the Old World. They seemed to have multiplied
freely in the midst of their deserts without coming in contact with
other races more civilized than their own. Accordingly, they exhibited
none of those indistinct, incoherent notions of right and wrong, none
of that deep corruption of manners, which is usually joined with
ignorance and rudeness among nations which, after advancing to
civilization, have relapsed into a state of barbarism. The Indian was
indebted to no one but himself; his virtues, his vices, and his
prejudices were his own work; he had grown up in the wild independence
of his nature.

If, in polished countries, the lowest of the people are rude and
uncivil, it is not merely because they are poor and ignorant, but that,
being so, they are in daily contact with rich and enlightened men. The
sight of their own hard lot and of their weakness, which is daily
contrasted with the happiness and power of some of their
fellow-creatures, excites in their hearts at the same time the
sentiments of anger and of fear: the consciousness of their inferiority
and of their dependence irritates while it humiliates them. This state
of mind displays itself in their manners and language; they are at once
insolent and servile. The truth of this is easily proved by
observation; the people are more rude in aristocratic countries than
elsewhere, in opulent cities than in rural districts. In those places
where the rich and powerful are assembled together the weak and the
indigent feel themselves oppressed by their inferior condition. Unable
to perceive a single chance of regaining their equality, they give up
to despair, and allow themselves to fall below the dignity of human
nature.

This unfortunate effect of the disparity of conditions is not
observable in savage life: the Indians, although they are ignorant and
poor, are equal and free. At the period when Europeans first came among
them the natives of North America were ignorant of the value of riches,
and indifferent to the enjoyments which civilized man procures to
himself by their means. Nevertheless there was nothing coarse in their
demeanor; they practised an habitual reserve and a kind of aristocratic
politeness. Mild and hospitable when at peace, though merciless in war
beyond any known degree of human ferocity, the Indian would expose
himself to die of hunger in order to succor the stranger who asked
admittance by night at the door of his hut; yet he could tear in pieces
with his hands the still quivering limbs of his prisoner. The famous
republics of antiquity never gave examples of more unshaken courage,
more haughty spirits, or more intractable love of independence than
were hidden in former times among the wild forests of the New World. *i
The Europeans produced no great impression when they landed upon the
shores of North America; their presence engendered neither envy nor
fear. What influence could they possess over such men as we have
described? The Indian could live without wants, suffer without
complaint, and pour out his death-song at the stake. *j Like all the
other members of the great human family, these savages believed in the
existence of a better world, and adored under different names, God, the
creator of the universe. Their notions on the great intellectual truths
were in general simple and philosophical. *k

i
[ We learn from President Jefferson’s “Notes upon Virginia,” p. 148,
that among the Iroquois, when attacked by a superior force, aged men
refused to fly or to survive the destruction of their country; and they
braved death like the ancient Romans when their capital was sacked by
the Gauls. Further on, p. 150, he tells us that there is no example of
an Indian who, having fallen into the hands of his enemies, begged for
his life; on the contrary, the captive sought to obtain death at the
hands of his conquerors by the use of insult and provocation.]


j
[ See “Histoire de la Louisiane,” by Lepage Dupratz; Charlevoix,
“Histoire de la Nouvelle France”; “Lettres du Rev. G. Hecwelder;”
“Transactions of the American Philosophical Society,” v. I; Jefferson’s
“Notes on Virginia,” pp. 135-190. What is said by Jefferson is of
especial weight, on account of the personal merit of the writer, of his
peculiar position, and of the matter-of-fact age in which he lived.]


k
[ See Appendix, D.]


Although we have here traced the character of a primitive people, yet
it cannot be doubted that another people, more civilized and more
advanced in all respects, had preceded it in the same regions.

An obscure tradition which prevailed among the Indians to the north of
the Atlantic informs us that these very tribes formerly dwelt on the
west side of the Mississippi. Along the banks of the Ohio, and
throughout the central valley, there are frequently found, at this day,
tumuli raised by the hands of men. On exploring these heaps of earth to
their centre, it is usual to meet with human bones, strange
instruments, arms and utensils of all kinds, made of metal, or destined
for purposes unknown to the present race. The Indians of our time are
unable to give any information relative to the history of this unknown
people. Neither did those who lived three hundred years ago, when
America was first discovered, leave any accounts from which even an
hypothesis could be formed. Tradition—that perishable, yet ever renewed
monument of the pristine world—throws no light upon the subject. It is
an undoubted fact, however, that in this part of the globe thousands of
our fellow-beings had lived. When they came hither, what was their
origin, their destiny, their history, and how they perished, no one can
tell. How strange does it appear that nations have existed, and
afterwards so completely disappeared from the earth that the
remembrance of their very names is effaced; their languages are lost;
their glory is vanished like a sound without an echo; though perhaps
there is not one which has not left behind it some tomb in memory of
its passage! The most durable monument of human labor is that which
recalls the wretchedness and nothingness of man.

Although the vast country which we have been describing was inhabited
by many indigenous tribes, it may justly be said at the time of its
discovery by Europeans to have formed one great desert. The Indians
occupied without possessing it. It is by agricultural labor that man
appropriates the soil, and the early inhabitants of North America lived
by the produce of the chase. Their implacable prejudices, their
uncontrolled passions, their vices, and still more perhaps their savage
virtues, consigned them to inevitable destruction. The ruin of these
nations began from the day when Europeans landed on their shores; it
has proceeded ever since, and we are now witnessing the completion of
it. They seem to have been placed by Providence amidst the riches of
the New World to enjoy them for a season, and then surrender them.
Those coasts, so admirably adapted for commerce and industry; those
wide and deep rivers; that inexhaustible valley of the Mississippi; the
whole continent, in short, seemed prepared to be the abode of a great
nation, yet unborn.

In that land the great experiment was to be made, by civilized man, of
the attempt to construct society upon a new basis; and it was there,
for the first time, that theories hitherto unknown, or deemed
impracticable, were to exhibit a spectacle for which the world had not
been prepared by the history of the past.




 Chapter II: Origin Of The Anglo-Americans—Part I




 Chapter Summary


Utility of knowing the origin of nations in order to understand their
social condition and their laws—America the only country in which the
starting-point of a great people has been clearly observable—In what
respects all who emigrated to British America were similar—In what they
differed—Remark applicable to all Europeans who established themselves
on the shores of the New World—Colonization of Virginia—Colonization of
New England—Original character of the first inhabitants of New
England—Their arrival—Their first laws—Their social contract—Penal code
borrowed from the Hebrew legislation—Religious fervor—Republican
spirit—Intimate union of the spirit of religion with the spirit of
liberty.

Origin Of The Anglo-Americans, And Its Importance In Relation To Their
Future Condition.

After the birth of a human being his early years are obscurely spent in
the toils or pleasures of childhood. As he grows up the world receives
him, when his manhood begins, and he enters into contact with his
fellows. He is then studied for the first time, and it is imagined that
the germ of the vices and the virtues of his maturer years is then
formed. This, if I am not mistaken, is a great error. We must begin
higher up; we must watch the infant in its mother’s arms; we must see
the first images which the external world casts upon the dark mirror of
his mind; the first occurrences which he witnesses; we must hear the
first words which awaken the sleeping powers of thought, and stand by
his earliest efforts, if we would understand the prejudices, the
habits, and the passions which will rule his life. The entire man is,
so to speak, to be seen in the cradle of the child.

The growth of nations presents something analogous to this: they all
bear some marks of their origin; and the circumstances which
accompanied their birth and contributed to their rise affect the whole
term of their being. If we were able to go back to the elements of
states, and to examine the oldest monuments of their history, I doubt
not that we should discover the primal cause of the prejudices, the
habits, the ruling passions, and, in short, of all that constitutes
what is called the national character; we should then find the
explanation of certain customs which now seem at variance with the
prevailing manners; of such laws as conflict with established
principles; and of such incoherent opinions as are here and there to be
met with in society, like those fragments of broken chains which we
sometimes see hanging from the vault of an edifice, and supporting
nothing. This might explain the destinies of certain nations, which
seem borne on by an unknown force to ends of which they themselves are
ignorant. But hitherto facts have been wanting to researches of this
kind: the spirit of inquiry has only come upon communities in their
latter days; and when they at length contemplated their origin, time
had already obscured it, or ignorance and pride adorned it with
truth-concealing fables.

America is the only country in which it has been possible to witness
the natural and tranquil growth of society, and where the influences
exercised on the future condition of states by their origin is clearly
distinguishable. At the period when the peoples of Europe landed in the
New World their national characteristics were already completely
formed; each of them had a physiognomy of its own; and as they had
already attained that stage of civilization at which men are led to
study themselves, they have transmitted to us a faithful picture of
their opinions, their manners, and their laws. The men of the sixteenth
century are almost as well known to us as our contemporaries. America,
consequently, exhibits in the broad light of day the phenomena which
the ignorance or rudeness of earlier ages conceals from our researches.
Near enough to the time when the states of America were founded, to be
accurately acquainted with their elements, and sufficiently removed
from that period to judge of some of their results, the men of our own
day seem destined to see further than their predecessors into the
series of human events. Providence has given us a torch which our
forefathers did not possess, and has allowed us to discern fundamental
causes in the history of the world which the obscurity of the past
concealed from them. If we carefully examine the social and political
state of America, after having studied its history, we shall remain
perfectly convinced that not an opinion, not a custom, not a law, I may
even say not an event, is upon record which the origin of that people
will not explain. The readers of this book will find the germ of all
that is to follow in the present chapter, and the key to almost the
whole work.

The emigrants who came, at different periods to occupy the territory
now covered by the American Union differed from each other in many
respects; their aim was not the same, and they governed themselves on
different principles. These men had, however, certain features in
common, and they were all placed in an analogous situation. The tie of
language is perhaps the strongest and the most durable that can unite
mankind. All the emigrants spoke the same tongue; they were all offsets
from the same people. Born in a country which had been agitated for
centuries by the struggles of faction, and in which all parties had
been obliged in their turn to place themselves under the protection of
the laws, their political education had been perfected in this rude
school, and they were more conversant with the notions of right and the
principles of true freedom than the greater part of their European
contemporaries. At the period of their first emigrations the parish
system, that fruitful germ of free institutions, was deeply rooted in
the habits of the English; and with it the doctrine of the sovereignty
of the people had been introduced into the bosom of the monarchy of the
House of Tudor.

The religious quarrels which have agitated the Christian world were
then rife. England had plunged into the new order of things with
headlong vehemence. The character of its inhabitants, which had always
been sedate and reflective, became argumentative and austere. General
information had been increased by intellectual debate, and the mind had
received a deeper cultivation. Whilst religion was the topic of
discussion, the morals of the people were reformed. All these national
features are more or less discoverable in the physiognomy of those
adventurers who came to seek a new home on the opposite shores of the
Atlantic.

Another remark, to which we shall hereafter have occasion to recur, is
applicable not only to the English, but to the French, the Spaniards,
and all the Europeans who successively established themselves in the
New World. All these European colonies contained the elements, if not
the development, of a complete democracy. Two causes led to this
result. It may safely be advanced, that on leaving the mother-country
the emigrants had in general no notion of superiority over one another.
The happy and the powerful do not go into exile, and there are no surer
guarantees of equality among men than poverty and misfortune. It
happened, however, on several occasions, that persons of rank were
driven to America by political and religious quarrels. Laws were made
to establish a gradation of ranks; but it was soon found that the soil
of America was opposed to a territorial aristocracy. To bring that
refractory land into cultivation, the constant and interested exertions
of the owner himself were necessary; and when the ground was prepared,
its produce was found to be insufficient to enrich a master and a
farmer at the same time. The land was then naturally broken up into
small portions, which the proprietor cultivated for himself. Land is
the basis of an aristocracy, which clings to the soil that supports it;
for it is not by privileges alone, nor by birth, but by landed property
handed down from generation to generation, that an aristocracy is
constituted. A nation may present immense fortunes and extreme
wretchedness, but unless those fortunes are territorial there is no
aristocracy, but simply the class of the rich and that of the poor.

All the British colonies had then a great degree of similarity at the
epoch of their settlement. All of them, from their first beginning,
seemed destined to witness the growth, not of the aristocratic liberty
of their mother-country, but of that freedom of the middle and lower
orders of which the history of the world had as yet furnished no
complete example.

In this general uniformity several striking differences were however
discernible, which it is necessary to point out. Two branches may be
distinguished in the Anglo-American family, which have hitherto grown
up without entirely commingling; the one in the South, the other in the
North.

Virginia received the first English colony; the emigrants took
possession of it in 1607. The idea that mines of gold and silver are
the sources of national wealth was at that time singularly prevalent in
Europe; a fatal delusion, which has done more to impoverish the nations
which adopted it, and has cost more lives in America, than the united
influence of war and bad laws. The men sent to Virginia *a were seekers
of gold, adventurers, without resources and without character, whose
turbulent and restless spirit endangered the infant colony, *b and
rendered its progress uncertain. The artisans and agriculturists
arrived afterwards; and, although they were a more moral and orderly
race of men, they were in nowise above the level of the inferior
classes in England. *c No lofty conceptions, no intellectual system,
directed the foundation of these new settlements. The colony was
scarcely established when slavery was introduced, *d and this was the
main circumstance which has exercised so prodigious an influence on the
character, the laws, and all the future prospects of the South.
Slavery, as we shall afterwards show, dishonors labor; it introduces
idleness into society, and with idleness, ignorance and pride, luxury
and distress. It enervates the powers of the mind, and benumbs the
activity of man. The influence of slavery, united to the English
character, explains the manners and the social condition of the
Southern States.

a
[ The charter granted by the Crown of England in 1609 stipulated,
amongst other conditions, that the adventurers should pay to the Crown
a fifth of the produce of all gold and silver mines. See Marshall’s
“Life of Washington,” vol. i. pp. 18-66.] [Footnote b: A large portion
of the adventurers, says Stith (“History of Virginia”), were
unprincipled young men of family, whom their parents were glad to ship
off, discharged servants, fraudulent bankrupts, or debauchees; and
others of the same class, people more apt to pillage and destroy than
to assist the settlement, were the seditious chiefs, who easily led
this band into every kind of extravagance and excess. See for the
history of Virginia the following works:—


“History of Virginia, from the First Settlements in the year 1624,” by
Smith.

“History of Virginia,” by William Stith.

“History of Virginia, from the Earliest Period,” by Beverley.]

c
[ It was not till some time later that a certain number of rich English
capitalists came to fix themselves in the colony.]


d
[ Slavery was introduced about the year 1620 by a Dutch vessel which
landed twenty negroes on the banks of the river James. See Chalmer.]


In the North, the same English foundation was modified by the most
opposite shades of character; and here I may be allowed to enter into
some details. The two or three main ideas which constitute the basis of
the social theory of the United States were first combined in the
Northern English colonies, more generally denominated the States of New
England. *e The principles of New England spread at first to the
neighboring states; they then passed successively to the more distant
ones; and at length they imbued the whole Confederation. They now
extend their influence beyond its limits over the whole American world.
The civilization of New England has been like a beacon lit upon a hill,
which, after it has diffused its warmth around, tinges the distant
horizon with its glow.

e
[ The States of New England are those situated to the east of the
Hudson; they are now six in number: 1, Connecticut; 2, Rhode Island; 3,
Massachusetts; 4, Vermont; 5, New Hampshire; 6, Maine.]


The foundation of New England was a novel spectacle, and all the
circumstances attending it were singular and original. The large
majority of colonies have been first inhabited either by men without
education and without resources, driven by their poverty and their
misconduct from the land which gave them birth, or by speculators and
adventurers greedy of gain. Some settlements cannot even boast so
honorable an origin; St. Domingo was founded by buccaneers; and the
criminal courts of England originally supplied the population of
Australia.

The settlers who established themselves on the shores of New England
all belonged to the more independent classes of their native country.
Their union on the soil of America at once presented the singular
phenomenon of a society containing neither lords nor common people,
neither rich nor poor. These men possessed, in proportion to their
number, a greater mass of intelligence than is to be found in any
European nation of our own time. All, without a single exception, had
received a good education, and many of them were known in Europe for
their talents and their acquirements. The other colonies had been
founded by adventurers without family; the emigrants of New England
brought with them the best elements of order and morality—they landed
in the desert accompanied by their wives and children. But what most
especially distinguished them was the aim of their undertaking. They
had not been obliged by necessity to leave their country; the social
position they abandoned was one to be regretted, and their means of
subsistence were certain. Nor did they cross the Atlantic to improve
their situation or to increase their wealth; the call which summoned
them from the comforts of their homes was purely intellectual; and in
facing the inevitable sufferings of exile their object was the triumph
of an idea.

The emigrants, or, as they deservedly styled themselves, the Pilgrims,
belonged to that English sect the austerity of whose principles had
acquired for them the name of Puritans. Puritanism was not merely a
religious doctrine, but it corresponded in many points with the most
absolute democratic and republican theories. It was this tendency which
had aroused its most dangerous adversaries. Persecuted by the
Government of the mother-country, and disgusted by the habits of a
society opposed to the rigor of their own principles, the Puritans went
forth to seek some rude and unfrequented part of the world, where they
could live according to their own opinions, and worship God in freedom.

A few quotations will throw more light upon the spirit of these pious
adventures than all we can say of them. Nathaniel Morton, *f the
historian of the first years of the settlement, thus opens his subject:

f
[ “New England’s Memorial,” p. 13; Boston, 1826. See also “Hutchinson’s
History,” vol. ii. p. 440.]


“Gentle Reader,—I have for some length of time looked upon it as a duty
incumbent, especially on the immediate successors of those that have
had so large experience of those many memorable and signal
demonstrations of God’s goodness, viz., the first beginners of this
Plantation in New England, to commit to writing his gracious
dispensations on that behalf; having so many inducements thereunto, not
onely otherwise but so plentifully in the Sacred Scriptures: that so,
what we have seen, and what our fathers have told us (Psalm lxxviii. 3,
4), we may not hide from our children, showing to the generations to
come the praises of the Lord; that especially the seed of Abraham his
servant, and the children of Jacob his chosen (Psalm cv. 5, 6), may
remember his marvellous works in the beginning and progress of the
planting of New England, his wonders and the judgments of his mouth;
how that God brought a vine into this wilderness; that he cast out the
heathen, and planted it; that he made room for it and caused it to take
deep root; and it filled the land (Psalm lxxx. 8, 9). And not onely so,
but also that he hath guided his people by his strength to his holy
habitation and planted them in the mountain of his inheritance in
respect of precious Gospel enjoyments: and that as especially God may
have the glory of all unto whom it is most due; so also some rays of
glory may reach the names of those blessed Saints that were the main
instruments and the beginning of this happy enterprise.”

It is impossible to read this opening paragraph without an involuntary
feeling of religious awe; it breathes the very savor of Gospel
antiquity. The sincerity of the author heightens his power of language.
The band which to his eyes was a mere party of adventurers gone forth
to seek their fortune beyond seas appears to the reader as the germ of
a great nation wafted by Providence to a predestined shore.

The author thus continues his narrative of the departure of the first
pilgrims:—

“So they left that goodly and pleasant city of Leyden, *g which had
been their resting-place for above eleven years; but they knew that
they were pilgrims and strangers here below, and looked not much on
these things, but lifted up their eyes to Heaven, their dearest
country, where God hath prepared for them a city (Heb. xi. 16), and
therein quieted their spirits. When they came to Delfs-Haven they found
the ship and all things ready; and such of their friends as could not
come with them followed after them, and sundry came from Amsterdam to
see them shipt, and to take their leaves of them. One night was spent
with little sleep with the most, but with friendly entertainment and
Christian discourse, and other real expressions of true Christian love.
The next day they went on board, and their friends with them, where
truly doleful was the sight of that sad and mournful parting, to hear
what sighs and sobs and prayers did sound amongst them; what tears did
gush from every eye, and pithy speeches pierced each other’s heart,
that sundry of the Dutch strangers that stood on the Key as spectators
could not refrain from tears. But the tide (which stays for no man)
calling them away, that were thus loth to depart, their Reverend Pastor
falling down on his knees, and they all with him, with watery cheeks
commended them with most fervent prayers unto the Lord and his
blessing; and then, with mutual embraces and many tears they took their
leaves one of another, which proved to be the last leave to many of
them.”

g
[ The emigrants were, for the most part, godly Christians from the
North of England, who had quitted their native country because they
were “studious of reformation, and entered into covenant to walk with
one another according to the primitive pattern of the Word of God.”
They emigrated to Holland, and settled in the city of Leyden in 1610,
where they abode, being lovingly respected by the Dutch, for many
years: they left it in 1620 for several reasons, the last of which was,
that their posterity would in a few generations become Dutch, and so
lose their interest in the English nation; they being desirous rather
to enlarge His Majesty’s dominions, and to live under their natural
prince.—Translator’s Note.]


The emigrants were about 150 in number, including the women and the
children. Their object was to plant a colony on the shores of the
Hudson; but after having been driven about for some time in the
Atlantic Ocean, they were forced to land on that arid coast of New
England which is now the site of the town of Plymouth. The rock is
still shown on which the pilgrims disembarked. *h

h
[ This rock is become an object of veneration in the United States. I
have seen bits of it carefully preserved in several towns of the Union.
Does not this sufficiently show how entirely all human power and
greatness is in the soul of man? Here is a stone which the feet of a
few outcasts pressed for an instant, and this stone becomes famous; it
is treasured by a great nation, its very dust is shared as a relic: and
what is become of the gateways of a thousand palaces?]


“But before we pass on,” continues our historian, “let the reader with
me make a pause and seriously consider this poor people’s present
condition, the more to be raised up to admiration of God’s goodness
towards them in their preservation: for being now passed the vast
ocean, and a sea of troubles before them in expectation, they had now
no friends to welcome them, no inns to entertain or refresh them, no
houses, or much less towns to repair unto to seek for succour: and for
the season it was winter, and they that know the winters of the country
know them to be sharp and violent, subject to cruel and fierce storms,
dangerous to travel to known places, much more to search unknown
coasts. Besides, what could they see but a hideous and desolate
wilderness, full of wilde beasts, and wilde men? and what multitudes of
them there were, they then knew not: for which way soever they turned
their eyes (save upward to Heaven) they could have but little solace or
content in respect of any outward object; for summer being ended, all
things stand in appearance with a weather-beaten face, and the whole
country full of woods and thickets, represented a wild and savage hew;
if they looked behind them, there was the mighty ocean which they had
passed, and was now as a main bar or gulph to separate them from all
the civil parts of the world.”

It must not be imagined that the piety of the Puritans was of a merely
speculative kind, or that it took no cognizance of the course of
worldly affairs. Puritanism, as I have already remarked, was scarcely
less a political than a religious doctrine. No sooner had the emigrants
landed on the barren coast described by Nathaniel Morton than it was
their first care to constitute a society, by passing the following Act:

“In the name of God. Amen. We, whose names are underwritten, the loyal
subjects of our dread Sovereign Lord King James, etc., etc., Having
undertaken for the glory of God, and advancement of the Christian
Faith, and the honour of our King and country, a voyage to plant the
first colony in the northern parts of Virginia; Do by these presents
solemnly and mutually, in the presence of God and one another, covenant
and combine ourselves together into a civil body politick, for our
better ordering and preservation, and furtherance of the ends
aforesaid: and by virtue hereof do enact, constitute and frame such
just and equal laws, ordinances, acts, constitutions, and officers,
from time to time, as shall be thought most meet and convenient for the
general good of the Colony: unto which we promise all due submission
and obedience,” etc. *i

i
[ The emigrants who founded the State of Rhode Island in 1638, those
who landed at New Haven in 1637, the first settlers in Connecticut in
1639, and the founders of Providence in 1640, began in like manner by
drawing up a social contract, which was acceded to by all the
interested parties. See “Pitkin’s History,” pp. 42 and 47.]


This happened in 1620, and from that time forwards the emigration went
on. The religious and political passions which ravaged the British
Empire during the whole reign of Charles I drove fresh crowds of
sectarians every year to the shores of America. In England the
stronghold of Puritanism was in the middle classes, and it was from the
middle classes that the majority of the emigrants came. The population
of New England increased rapidly; and whilst the hierarchy of rank
despotically classed the inhabitants of the mother-country, the colony
continued to present the novel spectacle of a community homogeneous in
all its parts. A democracy, more perfect than any which antiquity had
dreamt of, started in full size and panoply from the midst of an
ancient feudal society.




 Chapter II: Origin Of The Anglo-Americans—Part II


The English Government was not dissatisfied with an emigration which
removed the elements of fresh discord and of further revolutions. On
the contrary, everything was done to encourage it, and great exertions
were made to mitigate the hardships of those who sought a shelter from
the rigor of their country’s laws on the soil of America. It seemed as
if New England was a region given up to the dreams of fancy and the
unrestrained experiments of innovators.

The English colonies (and this is one of the main causes of their
prosperity) have always enjoyed more internal freedom and more
political independence than the colonies of other nations; but this
principle of liberty was nowhere more extensively applied than in the
States of New England.

It was generally allowed at that period that the territories of the New
World belonged to that European nation which had been the first to
discover them. Nearly the whole coast of North America thus became a
British possession towards the end of the sixteenth century. The means
used by the English Government to people these new domains were of
several kinds; the King sometimes appointed a governor of his own
choice, who ruled a portion of the New World in the name and under the
immediate orders of the Crown; *j this is the colonial system adopted
by other countries of Europe. Sometimes grants of certain tracts were
made by the Crown to an individual or to a company, *k in which case
all the civil and political power fell into the hands of one or more
persons, who, under the inspection and control of the Crown, sold the
lands and governed the inhabitants. Lastly, a third system consisted in
allowing a certain number of emigrants to constitute a political
society under the protection of the mother-country, and to govern
themselves in whatever was not contrary to her laws. This mode of
colonization, so remarkably favorable to liberty, was only adopted in
New England. *l

j
[ This was the case in the State of New York.]


k
[ Maryland, the Carolinas, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey were in this
situation. See “Pitkin’s History,” vol. i. pp. 11-31.]


l
[ See the work entitled “Historical Collection of State Papers and
other authentic Documents intended as materials for a History of the
United States of America, by Ebenezer Hasard. Philadelphia, 1792,” for
a great number of documents relating to the commencement of the
colonies, which are valuable from their contents and their
authenticity: amongst them are the various charters granted by the King
of England, and the first acts of the local governments.


See also the analysis of all these charters given by Mr. Story, Judge
of the Supreme Court of the United States, in the Introduction to his
“Commentary on the Constitution of the United States.” It results from
these documents that the principles of representative government and
the external forms of political liberty were introduced into all the
colonies at their origin. These principles were more fully acted upon
in the North than in the South, but they existed everywhere.]

In 1628 *m a charter of this kind was granted by Charles I to the
emigrants who went to form the colony of Massachusetts. But, in
general, charters were not given to the colonies of New England till
they had acquired a certain existence. Plymouth, Providence, New Haven,
the State of Connecticut, and that of Rhode Island *n were founded
without the co-operation and almost without the knowledge of the
mother-country. The new settlers did not derive their incorporation
from the seat of the empire, although they did not deny its supremacy;
they constituted a society of their own accord, and it was not till
thirty or forty years afterwards, under Charles II. that their
existence was legally recognized by a royal charter.

m
[ See “Pitkin’s History,” p, 35. See the “History of the Colony of
Massachusetts Bay,” by Hutchinson, vol. i. p. 9.] [Footnote n: See
“Pitkin’s History,” pp. 42, 47.]


This frequently renders its it difficult to detect the link which
connected the emigrants with the land of their forefathers in studying
the earliest historical and legislative records of New England. They
exercised the rights of sovereignty; they named their magistrates,
concluded peace or declared war, made police regulations, and enacted
laws as if their allegiance was due only to God. *o Nothing can be more
curious and, at the same time more instructive, than the legislation of
that period; it is there that the solution of the great social problem
which the United States now present to the world is to be found.

o
[ The inhabitants of Massachusetts had deviated from the forms which
are preserved in the criminal and civil procedure of England; in 1650
the decrees of justice were not yet headed by the royal style. See
Hutchinson, vol. i. p. 452.]


Amongst these documents we shall notice, as especially characteristic,
the code of laws promulgated by the little State of Connecticut in
1650. *p The legislators of Connecticut *q begin with the penal laws,
and, strange to say, they borrow their provisions from the text of Holy
Writ. “Whosoever shall worship any other God than the Lord,” says the
preamble of the Code, “shall surely be put to death.” This is followed
by ten or twelve enactments of the same kind, copied verbatim from the
books of Exodus, Leviticus, and Deuteronomy. Blasphemy, sorcery,
adultery, *r and rape were punished with death; an outrage offered by a
son to his parents was to be expiated by the same penalty. The
legislation of a rude and half-civilized people was thus applied to an
enlightened and moral community. The consequence was that the
punishment of death was never more frequently prescribed by the
statute, and never more rarely enforced towards the guilty.

p
[ Code of 1650, p. 28; Hartford, 1830.]


q
[ See also in “Hutchinson’s History,” vol. i. pp. 435, 456, the
analysis of the penal code adopted in 1648 by the Colony of
Massachusetts: this code is drawn up on the same principles as that of
Connecticut.]


r
[ Adultery was also punished with death by the law of Massachusetts:
and Hutchinson, vol. i. p. 441, says that several persons actually
suffered for this crime. He quotes a curious anecdote on this subject,
which occurred in the year 1663. A married woman had had criminal
intercourse with a young man; her husband died, and she married the
lover. Several years had elapsed, when the public began to suspect the
previous intercourse of this couple: they were thrown into prison, put
upon trial, and very narrowly escaped capital punishment.]


The chief care of the legislators, in this body of penal laws, was the
maintenance of orderly conduct and good morals in the community: they
constantly invaded the domain of conscience, and there was scarcely a
sin which was not subject to magisterial censure. The reader is aware
of the rigor with which these laws punished rape and adultery;
intercourse between unmarried persons was likewise severely repressed.
The judge was empowered to inflict a pecuniary penalty, a whipping, or
marriage *s on the misdemeanants; and if the records of the old courts
of New Haven may be believed, prosecutions of this kind were not
unfrequent. We find a sentence bearing date the first of May, 1660,
inflicting a fine and reprimand on a young woman who was accused of
using improper language, and of allowing herself to be kissed. *t The
Code of 1650 abounds in preventive measures. It punishes idleness and
drunkenness with severity. *u Innkeepers are forbidden to furnish more
than a certain quantity of liquor to each consumer; and simple lying,
whenever it may be injurious, *v is checked by a fine or a flogging. In
other places, the legislator, entirely forgetting the great principles
of religious toleration which he had himself upheld in Europe, renders
attendance on divine service compulsory, *w and goes so far as to visit
with severe punishment, ** and even with death, the Christians who
chose to worship God according to a ritual differing from his own. *x
Sometimes indeed the zeal of his enactments induces him to descend to
the most frivolous particulars: thus a law is to be found in the same
Code which prohibits the use of tobacco. *y It must not be forgotten
that these fantastical and vexatious laws were not imposed by
authority, but that they were freely voted by all the persons
interested, and that the manners of the community were even more
austere and more puritanical than the laws. In 1649 a solemn
association was formed in Boston to check the worldly luxury of long
hair. *z

s
[ Code of 1650, p. 48. It seems sometimes to have happened that the
judges superadded these punishments to each other, as is seen in a
sentence pronounced in 1643 (p. 114, “New Haven Antiquities”), by which
Margaret Bedford, convicted of loose conduct, was condemned to be
whipped, and afterwards to marry Nicholas Jemmings, her accomplice.]


t
[ “New Haven Antiquities,” p. 104. See also “Hutchinson’s History,” for
several causes equally extraordinary.]


u
[ Code of 1650, pp. 50, 57.]


v
[ Ibid., p. 64.]


w
[ Ibid., p. 44.]


*
[ This was not peculiar to Connecticut. See, for instance, the law
which, on September 13, 1644, banished the Anabaptists from the State
of Massachusetts. (“Historical Collection of State Papers,” vol. i. p.
538.) See also the law against the Quakers, passed on October 14, 1656:
“Whereas,” says the preamble, “an accursed race of heretics called
Quakers has sprung up,” etc. The clauses of the statute inflict a heavy
fine on all captains of ships who should import Quakers into the
country. The Quakers who may be found there shall be whipped and
imprisoned with hard labor. Those members of the sect who should defend
their opinions shall be first fined, then imprisoned, and finally
driven out of the province.—“Historical Collection of State Papers,”
vol. i. p. 630.]


x
[ By the penal law of Massachusetts, any Catholic priest who should set
foot in the colony after having been once driven out of it was liable
to capital punishment.]


y
[ Code of 1650, p. 96.]


z
[ “New England’s Memorial,” p. 316. See Appendix, E.]


These errors are no doubt discreditable to human reason; they attest
the inferiority of our nature, which is incapable of laying firm hold
upon what is true and just, and is often reduced to the alternative of
two excesses. In strict connection with this penal legislation, which
bears such striking marks of a narrow sectarian spirit, and of those
religious passions which had been warmed by persecution and were still
fermenting among the people, a body of political laws is to be found,
which, though written two hundred years ago, is still ahead of the
liberties of our age. The general principles which are the groundwork
of modern constitutions—principles which were imperfectly known in
Europe, and not completely triumphant even in Great Britain, in the
seventeenth century—were all recognized and determined by the laws of
New England: the intervention of the people in public affairs, the free
voting of taxes, the responsibility of authorities, personal liberty,
and trial by jury, were all positively established without discussion.
From these fruitful principles consequences have been derived and
applications have been made such as no nation in Europe has yet
ventured to attempt.

In Connecticut the electoral body consisted, from its origin, of the
whole number of citizens; and this is readily to be understood, *a when
we recollect that this people enjoyed an almost perfect equality of
fortune, and a still greater uniformity of opinions. *b In Connecticut,
at this period, all the executive functionaries were elected, including
the Governor of the State. *c The citizens above the age of sixteen
were obliged to bear arms; they formed a national militia, which
appointed its own officers, and was to hold itself at all times in
readiness to march for the defence of the country. *d

a
[ Constitution of 1638, p. 17.]


b
[ In 1641 the General Assembly of Rhode Island unanimously declared
that the government of the State was a democracy, and that the power
was vested in the body of free citizens, who alone had the right to
make the laws and to watch their execution.—Code of 1650, p. 70.]


c
[ “Pitkin’s History,” p. 47.]


d
[ Constitution of 1638, p. 12.]


In the laws of Connecticut, as well as in all those of New England, we
find the germ and gradual development of that township independence
which is the life and mainspring of American liberty at the present
day. The political existence of the majority of the nations of Europe
commenced in the superior ranks of society, and was gradually and
imperfectly communicated to the different members of the social body.
In America, on the other hand, it may be said that the township was
organized before the county, the county before the State, the State
before the Union. In New England townships were completely and
definitively constituted as early as 1650. The independence of the
township was the nucleus round which the local interests, passions,
rights, and duties collected and clung. It gave scope to the activity
of a real political life most thoroughly democratic and republican. The
colonies still recognized the supremacy of the mother-country; monarchy
was still the law of the State; but the republic was already
established in every township. The towns named their own magistrates of
every kind, rated themselves, and levied their own taxes. *e In the
parish of New England the law of representation was not adopted, but
the affairs of the community were discussed, as at Athens, in the
market-place, by a general assembly of the citizens.

e
[ Code of 1650, p. 80.]


In studying the laws which were promulgated at this first era of the
American republics, it is impossible not to be struck by the remarkable
acquaintance with the science of government and the advanced theory of
legislation which they display. The ideas there formed of the duties of
society towards its members are evidently much loftier and more
comprehensive than those of the European legislators at that time:
obligations were there imposed which were elsewhere slighted. In the
States of New England, from the first, the condition of the poor was
provided for; *f strict measures were taken for the maintenance of
roads, and surveyors were appointed to attend to them; *g registers
were established in every parish, in which the results of public
deliberations, and the births, deaths, and marriages of the citizens
were entered; *h clerks were directed to keep these registers; *i
officers were charged with the administration of vacant inheritances,
and with the arbitration of litigated landmarks; and many others were
created whose chief functions were the maintenance of public order in
the community. *j The law enters into a thousand useful provisions for
a number of social wants which are at present very inadequately felt in
France. [Footnote f: Ibid., p. 78.]

g
[ Ibid., p. 49.]


h
[ See “Hutchinson’s History,” vol. i. p. 455.]


i
[ Code of 1650, p. 86.]


j
[ Ibid., p. 40.]


But it is by the attention it pays to Public Education that the
original character of American civilization is at once placed in the
clearest light. “It being,” says the law, “one chief project of Satan
to keep men from the knowledge of the Scripture by persuading from the
use of tongues, to the end that learning may not be buried in the
graves of our forefathers, in church and commonwealth, the Lord
assisting our endeavors. . . .” *k Here follow clauses establishing
schools in every township, and obliging the inhabitants, under pain of
heavy fines, to support them. Schools of a superior kind were founded
in the same manner in the more populous districts. The municipal
authorities were bound to enforce the sending of children to school by
their parents; they were empowered to inflict fines upon all who
refused compliance; and in case of continued resistance society assumed
the place of the parent, took possession of the child, and deprived the
father of those natural rights which he used to so bad a purpose. The
reader will undoubtedly have remarked the preamble of these enactments:
in America religion is the road to knowledge, and the observance of the
divine laws leads man to civil freedom.

k
[ Ibid., p. 90.]


If, after having cast a rapid glance over the state of American society
in 1650, we turn to the condition of Europe, and more especially to
that of the Continent, at the same period, we cannot fail to be struck
with astonishment. On the Continent of Europe, at the beginning of the
seventeenth century, absolute monarchy had everywhere triumphed over
the ruins of the oligarchical and feudal liberties of the Middle Ages.
Never were the notions of right more completely confounded than in the
midst of the splendor and literature of Europe; never was there less
political activity among the people; never were the principles of true
freedom less widely circulated; and at that very time those principles,
which were scorned or unknown by the nations of Europe, were proclaimed
in the deserts of the New World, and were accepted as the future creed
of a great people. The boldest theories of the human reason were put
into practice by a community so humble that not a statesman
condescended to attend to it; and a legislation without a precedent was
produced offhand by the imagination of the citizens. In the bosom of
this obscure democracy, which had as yet brought forth neither
generals, nor philosophers, nor authors, a man might stand up in the
face of a free people and pronounce the following fine definition of
liberty. *l

l
[ Mather’s “Magnalia Christi Americana,” vol. ii. p. 13. This speech
was made by Winthrop; he was accused of having committed arbitrary
actions during his magistracy, but after having made the speech of
which the above is a fragment, he was acquitted by acclamation, and
from that time forwards he was always re-elected governor of the State.
See Marshal, vol. i. p. 166.]


“Nor would I have you to mistake in the point of your own liberty.
There is a liberty of a corrupt nature which is effected both by men
and beasts to do what they list, and this liberty is inconsistent with
authority, impatient of all restraint; by this liberty ‘sumus omnes
deteriores’: ’tis the grand enemy of truth and peace, and all the
ordinances of God are bent against it. But there is a civil, a moral, a
federal liberty which is the proper end and object of authority; it is
a liberty for that only which is just and good: for this liberty you
are to stand with the hazard of your very lives and whatsoever crosses
it is not authority, but a distemper thereof. This liberty is
maintained in a way of subjection to authority; and the authority set
over you will, in all administrations for your good, be quietly
submitted unto by all but such as have a disposition to shake off the
yoke and lose their true liberty, by their murmuring at the honor and
power of authority.”

The remarks I have made will suffice to display the character of
Anglo-American civilization in its true light. It is the result (and
this should be constantly present to the mind of two distinct
elements), which in other places have been in frequent hostility, but
which in America have been admirably incorporated and combined with one
another. I allude to the spirit of Religion and the spirit of Liberty.

The settlers of New England were at the same time ardent sectarians and
daring innovators. Narrow as the limits of some of their religious
opinions were, they were entirely free from political prejudices. Hence
arose two tendencies, distinct but not opposite, which are constantly
discernible in the manners as well as in the laws of the country.

It might be imagined that men who sacrificed their friends, their
family, and their native land to a religious conviction were absorbed
in the pursuit of the intellectual advantages which they purchased at
so dear a rate. The energy, however, with which they strove for the
acquirement of wealth, moral enjoyment, and the comforts as well as
liberties of the world, is scarcely inferior to that with which they
devoted themselves to Heaven.

Political principles and all human laws and institutions were moulded
and altered at their pleasure; the barriers of the society in which
they were born were broken down before them; the old principles which
had governed the world for ages were no more; a path without a turn and
a field without an horizon were opened to the exploring and ardent
curiosity of man: but at the limits of the political world he checks
his researches, he discreetly lays aside the use of his most formidable
faculties, he no longer consents to doubt or to innovate, but carefully
abstaining from raising the curtain of the sanctuary, he yields with
submissive respect to truths which he will not discuss. Thus, in the
moral world everything is classed, adapted, decided, and foreseen; in
the political world everything is agitated, uncertain, and disputed: in
the one is a passive, though a voluntary, obedience; in the other an
independence scornful of experience and jealous of authority.

These two tendencies, apparently so discrepant, are far from
conflicting; they advance together, and mutually support each other.
Religion perceives that civil liberty affords a noble exercise to the
faculties of man, and that the political world is a field prepared by
the Creator for the efforts of the intelligence. Contented with the
freedom and the power which it enjoys in its own sphere, and with the
place which it occupies, the empire of religion is never more surely
established than when it reigns in the hearts of men unsupported by
aught beside its native strength. Religion is no less the companion of
liberty in all its battles and its triumphs; the cradle of its infancy,
and the divine source of its claims. The safeguard of morality is
religion, and morality is the best security of law and the surest
pledge of freedom. *m

m
[ See Appendix, F.]


Reasons Of Certain Anomalies Which The Laws And Customs Of The
Anglo-Americans Present

Remains of aristocratic institutions in the midst of a complete
democracy—Why?—Distinction carefully to be drawn between what is of
Puritanical and what is of English origin.

The reader is cautioned not to draw too general or too absolute an
inference from what has been said. The social condition, the religion,
and the manners of the first emigrants undoubtedly exercised an immense
influence on the destiny of their new country. Nevertheless they were
not in a situation to found a state of things solely dependent on
themselves: no man can entirely shake off the influence of the past,
and the settlers, intentionally or involuntarily, mingled habits and
notions derived from their education and from the traditions of their
country with those habits and notions which were exclusively their own.
To form a judgment on the Anglo-Americans of the present day it is
therefore necessary to distinguish what is of Puritanical and what is
of English origin.

Laws and customs are frequently to be met with in the United States
which contrast strongly with all that surrounds them. These laws seem
to be drawn up in a spirit contrary to the prevailing tenor of the
American legislation; and these customs are no less opposed to the tone
of society. If the English colonies had been founded in an age of
darkness, or if their origin was already lost in the lapse of years,
the problem would be insoluble.

I shall quote a single example to illustrate what I advance. The civil
and criminal procedure of the Americans has only two means of
action—committal and bail. The first measure taken by the magistrate is
to exact security from the defendant, or, in case of refusal, to
incarcerate him: the ground of the accusation and the importance of the
charges against him are then discussed. It is evident that a
legislation of this kind is hostile to the poor man, and favorable only
to the rich. The poor man has not always a security to produce, even in
a civil cause; and if he is obliged to wait for justice in prison, he
is speedily reduced to distress. The wealthy individual, on the
contrary, always escapes imprisonment in civil causes; nay, more, he
may readily elude the punishment which awaits him for a delinquency by
breaking his bail. So that all the penalties of the law are, for him,
reducible to fines. *n Nothing can be more aristocratic than this
system of legislation. Yet in America it is the poor who make the law,
and they usually reserve the greatest social advantages to themselves.
The explanation of the phenomenon is to be found in England; the laws
of which I speak are English, *o and the Americans have retained them,
however repugnant they may be to the tenor of their legislation and the
mass of their ideas. Next to its habits, the thing which a nation is
least apt to change is its civil legislation. Civil laws are only
familiarly known to legal men, whose direct interest it is to maintain
them as they are, whether good or bad, simply because they themselves
are conversant with them. The body of the nation is scarcely acquainted
with them; it merely perceives their action in particular cases; but it
has some difficulty in seizing their tendency, and obeys them without
premeditation. I have quoted one instance where it would have been easy
to adduce a great number of others. The surface of American society is,
if I may use the expression, covered with a layer of democracy, from
beneath which the old aristocratic colors sometimes peep.

n
[ Crimes no doubt exist for which bail is inadmissible, but they are
few in number.]


o
[ See Blackstone; and Delolme, book I chap. x.]




 Chapter III: Social Conditions Of The Anglo-Americans




 Chapter Summary


A Social condition is commonly the result of circumstances, sometimes
of laws, oftener still of these two causes united; but wherever it
exists, it may justly be considered as the source of almost all the
laws, the usages, and the ideas which regulate the conduct of nations;
whatever it does not produce it modifies. It is therefore necessary, if
we would become acquainted with the legislation and the manners of a
nation, to begin by the study of its social condition.

The Striking Characteristic Of The Social Condition Of The
Anglo-Americans In Its Essential Democracy.

The first emigrants of New England—Their equality—Aristocratic laws
introduced in the South—Period of the Revolution—Change in the law of
descent—Effects produced by this change—Democracy carried to its utmost
limits in the new States of the West—Equality of education.

Many important observations suggest themselves upon the social
condition of the Anglo-Americans, but there is one which takes
precedence of all the rest. The social condition of the Americans is
eminently democratic; this was its character at the foundation of the
Colonies, and is still more strongly marked at the present day. I have
stated in the preceding chapter that great equality existed among the
emigrants who settled on the shores of New England. The germ of
aristocracy was never planted in that part of the Union. The only
influence which obtained there was that of intellect; the people were
used to reverence certain names as the emblems of knowledge and virtue.
Some of their fellow-citizens acquired a power over the rest which
might truly have been called aristocratic, if it had been capable of
transmission from father to son.

This was the state of things to the east of the Hudson: to the
south-west of that river, and in the direction of the Floridas, the
case was different. In most of the States situated to the south-west of
the Hudson some great English proprietors had settled, who had imported
with them aristocratic principles and the English law of descent. I
have explained the reasons why it was impossible ever to establish a
powerful aristocracy in America; these reasons existed with less force
to the south-west of the Hudson. In the South, one man, aided by
slaves, could cultivate a great extent of country: it was therefore
common to see rich landed proprietors. But their influence was not
altogether aristocratic as that term is understood in Europe, since
they possessed no privileges; and the cultivation of their estates
being carried on by slaves, they had no tenants depending on them, and
consequently no patronage. Still, the great proprietors south of the
Hudson constituted a superior class, having ideas and tastes of its
own, and forming the centre of political action. This kind of
aristocracy sympathized with the body of the people, whose passions and
interests it easily embraced; but it was too weak and too short-lived
to excite either love or hatred for itself. This was the class which
headed the insurrection in the South, and furnished the best leaders of
the American revolution.

At the period of which we are now speaking society was shaken to its
centre: the people, in whose name the struggle had taken place,
conceived the desire of exercising the authority which it had acquired;
its democratic tendencies were awakened; and having thrown off the yoke
of the mother-country, it aspired to independence of every kind. The
influence of individuals gradually ceased to be felt, and custom and
law united together to produce the same result.

But the law of descent was the last step to equality. I am surprised
that ancient and modern jurists have not attributed to this law a
greater influence on human affairs. *a It is true that these laws
belong to civil affairs; but they ought nevertheless to be placed at
the head of all political institutions; for, whilst political laws are
only the symbol of a nation’s condition, they exercise an incredible
influence upon its social state. They have, moreover, a sure and
uniform manner of operating upon society, affecting, as it were,
generations yet unborn.

a
[ I understand by the law of descent all those laws whose principal
object is to regulate the distribution of property after the death of
its owner. The law of entail is of this number; it certainly prevents
the owner from disposing of his possessions before his death; but this
is solely with the view of preserving them entire for the heir. The
principal object, therefore, of the law of entail is to regulate the
descent of property after the death of its owner: its other provisions
are merely means to this end.]


Through their means man acquires a kind of preternatural power over the
future lot of his fellow-creatures. When the legislator has regulated
the law of inheritance, he may rest from his labor. The machine once
put in motion will go on for ages, and advance, as if self-guided,
towards a given point. When framed in a particular manner, this law
unites, draws together, and vests property and power in a few hands:
its tendency is clearly aristocratic. On opposite principles its action
is still more rapid; it divides, distributes, and disperses both
property and power. Alarmed by the rapidity of its progress, those who
despair of arresting its motion endeavor to obstruct it by difficulties
and impediments; they vainly seek to counteract its effect by contrary
efforts; but it gradually reduces or destroys every obstacle, until by
its incessant activity the bulwarks of the influence of wealth are
ground down to the fine and shifting sand which is the basis of
democracy. When the law of inheritance permits, still more when it
decrees, the equal division of a father’s property amongst all his
children, its effects are of two kinds: it is important to distinguish
them from each other, although they tend to the same end.

In virtue of the law of partible inheritance, the death of every
proprietor brings about a kind of revolution in property; not only do
his possessions change hands, but their very nature is altered, since
they are parcelled into shares, which become smaller and smaller at
each division. This is the direct and, as it were, the physical effect
of the law. It follows, then, that in countries where equality of
inheritance is established by law, property, and especially landed
property, must have a tendency to perpetual diminution. The effects,
however, of such legislation would only be perceptible after a lapse of
time, if the law was abandoned to its own working; for supposing the
family to consist of two children (and in a country people as France is
the average number is not above three), these children, sharing amongst
them the fortune of both parents, would not be poorer than their father
or mother.

But the law of equal division exercises its influence not merely upon
the property itself, but it affects the minds of the heirs, and brings
their passions into play. These indirect consequences tend powerfully
to the destruction of large fortunes, and especially of large domains.
Among nations whose law of descent is founded upon the right of
primogeniture landed estates often pass from generation to generation
without undergoing division, the consequence of which is that family
feeling is to a certain degree incorporated with the estate. The family
represents the estate, the estate the family; whose name, together with
its origin, its glory, its power, and its virtues, is thus perpetuated
in an imperishable memorial of the past and a sure pledge of the
future.

When the equal partition of property is established by law, the
intimate connection is destroyed between family feeling and the
preservation of the paternal estate; the property ceases to represent
the family; for as it must inevitably be divided after one or two
generations, it has evidently a constant tendency to diminish, and must
in the end be completely dispersed. The sons of the great landed
proprietor, if they are few in number, or if fortune befriends them,
may indeed entertain the hope of being as wealthy as their father, but
not that of possessing the same property as he did; the riches must
necessarily be composed of elements different from his.

Now, from the moment that you divest the landowner of that interest in
the preservation of his estate which he derives from association, from
tradition, and from family pride, you may be certain that sooner or
later he will dispose of it; for there is a strong pecuniary interest
in favor of selling, as floating capital produces higher interest than
real property, and is more readily available to gratify the passions of
the moment.

Great landed estates which have once been divided never come together
again; for the small proprietor draws from his land a better revenue,
in proportion, than the large owner does from his, and of course he
sells it at a higher rate. *b The calculations of gain, therefore,
which decide the rich man to sell his domain will still more powerfully
influence him against buying small estates to unite them into a large
one.

b
[ I do not mean to say that the small proprietor cultivates his land
better, but he cultivates it with more ardor and care; so that he makes
up by his labor for his want of skill.]


What is called family pride is often founded upon an illusion of
self-love. A man wishes to perpetuate and immortalize himself, as it
were, in his great-grandchildren. Where the esprit de famille ceases to
act individual selfishness comes into play. When the idea of family
becomes vague, indeterminate, and uncertain, a man thinks of his
present convenience; he provides for the establishment of his
succeeding generation, and no more. Either a man gives up the idea of
perpetuating his family, or at any rate he seeks to accomplish it by
other means than that of a landed estate. Thus not only does the law of
partible inheritance render it difficult for families to preserve their
ancestral domains entire, but it deprives them of the inclination to
attempt it, and compels them in some measure to co-operate with the law
in their own extinction.

The law of equal distribution proceeds by two methods: by acting upon
things, it acts upon persons; by influencing persons, it affects
things. By these means the law succeeds in striking at the root of
landed property, and dispersing rapidly both families and fortunes. *c

c
[ Land being the most stable kind of property, we find, from time to
time, rich individuals who are disposed to make great sacrifices in
order to obtain it, and who willingly forfeit a considerable part of
their income to make sure of the rest. But these are accidental cases.
The preference for landed property is no longer found habitually in any
class but among the poor. The small landowner, who has less
information, less imagination, and fewer passions than the great one,
is generally occupied with the desire of increasing his estate: and it
often happens that by inheritance, by marriage, or by the chances of
trade, he is gradually furnished with the means. Thus, to balance the
tendency which leads men to divide their estates, there exists another,
which incites them to add to them. This tendency, which is sufficient
to prevent estates from being divided ad infinitum, is not strong
enough to create great territorial possessions, certainly not to keep
them up in the same family.]


Most certainly it is not for us Frenchmen of the nineteenth century,
who daily witness the political and social changes which the law of
partition is bringing to pass, to question its influence. It is
perpetually conspicuous in our country, overthrowing the walls of our
dwellings and removing the landmarks of our fields. But although it has
produced great effects in France, much still remains for it to do. Our
recollections, opinions, and habits present powerful obstacles to its
progress.

In the United States it has nearly completed its work of destruction,
and there we can best study its results. The English laws concerning
the transmission of property were abolished in almost all the States at
the time of the Revolution. The law of entail was so modified as not to
interrupt the free circulation of property. *d The first generation
having passed away, estates began to be parcelled out, and the change
became more and more rapid with the progress of time. At this moment,
after a lapse of a little more than sixty years, the aspect of society
is totally altered; the families of the great landed proprietors are
almost all commingled with the general mass. In the State of New York,
which formerly contained many of these, there are but two who still
keep their heads above the stream, and they must shortly disappear. The
sons of these opulent citizens are become merchants, lawyers, or
physicians. Most of them have lapsed into obscurity. The last trace of
hereditary ranks and distinctions is destroyed—the law of partition has
reduced all to one level. [Footnote d: See Appendix, G.]

I do not mean that there is any deficiency of wealthy individuals in
the United States; I know of no country, indeed, where the love of
money has taken stronger hold on the affections of men, and where the
profounder contempt is expressed for the theory of the permanent
equality of property. But wealth circulates with inconceivable
rapidity, and experience shows that it is rare to find two succeeding
generations in the full enjoyment of it.

This picture, which may perhaps be thought to be overcharged, still
gives a very imperfect idea of what is taking place in the new States
of the West and South-west. At the end of the last century a few bold
adventurers began to penetrate into the valleys of the Mississippi, and
the mass of the population very soon began to move in that direction:
communities unheard of till then were seen to emerge from the wilds:
States whose names were not in existence a few years before claimed
their place in the American Union; and in the Western settlements we
may behold democracy arrived at its utmost extreme. In these States,
founded off-hand, and, as it were, by chance, the inhabitants are but
of yesterday. Scarcely known to one another, the nearest neighbors are
ignorant of each other’s history. In this part of the American
continent, therefore, the population has not experienced the influence
of great names and great wealth, nor even that of the natural
aristocracy of knowledge and virtue. None are there to wield that
respectable power which men willingly grant to the remembrance of a
life spent in doing good before their eyes. The new States of the West
are already inhabited, but society has no existence among them. *e

e
[ This may have been true in 1832, but is not so in 1874, when great
cities like Chicago and San Francisco have sprung up in the Western
States. But as yet the Western States exert no powerful influence on
American society.—-Translator’s Note.]


It is not only the fortunes of men which are equal in America; even
their requirements partake in some degree of the same uniformity. I do
not believe that there is a country in the world where, in proportion
to the population, there are so few uninstructed and at the same time
so few learned individuals. Primary instruction is within the reach of
everybody; superior instruction is scarcely to be obtained by any. This
is not surprising; it is in fact the necessary consequence of what we
have advanced above. Almost all the Americans are in easy
circumstances, and can therefore obtain the first elements of human
knowledge.

In America there are comparatively few who are rich enough to live
without a profession. Every profession requires an apprenticeship,
which limits the time of instruction to the early years of life. At
fifteen they enter upon their calling, and thus their education ends at
the age when ours begins. Whatever is done afterwards is with a view to
some special and lucrative object; a science is taken up as a matter of
business, and the only branch of it which is attended to is such as
admits of an immediate practical application. In America most of the
rich men were formerly poor; most of those who now enjoy leisure were
absorbed in business during their youth; the consequence of which is,
that when they might have had a taste for study they had no time for
it, and when time is at their disposal they have no longer the
inclination.

There is no class, then, in America, in which the taste for
intellectual pleasures is transmitted with hereditary fortune and
leisure, and by which the labors of the intellect are held in honor.
Accordingly there is an equal want of the desire and the power of
application to these objects.

A middle standard is fixed in America for human knowledge. All approach
as near to it as they can; some as they rise, others as they descend.
Of course, an immense multitude of persons are to be found who
entertain the same number of ideas on religion, history, science,
political economy, legislation, and government. The gifts of intellect
proceed directly from God, and man cannot prevent their unequal
distribution. But in consequence of the state of things which we have
here represented it happens that, although the capacities of men are
widely different, as the Creator has doubtless intended they should be,
they are submitted to the same method of treatment.

In America the aristocratic element has always been feeble from its
birth; and if at the present day it is not actually destroyed, it is at
any rate so completely disabled that we can scarcely assign to it any
degree of influence in the course of affairs. The democratic principle,
on the contrary, has gained so much strength by time, by events, and by
legislation, as to have become not only predominant but all-powerful.
There is no family or corporate authority, and it is rare to find even
the influence of individual character enjoy any durability.

America, then, exhibits in her social state a most extraordinary
phenomenon. Men are there seen on a greater equality in point of
fortune and intellect, or, in other words, more equal in their
strength, than in any other country of the world, or in any age of
which history has preserved the remembrance.

Political Consequences Of The Social Condition Of The Anglo-Americans

The political consequences of such a social condition as this are
easily deducible. It is impossible to believe that equality will not
eventually find its way into the political world as it does everywhere
else. To conceive of men remaining forever unequal upon one single
point, yet equal on all others, is impossible; they must come in the
end to be equal upon all. Now I know of only two methods of
establishing equality in the political world; every citizen must be put
in possession of his rights, or rights must be granted to no one. For
nations which are arrived at the same stage of social existence as the
Anglo-Americans, it is therefore very difficult to discover a medium
between the sovereignty of all and the absolute power of one man: and
it would be vain to deny that the social condition which I have been
describing is equally liable to each of these consequences.

There is, in fact, a manly and lawful passion for equality which
excites men to wish all to be powerful and honored. This passion tends
to elevate the humble to the rank of the great; but there exists also
in the human heart a depraved taste for equality, which impels the weak
to attempt to lower the powerful to their own level, and reduces men to
prefer equality in slavery to inequality with freedom. Not that those
nations whose social condition is democratic naturally despise liberty;
on the contrary, they have an instinctive love of it. But liberty is
not the chief and constant object of their desires; equality is their
idol: they make rapid and sudden efforts to obtain liberty, and if they
miss their aim resign themselves to their disappointment; but nothing
can satisfy them except equality, and rather than lose it they resolve
to perish.

On the other hand, in a State where the citizens are nearly on an
equality, it becomes difficult for them to preserve their independence
against the aggressions of power. No one among them being strong enough
to engage in the struggle with advantage, nothing but a general
combination can protect their liberty. And such a union is not always
to be found.

From the same social position, then, nations may derive one or the
other of two great political results; these results are extremely
different from each other, but they may both proceed from the same
cause.

The Anglo-Americans are the first nations who, having been exposed to
this formidable alternative, have been happy enough to escape the
dominion of absolute power. They have been allowed by their
circumstances, their origin, their intelligence, and especially by
their moral feeling, to establish and maintain the sovereignty of the
people.




 Chapter IV: The Principle Of The Sovereignty Of The People In America




 Chapter Summary


It predominates over the whole of society in America—Application made
of this principle by the Americans even before their
Revolution—Development given to it by that Revolution—Gradual and
irresistible extension of the elective qualification.

The Principle Of The Sovereignty Of The People In America

Whenever the political laws of the United States are to be discussed,
it is with the doctrine of the sovereignty of the people that we must
begin. The principle of the sovereignty of the people, which is to be
found, more or less, at the bottom of almost all human institutions,
generally remains concealed from view. It is obeyed without being
recognized, or if for a moment it be brought to light, it is hastily
cast back into the gloom of the sanctuary. “The will of the nation” is
one of those expressions which have been most profusely abused by the
wily and the despotic of every age. To the eyes of some it has been
represented by the venal suffrages of a few of the satellites of power;
to others by the votes of a timid or an interested minority; and some
have even discovered it in the silence of a people, on the supposition
that the fact of submission established the right of command.

In America the principle of the sovereignty of the people is not either
barren or concealed, as it is with some other nations; it is recognized
by the customs and proclaimed by the laws; it spreads freely, and
arrives without impediment at its most remote consequences. If there be
a country in the world where the doctrine of the sovereignty of the
people can be fairly appreciated, where it can be studied in its
application to the affairs of society, and where its dangers and its
advantages may be foreseen, that country is assuredly America.

I have already observed that, from their origin, the sovereignty of the
people was the fundamental principle of the greater number of British
colonies in America. It was far, however, from then exercising as much
influence on the government of society as it now does. Two obstacles,
the one external, the other internal, checked its invasive progress. It
could not ostensibly disclose itself in the laws of colonies which were
still constrained to obey the mother-country: it was therefore obliged
to spread secretly, and to gain ground in the provincial assemblies,
and especially in the townships.

American society was not yet prepared to adopt it with all its
consequences. The intelligence of New England, and the wealth of the
country to the south of the Hudson (as I have shown in the preceding
chapter), long exercised a sort of aristocratic influence, which tended
to retain the exercise of social authority in the hands of a few. The
public functionaries were not universally elected, and the citizens
were not all of them electors. The electoral franchise was everywhere
placed within certain limits, and made dependent on a certain
qualification, which was exceedingly low in the North and more
considerable in the South.

The American revolution broke out, and the doctrine of the sovereignty
of the people, which had been nurtured in the townships and
municipalities, took possession of the State: every class was enlisted
in its cause; battles were fought, and victories obtained for it, until
it became the law of laws.

A no less rapid change was effected in the interior of society, where
the law of descent completed the abolition of local influences.

At the very time when this consequence of the laws and of the
revolution was apparent to every eye, victory was irrevocably
pronounced in favor of the democratic cause. All power was, in fact, in
its hands, and resistance was no longer possible. The higher orders
submitted without a murmur and without a struggle to an evil which was
thenceforth inevitable. The ordinary fate of falling powers awaited
them; each of their several members followed his own interests; and as
it was impossible to wring the power from the hands of a people which
they did not detest sufficiently to brave, their only aim was to secure
its good-will at any price. The most democratic laws were consequently
voted by the very men whose interests they impaired; and thus, although
the higher classes did not excite the passions of the people against
their order, they accelerated the triumph of the new state of things;
so that by a singular change the democratic impulse was found to be
most irresistible in the very States where the aristocracy had the
firmest hold. The State of Maryland, which had been founded by men of
rank, was the first to proclaim universal suffrage, and to introduce
the most democratic forms into the conduct of its government.

When a nation modifies the elective qualification, it may easily be
foreseen that sooner or later that qualification will be entirely
abolished. There is no more invariable rule in the history of society:
the further electoral rights are extended, the greater is the need of
extending them; for after each concession the strength of the democracy
increases, and its demands increase with its strength. The ambition of
those who are below the appointed rate is irritated in exact proportion
to the great number of those who are above it. The exception at last
becomes the rule, concession follows concession, and no stop can be
made short of universal suffrage.

At the present day the principle of the sovereignty of the people has
acquired, in the United States, all the practical development which the
imagination can conceive. It is unencumbered by those fictions which
have been thrown over it in other countries, and it appears in every
possible form according to the exigency of the occasion. Sometimes the
laws are made by the people in a body, as at Athens; and sometimes its
representatives, chosen by universal suffrage, transact business in its
name, and almost under its immediate control.

In some countries a power exists which, though it is in a degree
foreign to the social body, directs it, and forces it to pursue a
certain track. In others the ruling force is divided, being partly
within and partly without the ranks of the people. But nothing of the
kind is to be seen in the United States; there society governs itself
for itself. All power centres in its bosom; and scarcely an individual
is to be meet with who would venture to conceive, or, still less, to
express, the idea of seeking it elsewhere. The nation participates in
the making of its laws by the choice of its legislators, and in the
execution of them by the choice of the agents of the executive
government; it may almost be said to govern itself, so feeble and so
restricted is the share left to the administration, so little do the
authorities forget their popular origin and the power from which they
emanate. *a [Footnote a: See Appendix, H.]




 Chapter V: Necessity Of Examining The Condition Of The States—Part I


Necessity Of Examining The Condition Of The States Before That Of The
Union At Large.

It is proposed to examine in the following chapter what is the form of
government established in America on the principle of the sovereignty
of the people; what are its resources, its hindrances, its advantages,
and its dangers. The first difficulty which presents itself arises from
the complex nature of the constitution of the United States, which
consists of two distinct social structures, connected and, as it were,
encased one within the other; two governments, completely separate and
almost independent, the one fulfilling the ordinary duties and
responding to the daily and indefinite calls of a community, the other
circumscribed within certain limits, and only exercising an exceptional
authority over the general interests of the country. In short, there
are twenty-four small sovereign nations, whose agglomeration
constitutes the body of the Union. To examine the Union before we have
studied the States would be to adopt a method filled with obstacles.
The form of the Federal Government of the United States was the last
which was adopted; and it is in fact nothing more than a modification
or a summary of those republican principles which were current in the
whole community before it existed, and independently of its existence.
Moreover, the Federal Government is, as I have just observed, the
exception; the Government of the States is the rule. The author who
should attempt to exhibit the picture as a whole before he had
explained its details would necessarily fall into obscurity and
repetition.

The great political principles which govern American society at this
day undoubtedly took their origin and their growth in the State. It is
therefore necessary to become acquainted with the State in order to
possess a clue to the remainder. The States which at present compose
the American Union all present the same features, as far as regards the
external aspect of their institutions. Their political or
administrative existence is centred in three focuses of action, which
may not inaptly be compared to the different nervous centres which
convey motion to the human body. The township is the lowest in order,
then the county, and lastly the State; and I propose to devote the
following chapter to the examination of these three divisions.

The American System Of Townships And Municipal Bodies

Why the Author begins the examination of the political institutions
with the township—Its existence in all nations—Difficulty of
establishing and preserving municipal independence—Its importance—Why
the Author has selected the township system of New England as the main
topic of his discussion.

It is not undesignedly that I begin this subject with the Township. The
village or township is the only association which is so perfectly
natural that wherever a number of men are collected it seems to
constitute itself.

The town, or tithing, as the smallest division of a community, must
necessarily exist in all nations, whatever their laws and customs may
be: if man makes monarchies and establishes republics, the first
association of mankind seems constituted by the hand of God. But
although the existence of the township is coeval with that of man, its
liberties are not the less rarely respected and easily destroyed. A
nation is always able to establish great political assemblies, because
it habitually contains a certain number of individuals fitted by their
talents, if not by their habits, for the direction of affairs. The
township is, on the contrary, composed of coarser materials, which are
less easily fashioned by the legislator. The difficulties which attend
the consolidation of its independence rather augment than diminish with
the increasing enlightenment of the people. A highly civilized
community spurns the attempts of a local independence, is disgusted at
its numerous blunders, and is apt to despair of success before the
experiment is completed. Again, no immunities are so ill protected from
the encroachments of the supreme power as those of municipal bodies in
general: they are unable to struggle, single-handed, against a strong
or an enterprising government, and they cannot defend their cause with
success unless it be identified with the customs of the nation and
supported by public opinion. Thus until the independence of townships
is amalgamated with the manners of a people it is easily destroyed, and
it is only after a long existence in the laws that it can be thus
amalgamated. Municipal freedom is not the fruit of human device; it is
rarely created; but it is, as it were, secretly and spontaneously
engendered in the midst of a semi-barbarous state of society. The
constant action of the laws and the national habits, peculiar
circumstances, and above all time, may consolidate it; but there is
certainly no nation on the continent of Europe which has experienced
its advantages. Nevertheless local assemblies of citizens constitute
the strength of free nations. Town-meetings are to liberty what primary
schools are to science; they bring it within the people’s reach, they
teach men how to use and how to enjoy it. A nation may establish a
system of free government, but without the spirit of municipal
institutions it cannot have the spirit of liberty. The transient
passions and the interests of an hour, or the chance of circumstances,
may have created the external forms of independence; but the despotic
tendency which has been repelled will, sooner or later, inevitably
reappear on the surface.

In order to explain to the reader the general principles on which the
political organization of the counties and townships of the United
States rests, I have thought it expedient to choose one of the States
of New England as an example, to examine the mechanism of its
constitution, and then to cast a general glance over the country. The
township and the county are not organized in the same manner in every
part of the Union; it is, however, easy to perceive that the same
principles have guided the formation of both of them throughout the
Union. I am inclined to believe that these principles have been carried
further in New England than elsewhere, and consequently that they offer
greater facilities to the observations of a stranger. The institutions
of New England form a complete and regular whole; they have received
the sanction of time, they have the support of the laws, and the still
stronger support of the manners of the community, over which they
exercise the most prodigious influence; they consequently deserve our
attention on every account.

Limits Of The Township

The township of New England is a division which stands between the
commune and the canton of France, and which corresponds in general to
the English tithing, or town. Its average population is from two to
three thousand; *a so that, on the one hand, the interests of its
inhabitants are not likely to conflict, and, on the other, men capable
of conducting its affairs are always to be found among its citizens.

a
[ In 1830 there were 305 townships in the State of Massachusetts, and
610,014 inhabitants, which gives an average of about 2,000 inhabitants
to each township.]


Authorities Of The Township In New England

The people the source of all power here as elsewhere—Manages its own
affairs—No corporation—The greater part of the authority vested in the
hands of the Selectmen—How the Selectmen act—Town-meeting—Enumeration
of the public officers of the township—Obligatory and remunerated
functions.

In the township, as well as everywhere else, the people is the only
source of power; but in no stage of government does the body of
citizens exercise a more immediate influence. In America the people is
a master whose exigencies demand obedience to the utmost limits of
possibility.

In New England the majority acts by representatives in the conduct of
the public business of the State; but if such an arrangement be
necessary in general affairs, in the townships, where the legislative
and administrative action of the government is in more immediate
contact with the subject, the system of representation is not adopted.
There is no corporation; but the body of electors, after having
designated its magistrates, directs them in everything that exceeds the
simple and ordinary executive business of the State. *b

b
[ The same rules are not applicable to the great towns, which generally
have a mayor, and a corporation divided into two bodies; this, however,
is an exception which requires the sanction of a law.—See the Act of
February 22, 1822, for appointing the authorities of the city of
Boston. It frequently happens that small towns as well as cities are
subject to a peculiar administration. In 1832, 104 townships in the
State of New York were governed in this manner.—Williams’ Register.]


This state of things is so contrary to our ideas, and so different from
our customs, that it is necessary for me to adduce some examples to
explain it thoroughly.

The public duties in the township are extremely numerous and minutely
divided, as we shall see further on; but the larger proportion of
administrative power is vested in the hands of a small number of
individuals, called “the Selectmen.” *c The general laws of the State
impose a certain number of obligations on the selectmen, which they may
fulfil without the authorization of the body they represent, but which
they can only neglect on their own responsibility. The law of the State
obliges them, for instance, to draw up the list of electors in their
townships; and if they omit this part of their functions, they are
guilty of a misdemeanor. In all the affairs, however, which are
determined by the town-meeting, the selectmen are the organs of the
popular mandate, as in France the Maire executes the decree of the
municipal council. They usually act upon their own responsibility, and
merely put in practice principles which have been previously recognized
by the majority. But if any change is to be introduced in the existing
state of things, or if they wish to undertake any new enterprise, they
are obliged to refer to the source of their power. If, for instance, a
school is to be established, the selectmen convoke the whole body of
the electors on a certain day at an appointed place; they explain the
urgency of the case; they give their opinion on the means of satisfying
it, on the probable expense, and the site which seems to be most
favorable. The meeting is consulted on these several points; it adopts
the principle, marks out the site, votes the rate, and confides the
execution of its resolution to the selectmen.

c
[ Three selectmen are appointed in the small townships, and nine in the
large ones. See “The Town-Officer,” p. 186. See also the principal laws
of the State of Massachusetts relative to the selectmen:


Act of February 20, 1786, vol. i. p. 219; February 24, 1796, vol. i. p.
488; March 7, 1801, vol. ii. p. 45; June 16, 1795, vol. i. p. 475;
March 12, 1808, vol. ii. p. 186; February 28, 1787, vol. i. p. 302;
June 22, 1797, vol. i. p. 539.]

The selectmen have alone the right of calling a town-meeting, but they
may be requested to do so: if ten citizens are desirous of submitting a
new project to the assent of the township, they may demand a general
convocation of the inhabitants; the selectmen are obliged to comply,
but they have only the right of presiding at the meeting. *d

d
[ See Laws of Massachusetts, vol. i. p. 150, Act of March 25, 1786.]


The selectmen are elected every year in the month of April or of May.
The town-meeting chooses at the same time a number of other municipal
magistrates, who are entrusted with important administrative functions.
The assessors rate the township; the collectors receive the rate. A
constable is appointed to keep the peace, to watch the streets, and to
forward the execution of the laws; the town-clerk records all the town
votes, orders, grants, births, deaths, and marriages; the treasurer
keeps the funds; the overseer of the poor performs the difficult task
of superintending the action of the poor-laws; committee-men are
appointed to attend to the schools and to public instruction; and the
road-surveyors, who take care of the greater and lesser thoroughfares
of the township, complete the list of the principal functionaries. They
are, however, still further subdivided; and amongst the municipal
officers are to be found parish commissioners, who audit the expenses
of public worship; different classes of inspectors, some of whom are to
direct the citizens in case of fire; tithing-men, listers, haywards,
chimney-viewers, fence-viewers to maintain the bounds of property,
timber-measurers, and sealers of weights and measures. *e

e
[ All these magistrates actually exist; their different functions are
all detailed in a book called “The Town-Officer,” by Isaac Goodwin,
Worcester, 1827; and in the “Collection of the General Laws of
Massachusetts,” 3 vols., Boston, 1823.]


There are nineteen principal officers in a township. Every inhabitant
is constrained, on the pain of being fined, to undertake these
different functions; which, however, are almost all paid, in order that
the poorer citizens may be able to give up their time without loss. In
general the American system is not to grant a fixed salary to its
functionaries. Every service has its price, and they are remunerated in
proportion to what they have done.

Existence Of The Township

Every one the best judge of his own interest—Corollary of the principle
of the sovereignty of the people—Application of those doctrines in the
townships of America—The township of New England is sovereign in all
that concerns itself alone: subject to the State in all other
matters—Bond of the township and the State—In France the Government
lends its agent to the Commune—In America the reverse occurs.

I have already observed that the principle of the sovereignty of the
people governs the whole political system of the Anglo-Americans. Every
page of this book will afford new instances of the same doctrine. In
the nations by which the sovereignty of the people is recognized every
individual possesses an equal share of power, and participates alike in
the government of the State. Every individual is, therefore, supposed
to be as well informed, as virtuous, and as strong as any of his
fellow-citizens. He obeys the government, not because he is inferior to
the authorities which conduct it, or that he is less capable than his
neighbor of governing himself, but because he acknowledges the utility
of an association with his fellow-men, and because he knows that no
such association can exist without a regulating force. If he be a
subject in all that concerns the mutual relations of citizens, he is
free and responsible to God alone for all that concerns himself. Hence
arises the maxim that every one is the best and the sole judge of his
own private interest, and that society has no right to control a man’s
actions, unless they are prejudicial to the common weal, or unless the
common weal demands his co-operation. This doctrine is universally
admitted in the United States. I shall hereafter examine the general
influence which it exercises on the ordinary actions of life; I am now
speaking of the nature of municipal bodies.

The township, taken as a whole, and in relation to the government of
the country, may be looked upon as an individual to whom the theory I
have just alluded to is applied. Municipal independence is therefore a
natural consequence of the principle of the sovereignty of the people
in the United States: all the American republics recognize it more or
less; but circumstances have peculiarly favored its growth in New
England.

In this part of the Union the impulsion of political activity was given
in the townships; and it may almost be said that each of them
originally formed an independent nation. When the Kings of England
asserted their supremacy, they were contented to assume the central
power of the State. The townships of New England remained as they were
before; and although they are now subject to the State, they were at
first scarcely dependent upon it. It is important to remember that they
have not been invested with privileges, but that they have, on the
contrary, forfeited a portion of their independence to the State. The
townships are only subordinate to the State in those interests which I
shall term social, as they are common to all the citizens. They are
independent in all that concerns themselves; and amongst the
inhabitants of New England I believe that not a man is to be found who
would acknowledge that the State has any right to interfere in their
local interests. The towns of New England buy and sell, sue or are
sued, augment or diminish their rates, without the slightest opposition
on the part of the administrative authority of the State.

They are bound, however, to comply with the demands of the community.
If the State is in need of money, a town can neither give nor withhold
the supplies. If the State projects a road, the township cannot refuse
to let it cross its territory; if a police regulation is made by the
State, it must be enforced by the town. A uniform system of instruction
is organized all over the country, and every town is bound to establish
the schools which the law ordains. In speaking of the administration of
the United States I shall have occasion to point out the means by which
the townships are compelled to obey in these different cases: I here
merely show the existence of the obligation. Strict as this obligation
is, the government of the State imposes it in principle only, and in
its performance the township resumes all its independent rights. Thus,
taxes are voted by the State, but they are levied and collected by the
township; the existence of a school is obligatory, but the township
builds, pays, and superintends it. In France the State-collector
receives the local imposts; in America the town-collector receives the
taxes of the State. Thus the French Government lends its agents to the
commune; in America the township is the agent of the Government. This
fact alone shows the extent of the differences which exist between the
two nations.

Public Spirit Of The Townships Of New England

How the township of New England wins the affections of its
inhabitants—Difficulty of creating local public spirit in Europe—The
rights and duties of the American township favorable to
it—Characteristics of home in the United States—Manifestations of
public spirit in New England—Its happy effects.

In America, not only do municipal bodies exist, but they are kept alive
and supported by public spirit. The township of New England possesses
two advantages which infallibly secure the attentive interest of
mankind, namely, independence and authority. Its sphere is indeed small
and limited, but within that sphere its action is unrestrained; and its
independence gives to it a real importance which its extent and
population may not always ensure.

It is to be remembered that the affections of men generally lie on the
side of authority. Patriotism is not durable in a conquered nation. The
New Englander is attached to his township, not only because he was born
in it, but because it constitutes a social body of which he is a
member, and whose government claims and deserves the exercise of his
sagacity. In Europe the absence of local public spirit is a frequent
subject of regret to those who are in power; everyone agrees that there
is no surer guarantee of order and tranquility, and yet nothing is more
difficult to create. If the municipal bodies were made powerful and
independent, the authorities of the nation might be disunited and the
peace of the country endangered. Yet, without power and independence, a
town may contain good subjects, but it can have no active citizens.
Another important fact is that the township of New England is so
constituted as to excite the warmest of human affections, without
arousing the ambitious passions of the heart of man. The officers of
the country are not elected, and their authority is very limited. Even
the State is only a second-rate community, whose tranquil and obscure
administration offers no inducement sufficient to draw men away from
the circle of their interests into the turmoil of public affairs. The
federal government confers power and honor on the men who conduct it;
but these individuals can never be very numerous. The high station of
the Presidency can only be reached at an advanced period of life, and
the other federal functionaries are generally men who have been favored
by fortune, or distinguished in some other career. Such cannot be the
permanent aim of the ambitious. But the township serves as a centre for
the desire of public esteem, the want of exciting interests, and the
taste for authority and popularity, in the midst of the ordinary
relations of life; and the passions which commonly embroil society
change their character when they find a vent so near the domestic
hearth and the family circle.

In the American States power has been disseminated with admirable skill
for the purpose of interesting the greatest possible number of persons
in the common weal. Independently of the electors who are from time to
time called into action, the body politic is divided into innumerable
functionaries and officers, who all, in their several spheres,
represent the same powerful whole in whose name they act. The local
administration thus affords an unfailing source of profit and interest
to a vast number of individuals.

The American system, which divides the local authority among so many
citizens, does not scruple to multiply the functions of the town
officers. For in the United States it is believed, and with truth, that
patriotism is a kind of devotion which is strengthened by ritual
observance. In this manner the activity of the township is continually
perceptible; it is daily manifested in the fulfilment of a duty or the
exercise of a right, and a constant though gentle motion is thus kept
up in society which animates without disturbing it.

The American attaches himself to his home as the mountaineer clings to
his hills, because the characteristic features of his country are there
more distinctly marked than elsewhere. The existence of the townships
of New England is in general a happy one. Their government is suited to
their tastes, and chosen by themselves. In the midst of the profound
peace and general comfort which reign in America the commotions of
municipal discord are unfrequent. The conduct of local business is
easy. The political education of the people has long been complete; say
rather that it was complete when the people first set foot upon the
soil. In New England no tradition exists of a distinction of ranks; no
portion of the community is tempted to oppress the remainder; and the
abuses which may injure isolated individuals are forgotten in the
general contentment which prevails. If the government is defective (and
it would no doubt be easy to point out its deficiencies), the fact that
it really emanates from those it governs, and that it acts, either ill
or well, casts the protecting spell of a parental pride over its
faults. No term of comparison disturbs the satisfaction of the citizen:
England formerly governed the mass of the colonies, but the people was
always sovereign in the township where its rule is not only an ancient
but a primitive state.

The native of New England is attached to his township because it is
independent and free: his co-operation in its affairs ensures his
attachment to its interest; the well-being it affords him secures his
affection; and its welfare is the aim of his ambition and of his future
exertions: he takes a part in every occurrence in the place; he
practises the art of government in the small sphere within his reach;
he accustoms himself to those forms which can alone ensure the steady
progress of liberty; he imbibes their spirit; he acquires a taste for
order, comprehends the union or the balance of powers, and collects
clear practical notions on the nature of his duties and the extent of
his rights.

The Counties Of New England

The division of the countries in America has considerable analogy with
that of the arrondissements of France. The limits of the counties are
arbitrarily laid down, and the various districts which they contain
have no necessary connection, no common tradition or natural sympathy;
their object is simply to facilitate the administration of justice.

The extent of the township was too small to contain a system of
judicial institutions; each county has, however, a court of justice, *f
a sheriff to execute its decrees, and a prison for criminals. There are
certain wants which are felt alike by all the townships of a county; it
is therefore natural that they should be satisfied by a central
authority. In the State of Massachusetts this authority is vested in
the hands of several magistrates, who are appointed by the Governor of
the State, with the advice *g of his council. *h The officers of the
county have only a limited and occasional authority, which is
applicable to certain predetermined cases. The State and the townships
possess all the power requisite to conduct public business. The budget
of the county is drawn up by its officers, and is voted by the
legislature, but there is no assembly which directly or indirectly
represents the county. It has, therefore, properly speaking, no
political existence.

f
[ See the Act of February 14, 1821, Laws of Massachusetts, vol. i. p.
551.]


g
[ See the Act of February 20, 1819, Laws of Massachusetts, vol. ii. p.
494.]


h
[ The council of the Governor is an elective body.] A twofold tendency
may be discerned in the American constitutions, which impels the
legislator to centralize the legislative and to disperse the executive
power. The township of New England has in itself an indestructible
element of independence; and this distinct existence could only be
fictitiously introduced into the county, where its utility has not been
felt. But all the townships united have but one representation, which
is the State, the centre of the national authority: beyond the action
of the township and that of the nation, nothing can be said to exist
but the influence of individual exertion.


Administration In New England

Administration not perceived in America—Why?—The Europeans believe that
liberty is promoted by depriving the social authority of some of its
rights; the Americans, by dividing its exercise—Almost all the
administration confined to the township, and divided amongst the
town-officers—No trace of an administrative body to be perceived,
either in the township or above it—The reason of this—How it happens
that the administration of the State is uniform—Who is empowered to
enforce the obedience of the township and the county to the law—The
introduction of judicial power into the administration—Consequence of
the extension of the elective principle to all functionaries—The
Justice of the Peace in New England—By whom appointed—County officer:
ensures the administration of the townships—Court of Sessions—Its
action—Right of inspection and indictment disseminated like the other
administrative functions—Informers encouraged by the division of fines.

Nothing is more striking to an European traveller in the United States
than the absence of what we term the Government, or the Administration.
Written laws exist in America, and one sees that they are daily
executed; but although everything is in motion, the hand which gives
the impulse to the social machine can nowhere be discovered.
Nevertheless, as all peoples are obliged to have recourse to certain
grammatical forms, which are the foundation of human language, in order
to express their thoughts; so all communities are obliged to secure
their existence by submitting to a certain dose of authority, without
which they fall a prey to anarchy. This authority may be distributed in
several ways, but it must always exist somewhere.

There are two methods of diminishing the force of authority in a
nation: The first is to weaken the supreme power in its very principle,
by forbidding or preventing society from acting in its own defence
under certain circumstances. To weaken authority in this manner is what
is generally termed in Europe to lay the foundations of freedom. The
second manner of diminishing the influence of authority does not
consist in stripping society of any of its rights, nor in paralyzing
its efforts, but in distributing the exercise of its privileges in
various hands, and in multiplying functionaries, to each of whom the
degree of power necessary for him to perform his duty is entrusted.
There may be nations whom this distribution of social powers might lead
to anarchy; but in itself it is not anarchical. The action of authority
is indeed thus rendered less irresistible and less perilous, but it is
not totally suppressed.

The revolution of the United States was the result of a mature and
dignified taste for freedom, and not of a vague or ill-defined craving
for independence. It contracted no alliance with the turbulent passions
of anarchy; but its course was marked, on the contrary, by an
attachment to whatever was lawful and orderly.

It was never assumed in the United States that the citizen of a free
country has a right to do whatever he pleases; on the contrary, social
obligations were there imposed upon him more various than anywhere
else. No idea was ever entertained of attacking the principles or of
contesting the rights of society; but the exercise of its authority was
divided, to the end that the office might be powerful and the officer
insignificant, and that the community should be at once regulated and
free. In no country in the world does the law hold so absolute a
language as in America, and in no country is the right of applying it
vested in so many hands. The administrative power in the United States
presents nothing either central or hierarchical in its constitution,
which accounts for its passing, unperceived. The power exists, but its
representative is not to be perceived.

We have already seen that the independent townships of New England
protect their own private interests; and the municipal magistrates are
the persons to whom the execution of the laws of the State is most
frequently entrusted. *i Besides the general laws, the State sometimes
passes general police regulations; but more commonly the townships and
town officers, conjointly with justices of the peace, regulate the
minor details of social life, according to the necessities of the
different localities, and promulgate such enactments as concern the
health of the community, and the peace as well as morality of the
citizens. *j Lastly, these municipal magistrates provide, of their own
accord and without any delegated powers, for those unforeseen
emergencies which frequently occur in society. *k

i
[ See “The Town-Officer,” especially at the words Selectmen, Assessors,
Collectors, Schools, Surveyors of Highways. I take one example in a
thousand: the State prohibits travelling on the Sunday; the
tything-men, who are town-officers, are specially charged to keep watch
and to execute the law. See the Laws of Massachusetts, vol. i. p. 410.


The selectmen draw up the lists of electors for the election of the
Governor, and transmit the result of the ballot to the Secretary of the
State. See Act of February 24, 1796: Id., vol. i. p. 488.]

j
[ Thus, for instance, the selectmen authorize the construction of
drains, point out the proper sites for slaughter-houses and other
trades which are a nuisance to the neighborhood. See the Act of June 7,
1785: Id., vol. i. p. 193.]


k
[ The selectmen take measures for the security of the public in case of
contagious diseases, conjointly with the justices of the peace. See Act
of June 22, 1797, vol. i. p. 539.]


It results from what we have said that in the State of Massachusetts
the administrative authority is almost entirely restricted to the
township, *l but that it is distributed among a great number of
individuals. In the French commune there is properly but one official
functionary, namely, the Maire; and in New England we have seen that
there are nineteen. These nineteen functionaries do not in general
depend upon one another. The law carefully prescribes a circle of
action to each of these magistrates; and within that circle they have
an entire right to perform their functions independently of any other
authority. Above the township scarcely any trace of a series of
official dignitaries is to be found. It sometimes happens that the
county officers alter a decision of the townships or town magistrates,
*m but in general the authorities of the county have no right to
interfere with the authorities of the township, *n except in such
matters as concern the county.

l
[ I say almost, for there are various circumstances in the annals of a
township which are regulated by the justice of the peace in his
individual capacity, or by the justices of the peace assembled in the
chief town of the county; thus licenses are granted by the justices.
See the Act of February 28, 1787, vol. i. p. 297.]


m
[ Thus licenses are only granted to such persons as can produce a
certificate of good conduct from the selectmen. If the selectmen refuse
to give the certificate, the party may appeal to the justices assembled
in the Court of Sessions, and they may grant the license. See Act of
March 12, 1808, vol. ii. p. 186.


The townships have the right to make by-laws, and to enforce them by
fines which are fixed by law; but these by-laws must be approved by the
Court of Sessions. See Act of March 23, 1786, vol. i. p. 254.]

n
[ In Massachusetts the county magistrates are frequently called upon to
investigate the acts of the town magistrates; but it will be shown
further on that this investigation is a consequence, not of their
administrative, but of their judicial power.]


The magistrates of the township, as well as those of the county, are
bound to communicate their acts to the central government in a very
small number of predetermined cases. *o But the central government is
not represented by an individual whose business it is to publish police
regulations and ordinances enforcing the execution of the laws; to keep
up a regular communication with the officers of the township and the
county; to inspect their conduct, to direct their actions, or to
reprimand their faults. There is no point which serves as a centre to
the radii of the administration.

o
[ The town committees of schools are obliged to make an annual report
to the Secretary of the State on the condition of the school. See Act
of March 10, 1827, vol. iii. p. 183.]




 Chapter V: Necessity Of Examining The Condition Of The States—Part II


What, then, is the uniform plan on which the government is conducted,
and how is the compliance of the counties and their magistrates or the
townships and their officers enforced? In the States of New England the
legislative authority embraces more subjects than it does in France;
the legislator penetrates to the very core of the administration; the
law descends to the most minute details; the same enactment prescribes
the principle and the method of its application, and thus imposes a
multitude of strict and rigorously defined obligations on the secondary
functionaries of the State. The consequence of this is that if all the
secondary functionaries of the administration conform to the law,
society in all its branches proceeds with the greatest uniformity: the
difficulty remains of compelling the secondary functionaries of the
administration to conform to the law. It may be affirmed that, in
general, society has only two methods of enforcing the execution of the
laws at its disposal: a discretionary power may be entrusted to a
superior functionary of directing all the others, and of cashiering
them in case of disobedience; or the courts of justice may be
authorized to inflict judicial penalties on the offender: but these two
methods are not always available.

The right of directing a civil officer presupposes that of cashiering
him if he does not obey orders, and of rewarding him by promotion if he
fulfils his duties with propriety. But an elected magistrate can
neither be cashiered nor promoted. All elective functions are
inalienable until their term is expired. In fact, the elected
magistrate has nothing either to expect or to fear from his
constituents; and when all public offices are filled by ballot there
can be no series of official dignities, because the double right of
commanding and of enforcing obedience can never be vested in the same
individual, and because the power of issuing an order can never be
joined to that of inflicting a punishment or bestowing a reward.

The communities therefore in which the secondary functionaries of the
government are elected are perforce obliged to make great use of
judicial penalties as a means of administration. This is not evident at
first sight; for those in power are apt to look upon the institution of
elective functionaries as one concession, and the subjection of the
elected magistrate to the judges of the land as another. They are
equally averse to both these innovations; and as they are more
pressingly solicited to grant the former than the latter, they accede
to the election of the magistrate, and leave him independent of the
judicial power. Nevertheless, the second of these measures is the only
thing that can possibly counterbalance the first; and it will be found
that an elective authority which is not subject to judicial power will,
sooner or later, either elude all control or be destroyed. The courts
of justice are the only possible medium between the central power and
the administrative bodies; they alone can compel the elected
functionary to obey, without violating the rights of the elector. The
extension of judicial power in the political world ought therefore to
be in the exact ratio of the extension of elective offices: if these
two institutions do not go hand in hand, the State must fall into
anarchy or into subjection.

It has always been remarked that habits of legal business do not render
men apt to the exercise of administrative authority. The Americans have
borrowed from the English, their fathers, the idea of an institution
which is unknown upon the continent of Europe: I allude to that of the
Justices of the Peace. The Justice of the Peace is a sort of mezzo
termine between the magistrate and the man of the world, between the
civil officer and the judge. A justice of the peace is a well-informed
citizen, though he is not necessarily versed in the knowledge of the
laws. His office simply obliges him to execute the police regulations
of society; a task in which good sense and integrity are of more avail
than legal science. The justice introduces into the administration a
certain taste for established forms and publicity, which renders him a
most unserviceable instrument of despotism; and, on the other hand, he
is not blinded by those superstitions which render legal officers unfit
members of a government. The Americans have adopted the system of the
English justices of the peace, but they have deprived it of that
aristocratic character which is discernible in the mother-country. The
Governor of Massachusetts *p appoints a certain number of justices of
the peace in every county, whose functions last seven years. *q He
further designates three individuals from amongst the whole body of
justices who form in each county what is called the Court of Sessions.
The justices take a personal share in public business; they are
sometimes entrusted with administrative functions in conjunction with
elected officers, *r they sometimes constitute a tribunal, before which
the magistrates summarily prosecute a refractory citizen, or the
citizens inform against the abuses of the magistrate. But it is in the
Court of Sessions that they exercise their most important functions.
This court meets twice a year in the county town; in Massachusetts it
is empowered to enforce the obedience of the greater number *s of
public officers. *t It must be observed, that in the State of
Massachusetts the Court of Sessions is at the same time an
administrative body, properly so called, and a political tribunal. It
has been asserted that the county is a purely administrative division.
The Court of Sessions presides over that small number of affairs which,
as they concern several townships, or all the townships of the county
in common, cannot be entrusted to any one of them in particular. *u In
all that concerns county business the duties of the Court of Sessions
are purely administrative; and if in its investigations it occasionally
borrows the forms of judicial procedure, it is only with a view to its
own information, *v or as a guarantee to the community over which it
presides. But when the administration of the township is brought before
it, it always acts as a judicial body, and in some few cases as an
official assembly.

p
[ We shall hereafter learn what a Governor is: I shall content myself
with remarking in this place that he represents the executive power of
the whole State.]


q
[ See the Constitution of Massachusetts, chap. II. sect. 1. Section 9;
chap. III. Section 3.]


r
[ Thus, for example, a stranger arrives in a township from a country
where a contagious disease prevails, and he falls ill. Two justices of
the peace can, with the assent of the selectmen, order the sheriff of
the county to remove and take care of him.—Act of June 22, 1797, vol.
i. p. 540.


In general the justices interfere in all the important acts of the
administration, and give them a semi-judicial character.] [Footnote s:
I say the greater number, because certain administrative misdemeanors
are brought before ordinary tribunals. If, for instance, a township
refuses to make the necessary expenditure for its schools or to name a
school-committee, it is liable to a heavy fine. But this penalty is
pronounced by the Supreme Judicial Court or the Court of Common Pleas.
See Act of March 10, 1827, Laws of Massachusetts, vol. iii. p. 190. Or
when a township neglects to provide the necessary war-stores.—Act of
February 21, 1822: Id., vol. ii. p. 570.]

t
[ In their individual capacity the justices of the peace take a part in
the business of the counties and townships.] [Footnote u: These affairs
may be brought under the following heads:—1. The erection of prisons
and courts of justice. 2. The county budget, which is afterwards voted
by the State. 3. The distribution of the taxes so voted. 4. Grants of
certain patents. 5. The laying down and repairs of the country roads.]


v
[ Thus, when a road is under consideration, almost all difficulties are
disposed of by the aid of the jury.]


The first difficulty is to procure the obedience of an authority as
entirely independent of the general laws of the State as the township
is. We have stated that assessors are annually named by the
town-meetings to levy the taxes. If a township attempts to evade the
payment of the taxes by neglecting to name its assessors, the Court of
Sessions condemns it to a heavy penalty. *w The fine is levied on each
of the inhabitants; and the sheriff of the county, who is the officer
of justice, executes the mandate. Thus it is that in the United States
the authority of the Government is mysteriously concealed under the
forms of a judicial sentence; and its influence is at the same time
fortified by that irresistible power with which men have invested the
formalities of law.

w
[ See Act of February 20, 1786, Laws of Massachusetts, vol. i. p. 217.]


These proceedings are easy to follow and to understand. The demands
made upon a township are in general plain and accurately defined; they
consist in a simple fact without any complication, or in a principle
without its application in detail. *x But the difficulty increases when
it is not the obedience of the township, but that of the town officers
which is to be enforced. All the reprehensible actions of which a
public functionary may be guilty are reducible to the following heads:

x
[ There is an indirect method of enforcing the obedience of a township.
Suppose that the funds which the law demands for the maintenance of the
roads have not been voted, the town surveyor is then authorized, ex
officio, to levy the supplies. As he is personally responsible to
private individuals for the state of the roads, and indictable before
the Court of Sessions, he is sure to employ the extraordinary right
which the law gives him against the township. Thus by threatening the
officer the Court of Sessions exacts compliance from the town. See Act
of March 5, 1787, Id., vol. i. p. 305.]


He may execute the law without energy or zeal;

He may neglect to execute the law;

He may do what the law enjoins him not to do.

The last two violations of duty can alone come under the cognizance of
a tribunal; a positive and appreciable fact is the indispensable
foundation of an action at law. Thus, if the selectmen omit to fulfil
the legal formalities usual at town elections, they may be condemned to
pay a fine; *y but when the public officer performs his duty without
ability, and when he obeys the letter of the law without zeal or
energy, he is at least beyond the reach of judicial interference. The
Court of Sessions, even when it is invested with its official powers,
is in this case unable to compel him to a more satisfactory obedience.
The fear of removal is the only check to these quasi-offences; and as
the Court of Sessions does not originate the town authorities, it
cannot remove functionaries whom it does not appoint. Moreover, a
perpetual investigation would be necessary to convict the officer of
negligence or lukewarmness; and the Court of Sessions sits but twice a
year and then only judges such offences as are brought before its
notice. The only security of that active and enlightened obedience
which a court of justice cannot impose upon public officers lies in the
possibility of their arbitrary removal. In France this security is
sought for in powers exercised by the heads of the administration; in
America it is sought for in the principle of election.

y
[ Laws of Massachusetts, vol. ii. p. 45.]


Thus, to recapitulate in a few words what I have been showing: If a
public officer in New England commits a crime in the exercise of his
functions, the ordinary courts of justice are always called upon to
pass sentence upon him. If he commits a fault in his official capacity,
a purely administrative tribunal is empowered to punish him; and, if
the affair is important or urgent, the judge supplies the omission of
the functionary. *z Lastly, if the same individual is guilty of one of
those intangible offences of which human justice has no cognizance, he
annually appears before a tribunal from which there is no appeal, which
can at once reduce him to insignificance and deprive him of his charge.
This system undoubtedly possesses great advantages, but its execution
is attended with a practical difficulty which it is important to point
out.

z
[ If, for instance, a township persists in refusing to name its
assessors, the Court of Sessions nominates them; and the magistrates
thus appointed are invested with the same authority as elected
officers. See the Act quoted above, February 20, 1787.]


I have already observed that the administrative tribunal, which is
called the Court of Sessions, has no right of inspection over the town
officers. It can only interfere when the conduct of a magistrate is
specially brought under its notice; and this is the delicate part of
the system. The Americans of New England are unacquainted with the
office of public prosecutor in the Court of Sessions, *a and it may
readily be perceived that it could not have been established without
difficulty. If an accusing magistrate had merely been appointed in the
chief town of each county, and if he had been unassisted by agents in
the townships, he would not have been better acquainted with what was
going on in the county than the members of the Court of Sessions. But
to appoint agents in each township would have been to centre in his
person the most formidable of powers, that of a judicial
administration. Moreover, laws are the children of habit, and nothing
of the kind exists in the legislation of England. The Americans have
therefore divided the offices of inspection and of prosecution, as well
as all the other functions of the administration. Grand jurors are
bound by the law to apprise the court to which they belong of all the
misdemeanors which may have been committed in their county. *b There
are certain great offences which are officially prosecuted by the
States; *c but more frequently the task of punishing delinquents
devolves upon the fiscal officer, whose province it is to receive the
fine: thus the treasurer of the township is charged with the
prosecution of such administrative offences as fall under his notice.
But a more special appeal is made by American legislation to the
private interest of the citizen; *d and this great principle is
constantly to be met with in studying the laws of the United States.
American legislators are more apt to give men credit for intelligence
than for honesty, and they rely not a little on personal cupidity for
the execution of the laws. When an individual is really and sensibly
injured by an administrative abuse, it is natural that his personal
interest should induce him to prosecute. But if a legal formality be
required, which, however advantageous to the community, is of small
importance to individuals, plaintiffs may be less easily found; and
thus, by a tacit agreement, the laws may fall into disuse. Reduced by
their system to this extremity, the Americans are obliged to encourage
informers by bestowing on them a portion of the penalty in certain
cases, *e and to insure the execution of the laws by the dangerous
expedient of degrading the morals of the people. The only
administrative authority above the county magistrates is, properly
speaking, that of the Government.

a
[ I say the Court of Sessions, because in common courts there is a
magistrate who exercises some of the functions of a public prosecutor.]


b
[ The grand-jurors are, for instance, bound to inform the court of the
bad state of the roads.—Laws of Massachusetts, vol. i. p. 308.]


c
[ If, for instance, the treasurer of the county holds back his
accounts.—Laws of Massachusetts, vol. i. p. 406.] [Footnote d: Thus, if
a private individual breaks down or is wounded in consequence of the
badness of a road, he can sue the township or the county for damages at
the sessions.—Laws of Massachusetts, vol. i. p. 309.]


e
[ In cases of invasion or insurrection, if the town-officers neglect to
furnish the necessary stores and ammunition for the militia, the
township may be condemned to a fine of from $200 to $500. It may
readily be imagined that in such a case it might happen that no one
cared to prosecute; hence the law adds that all the citizens may indict
offences of this kind, and that half of the fine shall belong to the
plaintiff. See Act of March 6, 1810, vol. ii. p. 236. The same clause
is frequently to be met with in the law of Massachusetts. Not only are
private individuals thus incited to prosecute the public officers, but
the public officers are encouraged in the same manner to bring the
disobedience of private individuals to justice. If a citizen refuses to
perform the work which has been assigned to him upon a road, the road
surveyor may prosecute him, and he receives half the penalty for
himself. See the Laws above quoted, vol. i. p. 308.]


General Remarks On The Administration Of The United States Differences
of the States of the Union in their system of administration—Activity
and perfection of the local authorities decrease towards the
South—Power of the magistrate increases; that of the elector
diminishes—Administration passes from the township to the county—States
of New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania—Principles of administration applicable
to the whole Union—Election of public officers, and inalienability of
their functions—Absence of gradation of ranks—Introduction of judicial
resources into the administration.

I have already premised that, after having examined the constitution of
the township and the county of New England in detail, I should take a
general view of the remainder of the Union. Townships and a local
activity exist in every State; but in no part of the confederation is a
township to be met with precisely similar to those of New England. The
more we descend towards the South, the less active does the business of
the township or parish become; the number of magistrates, of functions,
and of rights decreases; the population exercises a less immediate
influence on affairs; town meetings are less frequent, and the subjects
of debate less numerous. The power of the elected magistrate is
augmented and that of the elector diminished, whilst the public spirit
of the local communities is less awakened and less influential. *f
These differences may be perceived to a certain extent in the State of
New York; they are very sensible in Pennsylvania; but they become less
striking as we advance to the northwest. The majority of the emigrants
who settle in the northwestern States are natives of New England, and
they carry the habits of their mother country with them into that which
they adopt. A township in Ohio is by no means dissimilar from a
township in Massachusetts.

f
[ For details see the Revised Statutes of the State of New York, part
i. chap. xi. vol. i. pp. 336-364, entitled, “Of the Powers, Duties, and
Privileges of Towns.”


See in the Digest of the Laws of Pennsylvania, the words Assessors,
Collector, Constables, Overseer of the Poor, Supervisors of Highways;
and in the Acts of a general nature of the State of Ohio, the Act of
February 25, 1834, relating to townships, p. 412; besides the peculiar
dispositions relating to divers town-officers, such as Township’s
Clerk, Trustees, Overseers of the Poor, Fence Viewers, Appraisers of
Property, Township’s Treasurer, Constables, Supervisors of Highways.]

We have seen that in Massachusetts the mainspring of public
administration lies in the township. It forms the common centre of the
interests and affections of the citizens. But this ceases to be the
case as we descend to States in which knowledge is less generally
diffused, and where the township consequently offers fewer guarantees
of a wise and active administration. As we leave New England,
therefore, we find that the importance of the town is gradually
transferred to the county, which becomes the centre of administration,
and the intermediate power between the Government and the citizen. In
Massachusetts the business of the county is conducted by the Court of
Sessions, which is composed of a quorum named by the Governor and his
council; but the county has no representative assembly, and its
expenditure is voted by the national legislature. In the great State of
New York, on the contrary, and in those of Ohio and Pennsylvania, the
inhabitants of each county choose a certain number of representatives,
who constitute the assembly of the county. *g The county assembly has
the right of taxing the inhabitants to a certain extent; and in this
respect it enjoys the privileges of a real legislative body: at the
same time it exercises an executive power in the county, frequently
directs the administration of the townships, and restricts their
authority within much narrower bounds than in Massachusetts.

g
[ See the Revised Statutes of the State of New York, part i. chap. xi.
vol. i. p. 340. Id. chap. xii. p. 366; also in the Acts of the State of
Ohio, an act relating to county commissioners, February 25, 1824, p.
263. See the Digest of the Laws of Pennsylvania, at the words
County-rates and Levies, p. 170. In the State of New York each township
elects a representative, who has a share in the administration of the
county as well as in that of the township.]


Such are the principal differences which the systems of county and town
administration present in the Federal States. Were it my intention to
examine the provisions of American law minutely, I should have to point
out still further differences in the executive details of the several
communities. But what I have already said may suffice to show the
general principles on which the administration of the United States
rests. These principles are differently applied; their consequences are
more or less numerous in various localities; but they are always
substantially the same. The laws differ, and their outward features
change, but their character does not vary. If the township and the
county are not everywhere constituted in the same manner, it is at
least true that in the United States the county and the township are
always based upon the same principle, namely, that everyone is the best
judge of what concerns himself alone, and the most proper person to
supply his private wants. The township and the county are therefore
bound to take care of their special interests: the State governs, but
it does not interfere with their administration. Exceptions to this
rule may be met with, but not a contrary principle.

The first consequence of this doctrine has been to cause all the
magistrates to be chosen either by or at least from amongst the
citizens. As the officers are everywhere elected or appointed for a
certain period, it has been impossible to establish the rules of a
dependent series of authorities; there are almost as many independent
functionaries as there are functions, and the executive power is
disseminated in a multitude of hands. Hence arose the indispensable
necessity of introducing the control of the courts of justice over the
administration, and the system of pecuniary penalties, by which the
secondary bodies and their representatives are constrained to obey the
laws. This system obtains from one end of the Union to the other. The
power of punishing the misconduct of public officers, or of performing
the part of the executive in urgent cases, has not, however, been
bestowed on the same judges in all the States. The Anglo-Americans
derived the institution of justices of the peace from a common source;
but although it exists in all the States, it is not always turned to
the same use. The justices of the peace everywhere participate in the
administration of the townships and the counties, *h either as public
officers or as the judges of public misdemeanors, but in most of the
States the more important classes of public offences come under the
cognizance of the ordinary tribunals.

h
[ In some of the Southern States the county courts are charged with all
the details of the administration. See the Statutes of the State of
Tennessee, arts. Judiciary, Taxes, etc.]


The election of public officers, or the inalienability of their
functions, the absence of a gradation of powers, and the introduction
of a judicial control over the secondary branches of the
administration, are the universal characteristics of the American
system from Maine to the Floridas. In some States (and that of New York
has advanced most in this direction) traces of a centralized
administration begin to be discernible. In the State of New York the
officers of the central government exercise, in certain cases, a sort
of inspection or control over the secondary bodies. *i

i
[ For instance, the direction of public instruction centres in the
hands of the Government. The legislature names the members of the
University, who are denominated Regents; the Governor and
Lieutentant-Governor of the State are necessarily of the
number.—Revised Statutes, vol. i. p. 455. The Regents of the University
annually visit the colleges and academies, and make their report to the
legislature. Their superintendence is not inefficient, for several
reasons: the colleges in order to become corporations stand in need of
a charter, which is only granted on the recommendation of the Regents;
every year funds are distributed by the State for the encouragement of
learning, and the Regents are the distributors of this money. See chap.
xv. “Instruction,” Revised Statutes, vol. i. p. 455.


The school-commissioners are obliged to send an annual report to the
Superintendent of the Republic.—Id. p. 488.

A similar report is annually made to the same person on the number and
condition of the poor.—Id. p. 631.]

At other times they constitute a court of appeal for the decision of
affairs. *j In the State of New York judicial penalties are less used
than in other parts as a means of administration, and the right of
prosecuting the offences of public officers is vested in fewer hands.
*k The same tendency is faintly observable in some other States; *l but
in general the prominent feature of the administration in the United
States is its excessive local independence.

j
[ If any one conceives himself to be wronged by the
school-commissioners (who are town-officers), he can appeal to the
superintendent of the primary schools, whose decision is final.—Revised
Statutes, vol. i. p. 487.


Provisions similar to those above cited are to be met with from time to
time in the laws of the State of New York; but in general these
attempts at centralization are weak and unproductive. The great
authorities of the State have the right of watching and controlling the
subordinate agents, without that of rewarding or punishing them. The
same individual is never empowered to give an order and to punish
disobedience; he has therefore the right of commanding, without the
means of exacting compliance. In 1830 the Superintendent of Schools
complained in his Annual Report addressed to the legislature that
several school-commissioners had neglected, notwithstanding his
application, to furnish him with the accounts which were due. He added
that if this omission continued he should be obliged to prosecute them,
as the law directs, before the proper tribunals.]

k
[ Thus the district-attorney is directed to recover all fines below the
sum of fifty dollars, unless such a right has been specially awarded to
another magistrate.—Revised Statutes, vol. i. p. 383.]


l
[ Several traces of centralization may be discovered in Massachusetts;
for instance, the committees of the town-schools are directed to make
an annual report to the Secretary of State. See Laws of Massachusetts,
vol. i. p. 367.]


Of The State

I have described the townships and the administration; it now remains
for me to speak of the State and the Government. This is ground I may
pass over rapidly, without fear of being misunderstood; for all I have
to say is to be found in written forms of the various constitutions,
which are easily to be procured. These constitutions rest upon a simple
and rational theory; their forms have been adopted by all
constitutional nations, and are become familiar to us. In this place,
therefore, it is only necessary for me to give a short analysis; I
shall endeavor afterwards to pass judgment upon what I now describe.




 Chapter V: Necessity Of Examining The Condition Of The States—Part III

Legislative Power Of The State

Division of the Legislative Body into two Houses—Senate—House of
Representatives—Different functions of these two Bodies.

The legislative power of the State is vested in two assemblies, the
first of which generally bears the name of the Senate. The Senate is
commonly a legislative body; but it sometimes becomes an executive and
judicial one. It takes a part in the government in several ways,
according to the constitution of the different States; *m but it is in
the nomination of public functionaries that it most commonly assumes an
executive power. It partakes of judicial power in the trial of certain
political offences, and sometimes also in the decision of certain civil
cases. *n The number of its members is always small. The other branch
of the legislature, which is usually called the House of
Representatives, has no share whatever in the administration, and only
takes a part in the judicial power inasmuch as it impeaches public
functionaries before the Senate. The members of the two Houses are
nearly everywhere subject to the same conditions of election. They are
chosen in the same manner, and by the same citizens. The only
difference which exists between them is, that the term for which the
Senate is chosen is in general longer than that of the House of
Representatives. The latter seldom remain in office longer than a year;
the former usually sit two or three years. By granting to the senators
the privilege of being chosen for several years, and being renewed
seriatim, the law takes care to preserve in the legislative body a
nucleus of men already accustomed to public business, and capable of
exercising a salutary influence upon the junior members.

m
[ In Massachusetts the Senate is not invested with any administrative
functions.]


n
[ As in the State of New York.]


The Americans, plainly, did not desire, by this separation of the
legislative body into two branches, to make one house hereditary and
the other elective; one aristocratic and the other democratic. It was
not their object to create in the one a bulwark to power, whilst the
other represented the interests and passions of the people. The only
advantages which result from the present constitution of the United
States are the division of the legislative power and the consequent
check upon political assemblies; with the creation of a tribunal of
appeal for the revision of the laws.

Time and experience, however, have convinced the Americans that if
these are its only advantages, the division of the legislative power is
still a principle of the greatest necessity. Pennsylvania was the only
one of the United States which at first attempted to establish a single
House of Assembly, and Franklin himself was so far carried away by the
necessary consequences of the principle of the sovereignty of the
people as to have concurred in the measure; but the Pennsylvanians were
soon obliged to change the law, and to create two Houses. Thus the
principle of the division of the legislative power was finally
established, and its necessity may henceforward be regarded as a
demonstrated truth. This theory, which was nearly unknown to the
republics of antiquity—which was introduced into the world almost by
accident, like so many other great truths—and misunderstood by several
modern nations, is at length become an axiom in the political science
of the present age.

[See Benjamin Franklin]

The Executive Power Of The State

Office of Governor in an American State—The place he occupies in
relation to the Legislature—His rights and his duties—His dependence on
the people.

The executive power of the State may with truth be said to be
represented by the Governor, although he enjoys but a portion of its
rights. The supreme magistrate, under the title of Governor, is the
official moderator and counsellor of the legislature. He is armed with
a veto or suspensive power, which allows him to stop, or at least to
retard, its movements at pleasure. He lays the wants of the country
before the legislative body, and points out the means which he thinks
may be usefully employed in providing for them; he is the natural
executor of its decrees in all the undertakings which interest the
nation at large. *o In the absence of the legislature, the Governor is
bound to take all necessary steps to guard the State against violent
shocks and unforeseen dangers. The whole military power of the State is
at the disposal of the Governor. He is the commander of the militia,
and head of the armed force. When the authority, which is by general
consent awarded to the laws, is disregarded, the Governor puts himself
at the head of the armed force of the State, to quell resistance, and
to restore order. Lastly, the Governor takes no share in the
administration of townships and counties, except it be indirectly in
the nomination of Justices of the Peace, which nomination he has not
the power to cancel. *p The Governor is an elected magistrate, and is
generally chosen for one or two years only; so that he always continues
to be strictly dependent upon the majority who returned him.

o
[ Practically speaking, it is not always the Governor who executes the
plans of the Legislature; it often happens that the latter, in voting a
measure, names special agents to superintend the execution of it.]


p
[ In some of the States the justices of the peace are not elected by
the Governor.]


Political Effects Of The System Of Local Administration In The United
States

Necessary distinction between the general centralization of Government
and the centralization of the local administration—Local administration
not centralized in the United States: great general centralization of
the Government—Some bad consequences resulting to the United States
from the local administration—Administrative advantages attending this
order of things—The power which conducts the Government is less
regular, less enlightened, less learned, but much greater than in
Europe—Political advantages of this order of things—In the United
States the interests of the country are everywhere kept in view—Support
given to the Government by the community—Provincial institutions more
necessary in proportion as the social condition becomes more
democratic—Reason of this.

Centralization is become a word of general and daily use, without any
precise meaning being attached to it. Nevertheless, there exist two
distinct kinds of centralization, which it is necessary to discriminate
with accuracy. Certain interests are common to all parts of a nation,
such as the enactment of its general laws and the maintenance of its
foreign relations. Other interests are peculiar to certain parts of the
nation; such, for instance, as the business of different townships.
When the power which directs the general interests is centred in one
place, or vested in the same persons, it constitutes a central
government. In like manner the power of directing partial or local
interests, when brought together into one place, constitutes what may
be termed a central administration.

Upon some points these two kinds of centralization coalesce; but by
classifying the objects which fall more particularly within the
province of each of them, they may easily be distinguished. It is
evident that a central government acquires immense power when united to
administrative centralization. Thus combined, it accustoms men to set
their own will habitually and completely aside; to submit, not only for
once, or upon one point, but in every respect, and at all times. Not
only, therefore, does this union of power subdue them compulsorily, but
it affects them in the ordinary habits of life, and influences each
individual, first separately and then collectively.

These two kinds of centralization mutually assist and attract each
other; but they must not be supposed to be inseparable. It is
impossible to imagine a more completely central government than that
which existed in France under Louis XIV.; when the same individual was
the author and the interpreter of the laws, and the representative of
France at home and abroad, he was justified in asserting that the State
was identified with his person. Nevertheless, the administration was
much less centralized under Louis XIV. than it is at the present day.

In England the centralization of the government is carried to great
perfection; the State has the compact vigor of a man, and by the sole
act of its will it puts immense engines in motion, and wields or
collects the efforts of its authority. Indeed, I cannot conceive that a
nation can enjoy a secure or prosperous existence without a powerful
centralization of government. But I am of opinion that a central
administration enervates the nations in which it exists by incessantly
diminishing their public spirit. If such an administration succeeds in
condensing at a given moment, on a given point, all the disposable
resources of a people, it impairs at least the renewal of those
resources. It may ensure a victory in the hour of strife, but it
gradually relaxes the sinews of strength. It may contribute admirably
to the transient greatness of a man, but it cannot ensure the durable
prosperity of a nation.

If we pay proper attention, we shall find that whenever it is said that
a State cannot act because it has no central point, it is the
centralization of the government in which it is deficient. It is
frequently asserted, and we are prepared to assent to the proposition,
that the German empire was never able to bring all its powers into
action. But the reason was, that the State was never able to enforce
obedience to its general laws, because the several members of that
great body always claimed the right, or found the means, of refusing
their co-operation to the representatives of the common authority, even
in the affairs which concerned the mass of the people; in other words,
because there was no centralization of government. The same remark is
applicable to the Middle Ages; the cause of all the confusion of feudal
society was that the control, not only of local but of general
interests, was divided amongst a thousand hands, and broken up in a
thousand different ways; the absence of a central government prevented
the nations of Europe from advancing with energy in any straightforward
course.

We have shown that in the United States no central administration and
no dependent series of public functionaries exist. Local authority has
been carried to lengths which no European nation could endure without
great inconvenience, and which has even produced some disadvantageous
consequences in America. But in the United States the centralization of
the Government is complete; and it would be easy to prove that the
national power is more compact than it has ever been in the old nations
of Europe. Not only is there but one legislative body in each State;
not only does there exist but one source of political authority; but
district assemblies and county courts have not in general been
multiplied, lest they should be tempted to exceed their administrative
duties, and interfere with the Government. In America the legislature
of each State is supreme; nothing can impede its authority; neither
privileges, nor local immunities, nor personal influence, nor even the
empire of reason, since it represents that majority which claims to be
the sole organ of reason. Its own determination is, therefore, the only
limit to this action. In juxtaposition to it, and under its immediate
control, is the representative of the executive power, whose duty it is
to constrain the refractory to submit by superior force. The only
symptom of weakness lies in certain details of the action of the
Government. The American republics have no standing armies to
intimidate a discontented minority; but as no minority has as yet been
reduced to declare open war, the necessity of an army has not been
felt. *q The State usually employs the officers of the township or the
county to deal with the citizens. Thus, for instance, in New England,
the assessor fixes the rate of taxes; the collector receives them; the
town-treasurer transmits the amount to the public treasury; and the
disputes which may arise are brought before the ordinary courts of
justice. This method of collecting taxes is slow as well as
inconvenient, and it would prove a perpetual hindrance to a Government
whose pecuniary demands were large. It is desirable that, in whatever
materially affects its existence, the Government should be served by
officers of its own, appointed by itself, removable at pleasure, and
accustomed to rapid methods of proceeding. But it will always be easy
for the central government, organized as it is in America, to introduce
new and more efficacious modes of action, proportioned to its wants.
[Footnote q: [The Civil War of 1860-65 cruelly belied this statement,
and in the course of the struggle the North alone called two millions
and a half of men to arms; but to the honor of the United States it
must be added that, with the cessation of the contest, this army
disappeared as rapidly as it had been raised.—Translator’s Note.]]

The absence of a central government will not, then, as has often been
asserted, prove the destruction of the republics of the New World; far
from supposing that the American governments are not sufficiently
centralized, I shall prove hereafter that they are too much so. The
legislative bodies daily encroach upon the authority of the Government,
and their tendency, like that of the French Convention, is to
appropriate it entirely to themselves. Under these circumstances the
social power is constantly changing hands, because it is subordinate to
the power of the people, which is too apt to forget the maxims of
wisdom and of foresight in the consciousness of its strength: hence
arises its danger; and thus its vigor, and not its impotence, will
probably be the cause of its ultimate destruction.

The system of local administration produces several different effects
in America. The Americans seem to me to have outstepped the limits of
sound policy in isolating the administration of the Government; for
order, even in second-rate affairs, is a matter of national importance.
*r As the State has no administrative functionaries of its own,
stationed on different points of its territory, to whom it can give a
common impulse, the consequence is that it rarely attempts to issue any
general police regulations. The want of these regulations is severely
felt, and is frequently observed by Europeans. The appearance of
disorder which prevails on the surface leads him at first to imagine
that society is in a state of anarchy; nor does he perceive his mistake
till he has gone deeper into the subject. Certain undertakings are of
importance to the whole State; but they cannot be put in execution,
because there is no national administration to direct them. Abandoned
to the exertions of the towns or counties, under the care of elected or
temporary agents, they lead to no result, or at least to no durable
benefit.

r
[ The authority which represents the State ought not, I think, to waive
the right of inspecting the local administration, even when it does not
interfere more actively. Suppose, for instance, that an agent of the
Government was stationed at some appointed spot in the country, to
prosecute the misdemeanors of the town and county officers, would not a
more uniform order be the result, without in any way compromising the
independence of the township? Nothing of the kind, however, exists in
America: there is nothing above the county-courts, which have, as it
were, only an incidental cognizance of the offences they are meant to
repress.]


The partisans of centralization in Europe are wont to maintain that the
Government directs the affairs of each locality better than the
citizens could do it for themselves; this may be true when the central
power is enlightened, and when the local districts are ignorant; when
it is as alert as they are slow; when it is accustomed to act, and they
to obey. Indeed, it is evident that this double tendency must augment
with the increase of centralization, and that the readiness of the one
and the incapacity of the others must become more and more prominent.
But I deny that such is the case when the people is as enlightened, as
awake to its interests, and as accustomed to reflect on them, as the
Americans are. I am persuaded, on the contrary, that in this case the
collective strength of the citizens will always conduce more
efficaciously to the public welfare than the authority of the
Government. It is difficult to point out with certainty the means of
arousing a sleeping population, and of giving it passions and knowledge
which it does not possess; it is, I am well aware, an arduous task to
persuade men to busy themselves about their own affairs; and it would
frequently be easier to interest them in the punctilios of court
etiquette than in the repairs of their common dwelling. But whenever a
central administration affects to supersede the persons most
interested, I am inclined to suppose that it is either misled or
desirous to mislead. However enlightened and however skilful a central
power may be, it cannot of itself embrace all the details of the
existence of a great nation. Such vigilance exceeds the powers of man.
And when it attempts to create and set in motion so many complicated
springs, it must submit to a very imperfect result, or consume itself
in bootless efforts.

Centralization succeeds more easily, indeed, in subjecting the external
actions of men to a certain uniformity, which at least commands our
regard, independently of the objects to which it is applied, like those
devotees who worship the statue and forget the deity it represents.
Centralization imparts without difficulty an admirable regularity to
the routine of business; provides for the details of the social police
with sagacity; represses the smallest disorder and the most petty
misdemeanors; maintains society in a status quo alike secure from
improvement and decline; and perpetuates a drowsy precision in the
conduct of affairs, which is hailed by the heads of the administration
as a sign of perfect order and public tranquillity: *s in short, it
excels more in prevention than in action. Its force deserts it when
society is to be disturbed or accelerated in its course; and if once
the co-operation of private citizens is necessary to the furtherance of
its measures, the secret of its impotence is disclosed. Even whilst it
invokes their assistance, it is on the condition that they shall act
exactly as much as the Government chooses, and exactly in the manner it
appoints. They are to take charge of the details, without aspiring to
guide the system; they are to work in a dark and subordinate sphere,
and only to judge the acts in which they have themselves cooperated by
their results. These, however, are not conditions on which the alliance
of the human will is to be obtained; its carriage must be free and its
actions responsible, or (such is the constitution of man) the citizen
had rather remain a passive spectator than a dependent actor in schemes
with which he is unacquainted.

s
[ China appears to me to present the most perfect instance of that
species of well-being which a completely central administration may
furnish to the nations among which it exists. Travellers assure us that
the Chinese have peace without happiness, industry without improvement,
stability without strength, and public order without public morality.
The condition of society is always tolerable, never excellent. I am
convinced that, when China is opened to European observation, it will
be found to contain the most perfect model of a central administration
which exists in the universe.]


It is undeniable that the want of those uniform regulations which
control the conduct of every inhabitant of France is not unfrequently
felt in the United States. Gross instances of social indifference and
neglect are to be met with, and from time to time disgraceful blemishes
are seen in complete contrast with the surrounding civilization. Useful
undertakings which cannot succeed without perpetual attention and
rigorous exactitude are very frequently abandoned in the end; for in
America, as well as in other countries, the people is subject to sudden
impulses and momentary exertions. The European who is accustomed to
find a functionary always at hand to interfere with all he undertakes
has some difficulty in accustoming himself to the complex mechanism of
the administration of the townships. In general it may be affirmed that
the lesser details of the police, which render life easy and
comfortable, are neglected in America; but that the essential
guarantees of man in society are as strong there as elsewhere. In
America the power which conducts the Government is far less regular,
less enlightened, and less learned, but an hundredfold more
authoritative than in Europe. In no country in the world do the
citizens make such exertions for the common weal; and I am acquainted
with no people which has established schools as numerous and as
efficacious, places of public worship better suited to the wants of the
inhabitants, or roads kept in better repair. Uniformity or permanence
of design, the minute arrangement of details, *t and the perfection of
an ingenious administration, must not be sought for in the United
States; but it will be easy to find, on the other hand, the symptoms of
a power which, if it is somewhat barbarous, is at least robust; and of
an existence which is checkered with accidents indeed, but cheered at
the same time by animation and effort.

t
[ A writer of talent, who, in the comparison which he has drawn between
the finances of France and those of the United States, has proved that
ingenuity cannot always supply the place of a knowledge of facts, very
justly reproaches the Americans for the sort of confusion which exists
in the accounts of the expenditure in the townships; and after giving
the model of a departmental budget in France, he adds:—“We are indebted
to centralization, that admirable invention of a great man, for the
uniform order and method which prevail alike in all the municipal
budgets, from the largest town to the humblest commune.” Whatever may
be my admiration of this result, when I see the communes of France,
with their excellent system of accounts, plunged into the grossest
ignorance of their true interests, and abandoned to so incorrigible an
apathy that they seem to vegetate rather than to live; when, on the
other hand, I observe the activity, the information, and the spirit of
enterprise which keep society in perpetual labor, in those American
townships whose budgets are drawn up with small method and with still
less uniformity, I am struck by the spectacle; for to my mind the end
of a good government is to ensure the welfare of a people, and not to
establish order and regularity in the midst of its misery and its
distress. I am therefore led to suppose that the prosperity of the
American townships and the apparent confusion of their accounts, the
distress of the French communes and the perfection of their budget, may
be attributable to the same cause. At any rate I am suspicious of a
benefit which is united to so many evils, and I am not averse to an
evil which is compensated by so many benefits.]


Granting for an instant that the villages and counties of the United
States would be more usefully governed by a remote authority which they
had never seen than by functionaries taken from the midst of
them—admitting, for the sake of argument, that the country would be
more secure, and the resources of society better employed, if the whole
administration centred in a single arm—still the political advantages
which the Americans derive from their system would induce me to prefer
it to the contrary plan. It profits me but little, after all, that a
vigilant authority should protect the tranquillity of my pleasures and
constantly avert all dangers from my path, without my care or my
concern, if this same authority is the absolute mistress of my liberty
and of my life, and if it so monopolizes all the energy of existence
that when it languishes everything languishes around it, that when it
sleeps everything must sleep, that when it dies the State itself must
perish.

In certain countries of Europe the natives consider themselves as a
kind of settlers, indifferent to the fate of the spot upon which they
live. The greatest changes are effected without their concurrence and
(unless chance may have apprised them of the event) without their
knowledge; nay more, the citizen is unconcerned as to the condition of
his village, the police of his street, the repairs of the church or of
the parsonage; for he looks upon all these things as unconnected with
himself, and as the property of a powerful stranger whom he calls the
Government. He has only a life-interest in these possessions, and he
entertains no notions of ownership or of improvement. This want of
interest in his own affairs goes so far that, if his own safety or that
of his children is endangered, instead of trying to avert the peril, he
will fold his arms, and wait till the nation comes to his assistance.
This same individual, who has so completely sacrificed his own free
will, has no natural propensity to obedience; he cowers, it is true,
before the pettiest officer; but he braves the law with the spirit of a
conquered foe as soon as its superior force is removed: his
oscillations between servitude and license are perpetual. When a nation
has arrived at this state it must either change its customs and its
laws or perish: the source of public virtue is dry, and, though it may
contain subjects, the race of citizens is extinct. Such communities are
a natural prey to foreign conquests, and if they do not disappear from
the scene of life, it is because they are surrounded by other nations
similar or inferior to themselves: it is because the instinctive
feeling of their country’s claims still exists in their hearts; and
because an involuntary pride in the name it bears, or a vague
reminiscence of its bygone fame, suffices to give them the impulse of
self-preservation.

Nor can the prodigious exertions made by tribes in the defence of a
country to which they did not belong be adduced in favor of such a
system; for it will be found that in these cases their main incitement
was religion. The permanence, the glory, or the prosperity of the
nation were become parts of their faith, and in defending the country
they inhabited they defended that Holy City of which they were all
citizens. The Turkish tribes have never taken an active share in the
conduct of the affairs of society, but they accomplished stupendous
enterprises as long as the victories of the Sultan were the triumphs of
the Mohammedan faith. In the present age they are in rapid decay,
because their religion is departing, and despotism only remains.
Montesquieu, who attributed to absolute power an authority peculiar to
itself, did it, as I conceive, an undeserved honor; for despotism,
taken by itself, can produce no durable results. On close inspection we
shall find that religion, and not fear, has ever been the cause of the
long-lived prosperity of an absolute government. Whatever exertions may
be made, no true power can be founded among men which does not depend
upon the free union of their inclinations; and patriotism and religion
are the only two motives in the world which can permanently direct the
whole of a body politic to one end.

Laws cannot succeed in rekindling the ardor of an extinguished faith,
but men may be interested in the fate of their country by the laws. By
this influence the vague impulse of patriotism, which never abandons
the human heart, may be directed and revived; and if it be connected
with the thoughts, the passions, and the daily habits of life, it may
be consolidated into a durable and rational sentiment.

Let it not be said that the time for the experiment is already past;
for the old age of nations is not like the old age of men, and every
fresh generation is a new people ready for the care of the legislator.

It is not the administrative but the political effects of the local
system that I most admire in America. In the United States the
interests of the country are everywhere kept in view; they are an
object of solicitude to the people of the whole Union, and every
citizen is as warmly attached to them as if they were his own. He takes
pride in the glory of his nation; he boasts of its success, to which he
conceives himself to have contributed, and he rejoices in the general
prosperity by which he profits. The feeling he entertains towards the
State is analogous to that which unites him to his family, and it is by
a kind of egotism that he interests himself in the welfare of his
country.

The European generally submits to a public officer because he
represents a superior force; but to an American he represents a right.
In America it may be said that no one renders obedience to man, but to
justice and to law. If the opinion which the citizen entertains of
himself is exaggerated, it is at least salutary; he unhesitatingly
confides in his own powers, which appear to him to be all-sufficient.
When a private individual meditates an undertaking, however directly
connected it may be with the welfare of society, he never thinks of
soliciting the co-operation of the Government, but he publishes his
plan, offers to execute it himself, courts the assistance of other
individuals, and struggles manfully against all obstacles. Undoubtedly
he is often less successful than the State might have been in his
position; but in the end the sum of these private undertakings far
exceeds all that the Government could have done.

As the administrative authority is within the reach of the citizens,
whom it in some degree represents, it excites neither their jealousy
nor their hatred; as its resources are limited, every one feels that he
must not rely solely on its assistance. Thus, when the administration
thinks fit to interfere, it is not abandoned to itself as in Europe;
the duties of the private citizens are not supposed to have lapsed
because the State assists in their fulfilment, but every one is ready,
on the contrary, to guide and to support it. This action of individual
exertions, joined to that of the public authorities, frequently
performs what the most energetic central administration would be unable
to execute. It would be easy to adduce several facts in proof of what I
advance, but I had rather give only one, with which I am more
thoroughly acquainted. *u In America the means which the authorities
have at their disposal for the discovery of crimes and the arrest of
criminals are few. The State police does not exist, and passports are
unknown. The criminal police of the United States cannot be compared to
that of France; the magistrates and public prosecutors are not
numerous, and the examinations of prisoners are rapid and oral.
Nevertheless in no country does crime more rarely elude punishment. The
reason is, that every one conceives himself to be interested in
furnishing evidence of the act committed, and in stopping the
delinquent. During my stay in the United States I witnessed the
spontaneous formation of committees for the pursuit and prosecution of
a man who had committed a great crime in a certain county. In Europe a
criminal is an unhappy being who is struggling for his life against the
ministers of justice, whilst the population is merely a spectator of
the conflict; in America he is looked upon as an enemy of the human
race, and the whole of mankind is against him.

u
[ See Appendix, I.]


I believe that provincial institutions are useful to all nations, but
nowhere do they appear to me to be more indispensable than amongst a
democratic people. In an aristocracy order can always be maintained in
the midst of liberty, and as the rulers have a great deal to lose order
is to them a first-rate consideration. In like manner an aristocracy
protects the people from the excesses of despotism, because it always
possesses an organized power ready to resist a despot. But a democracy
without provincial institutions has no security against these evils.
How can a populace, unaccustomed to freedom in small concerns, learn to
use it temperately in great affairs? What resistance can be offered to
tyranny in a country where every private individual is impotent, and
where the citizens are united by no common tie? Those who dread the
license of the mob, and those who fear the rule of absolute power,
ought alike to desire the progressive growth of provincial liberties.

On the other hand, I am convinced that democratic nations are most
exposed to fall beneath the yoke of a central administration, for
several reasons, amongst which is the following. The constant tendency
of these nations is to concentrate all the strength of the Government
in the hands of the only power which directly represents the people,
because beyond the people nothing is to be perceived but a mass of
equal individuals confounded together. But when the same power is
already in possession of all the attributes of the Government, it can
scarcely refrain from penetrating into the details of the
administration, and an opportunity of doing so is sure to present
itself in the end, as was the case in France. In the French Revolution
there were two impulses in opposite directions, which must never be
confounded—the one was favorable to liberty, the other to despotism.
Under the ancient monarchy the King was the sole author of the laws,
and below the power of the sovereign certain vestiges of provincial
institutions, half destroyed, were still distinguishable. These
provincial institutions were incoherent, ill compacted, and frequently
absurd; in the hands of the aristocracy they had sometimes been
converted into instruments of oppression. The Revolution declared
itself the enemy of royalty and of provincial institutions at the same
time; it confounded all that had preceded it—despotic power and the
checks to its abuses—in indiscriminate hatred, and its tendency was at
once to overthrow and to centralize. This double character of the
French Revolution is a fact which has been adroitly handled by the
friends of absolute power. Can they be accused of laboring in the cause
of despotism when they are defending that central administration which
was one of the great innovations of the Revolution? *v In this manner
popularity may be conciliated with hostility to the rights of the
people, and the secret slave of tyranny may be the professed admirer of
freedom.

v
[ See Appendix K.]


I have visited the two nations in which the system of provincial
liberty has been most perfectly established, and I have listened to the
opinions of different parties in those countries. In America I met with
men who secretly aspired to destroy the democratic institutions of the
Union; in England I found others who attacked the aristocracy openly,
but I know of no one who does not regard provincial independence as a
great benefit. In both countries I have heard a thousand different
causes assigned for the evils of the State, but the local system was
never mentioned amongst them. I have heard citizens attribute the power
and prosperity of their country to a multitude of reasons, but they all
placed the advantages of local institutions in the foremost rank. Am I
to suppose that when men who are naturally so divided on religious
opinions and on political theories agree on one point (and that one of
which they have daily experience), they are all in error? The only
nations which deny the utility of provincial liberties are those which
have fewest of them; in other words, those who are unacquainted with
the institution are the only persons who pass a censure upon it.




 Chapter VI: Judicial Power In The United States




 Chapter Summary


The Anglo-Americans have retained the characteristics of judicial power
which are common to all nations—They have, however, made it a powerful
political organ—How—In what the judicial system of the Anglo-Americans
differs from that of all other nations—Why the American judges have the
right of declaring the laws to be unconstitutional—How they use this
right—Precautions taken by the legislator to prevent its abuse.

Judicial Power In The United States And Its Influence On Political
Society.

I have thought it essential to devote a separate chapter to the
judicial authorities of the United States, lest their great political
importance should be lessened in the reader’s eyes by a merely
incidental mention of them. Confederations have existed in other
countries beside America, and republics have not been established upon
the shores of the New World alone; the representative system of
government has been adopted in several States of Europe, but I am not
aware that any nation of the globe has hitherto organized a judicial
power on the principle now adopted by the Americans. The judicial
organization of the United States is the institution which a stranger
has the greatest difficulty in understanding. He hears the authority of
a judge invoked in the political occurrences of every day, and he
naturally concludes that in the United States the judges are important
political functionaries; nevertheless, when he examines the nature of
the tribunals, they offer nothing which is contrary to the usual habits
and privileges of those bodies, and the magistrates seem to him to
interfere in public affairs of chance, but by a chance which recurs
every day.

When the Parliament of Paris remonstrated, or refused to enregister an
edict, or when it summoned a functionary accused of malversation to its
bar, its political influence as a judicial body was clearly visible;
but nothing of the kind is to be seen in the United States. The
Americans have retained all the ordinary characteristics of judicial
authority, and have carefully restricted its action to the ordinary
circle of its functions.

The first characteristic of judicial power in all nations is the duty
of arbitration. But rights must be contested in order to warrant the
interference of a tribunal; and an action must be brought to obtain the
decision of a judge. As long, therefore, as the law is uncontested, the
judicial authority is not called upon to discuss it, and it may exist
without being perceived. When a judge in a given case attacks a law
relating to that case, he extends the circle of his customary duties,
without however stepping beyond it; since he is in some measure obliged
to decide upon the law in order to decide the case. But if he
pronounces upon a law without resting upon a case, he clearly steps
beyond his sphere, and invades that of the legislative authority.

The second characteristic of judicial power is that it pronounces on
special cases, and not upon general principles. If a judge in deciding
a particular point destroys a general principle, by passing a judgment
which tends to reject all the inferences from that principle, and
consequently to annul it, he remains within the ordinary limits of his
functions. But if he directly attacks a general principle without
having a particular case in view, he leaves the circle in which all
nations have agreed to confine his authority, he assumes a more
important, and perhaps a more useful, influence than that of the
magistrate, but he ceases to be a representative of the judicial power.

The third characteristic of the judicial power is its inability to act
unless it is appealed to, or until it has taken cognizance of an
affair. This characteristic is less general than the other two; but,
notwithstanding the exceptions, I think it may be regarded as
essential. The judicial power is by its nature devoid of action; it
must be put in motion in order to produce a result. When it is called
upon to repress a crime, it punishes the criminal; when a wrong is to
be redressed, it is ready to redress it; when an act requires
interpretation, it is prepared to interpret it; but it does not pursue
criminals, hunt out wrongs, or examine into evidence of its own accord.
A judicial functionary who should open proceedings, and usurp the
censorship of the laws, would in some measure do violence to the
passive nature of his authority.

The Americans have retained these three distinguishing characteristics
of the judicial power; an American judge can only pronounce a decision
when litigation has arisen, he is only conversant with special cases,
and he cannot act until the cause has been duly brought before the
court. His position is therefore perfectly similar to that of the
magistrate of other nations; and he is nevertheless invested with
immense political power. If the sphere of his authority and his means
of action are the same as those of other judges, it may be asked whence
he derives a power which they do not possess. The cause of this
difference lies in the simple fact that the Americans have acknowledged
the right of the judges to found their decisions on the constitution
rather than on the laws. In other words, they have left them at liberty
not to apply such laws as may appear to them to be unconstitutional.

I am aware that a similar right has been claimed—but claimed in vain—by
courts of justice in other countries; but in America it is recognized
by all authorities; and not a party, nor so much as an individual, is
found to contest it. This fact can only be explained by the principles
of the American constitution. In France the constitution is (or at
least is supposed to be) immutable; and the received theory is that no
power has the right of changing any part of it. In England the
Parliament has an acknowledged right to modify the constitution; as,
therefore, the constitution may undergo perpetual changes, it does not
in reality exist; the Parliament is at once a legislative and a
constituent assembly. The political theories of America are more simple
and more rational. An American constitution is not supposed to be
immutable as in France, nor is it susceptible of modification by the
ordinary powers of society as in England. It constitutes a detached
whole, which, as it represents the determination of the whole people,
is no less binding on the legislator than on the private citizen, but
which may be altered by the will of the people in predetermined cases,
according to established rules. In America the constitution may
therefore vary, but as long as it exists it is the origin of all
authority, and the sole vehicle of the predominating force. *a

a
[ [The fifth article of the original Constitution of the United States
provides the mode in which amendments of the Constitution may be made.
Amendments must be proposed by two-thirds of both Houses of Congress,
and ratified by the Legislatures of three-fourths of the several
States. Fifteen amendments of the Constitution have been made at
different times since 1789, the most important of which are the
Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth, framed and ratified after the
Civil War. The original Constitution of the United States, followed by
these fifteen amendments, is printed at the end of this edition.
—Translator’s Note, 1874.]]


It is easy to perceive in what manner these differences must act upon
the position and the rights of the judicial bodies in the three
countries I have cited. If in France the tribunals were authorized to
disobey the laws on the ground of their being opposed to the
constitution, the supreme power would in fact be placed in their hands,
since they alone would have the right of interpreting a constitution,
the clauses of which can be modified by no authority. They would
therefore take the place of the nation, and exercise as absolute a sway
over society as the inherent weakness of judicial power would allow
them to do. Undoubtedly, as the French judges are incompetent to
declare a law to be unconstitutional, the power of changing the
constitution is indirectly given to the legislative body, since no
legal barrier would oppose the alterations which it might prescribe.
But it is better to grant the power of changing the constitution of the
people to men who represent (however imperfectly) the will of the
people, than to men who represent no one but themselves.

It would be still more unreasonable to invest the English judges with
the right of resisting the decisions of the legislative body, since the
Parliament which makes the laws also makes the constitution; and
consequently a law emanating from the three powers of the State can in
no case be unconstitutional. But neither of these remarks is applicable
to America.

In the United States the constitution governs the legislator as much as
the private citizen; as it is the first of laws it cannot be modified
by a law, and it is therefore just that the tribunals should obey the
constitution in preference to any law. This condition is essential to
the power of the judicature, for to select that legal obligation by
which he is most strictly bound is the natural right of every
magistrate.

In France the constitution is also the first of laws, and the judges
have the same right to take it as the ground of their decisions, but
were they to exercise this right they must perforce encroach on rights
more sacred than their own, namely, on those of society, in whose name
they are acting. In this case the State-motive clearly prevails over
the motives of an individual. In America, where the nation can always
reduce its magistrates to obedience by changing its constitution, no
danger of this kind is to be feared. Upon this point, therefore, the
political and the logical reasons agree, and the people as well as the
judges preserve their privileges.

Whenever a law which the judge holds to be unconstitutional is argued
in a tribunal of the United States he may refuse to admit it as a rule;
this power is the only one which is peculiar to the American
magistrate, but it gives rise to immense political influence. Few laws
can escape the searching analysis of the judicial power for any length
of time, for there are few which are not prejudicial to some private
interest or other, and none which may not be brought before a court of
justice by the choice of parties, or by the necessity of the case. But
from the time that a judge has refused to apply any given law in a
case, that law loses a portion of its moral cogency. The persons to
whose interests it is prejudicial learn that means exist of evading its
authority, and similar suits are multiplied, until it becomes
powerless. One of two alternatives must then be resorted to: the people
must alter the constitution, or the legislature must repeal the law.
The political power which the Americans have intrusted to their courts
of justice is therefore immense, but the evils of this power are
considerably diminished by the obligation which has been imposed of
attacking the laws through the courts of justice alone. If the judge
had been empowered to contest the laws on the ground of theoretical
generalities, if he had been enabled to open an attack or to pass a
censure on the legislator, he would have played a prominent part in the
political sphere; and as the champion or the antagonist of a party, he
would have arrayed the hostile passions of the nation in the conflict.
But when a judge contests a law applied to some particular case in an
obscure proceeding, the importance of his attack is concealed from the
public gaze, his decision bears upon the interest of an individual, and
if the law is slighted it is only collaterally. Moreover, although it
is censured, it is not abolished; its moral force may be diminished,
but its cogency is by no means suspended, and its final destruction can
only be accomplished by the reiterated attacks of judicial
functionaries. It will readily be understood that by connecting the
censorship of the laws with the private interests of members of the
community, and by intimately uniting the prosecution of the law with
the prosecution of an individual, legislation is protected from wanton
assailants, and from the daily aggressions of party spirit. The errors
of the legislator are exposed whenever their evil consequences are most
felt, and it is always a positive and appreciable fact which serves as
the basis of a prosecution.

I am inclined to believe this practice of the American courts to be at
once the most favorable to liberty as well as to public order. If the
judge could only attack the legislator openly and directly, he would
sometimes be afraid to oppose any resistance to his will; and at other
moments party spirit might encourage him to brave it at every turn. The
laws would consequently be attacked when the power from which they
emanate is weak, and obeyed when it is strong. That is to say, when it
would be useful to respect them they would be contested, and when it
would be easy to convert them into an instrument of oppression they
would be respected. But the American judge is brought into the
political arena independently of his own will. He only judges the law
because he is obliged to judge a case. The political question which he
is called upon to resolve is connected with the interest of the
suitors, and he cannot refuse to decide it without abdicating the
duties of his post. He performs his functions as a citizen by
fulfilling the precise duties which belong to his profession as a
magistrate. It is true that upon this system the judicial censorship
which is exercised by the courts of justice over the legislation cannot
extend to all laws indiscriminately, inasmuch as some of them can never
give rise to that exact species of contestation which is termed a
lawsuit; and even when such a contestation is possible, it may happen
that no one cares to bring it before a court of justice. The Americans
have often felt this disadvantage, but they have left the remedy
incomplete, lest they should give it an efficacy which might in some
cases prove dangerous. Within these limits the power vested in the
American courts of justice of pronouncing a statute to be
unconstitutional forms one of the most powerful barriers which has ever
been devised against the tyranny of political assemblies.

Other Powers Granted To American Judges

The United States all the citizens have the right of indicting public
functionaries before the ordinary tribunals—How they use this
right—Art. 75 of the French Constitution of the An VIII—The Americans
and the English cannot understand the purport of this clause.

It is perfectly natural that in a free country like America all the
citizens should have the right of indicting public functionaries before
the ordinary tribunals, and that all the judges should have the power
of punishing public offences. The right granted to the courts of
justice of judging the agents of the executive government, when they
have violated the laws, is so natural a one that it cannot be looked
upon as an extraordinary privilege. Nor do the springs of government
appear to me to be weakened in the United States by the custom which
renders all public officers responsible to the judges of the land. The
Americans seem, on the contrary, to have increased by this means that
respect which is due to the authorities, and at the same time to have
rendered those who are in power more scrupulous of offending public
opinion. I was struck by the small number of political trials which
occur in the United States, but I had no difficulty in accounting for
this circumstance. A lawsuit, of whatever nature it may be, is always a
difficult and expensive undertaking. It is easy to attack a public man
in a journal, but the motives which can warrant an action at law must
be serious. A solid ground of complaint must therefore exist to induce
an individual to prosecute a public officer, and public officers are
careful not to furnish these grounds of complaint when they are afraid
of being prosecuted.

This does not depend upon the republican form of American institutions,
for the same facts present themselves in England. These two nations do
not regard the impeachment of the principal officers of State as a
sufficient guarantee of their independence. But they hold that the
right of minor prosecutions, which are within the reach of the whole
community, is a better pledge of freedom than those great judicial
actions which are rarely employed until it is too late.

In the Middle Ages, when it was very difficult to overtake offenders,
the judges inflicted the most dreadful tortures on the few who were
arrested, which by no means diminished the number of crimes. It has
since been discovered that when justice is more certain and more mild,
it is at the same time more efficacious. The English and the Americans
hold that tyranny and oppression are to be treated like any other
crime, by lessening the penalty and facilitating conviction.

In the year VIII of the French Republic a constitution was drawn up in
which the following clause was introduced: “Art. 75. All the agents of
the government below the rank of ministers can only be prosecuted for
offences relating to their several functions by virtue of a decree of
the Conseil d’Etat; in which the case the prosecution takes place
before the ordinary tribunals.” This clause survived the “Constitution
de l’An VIII,” and it is still maintained in spite of the just
complaints of the nation. I have always found the utmost difficulty in
explaining its meaning to Englishmen or Americans. They were at once
led to conclude that the Conseil d’Etat in France was a great tribunal,
established in the centre of the kingdom, which exercised a preliminary
and somewhat tyrannical jurisdiction in all political causes. But when
I told them that the Conseil d’Etat was not a judicial body, in the
common sense of the term, but an administrative council composed of men
dependent on the Crown, so that the king, after having ordered one of
his servants, called a Prefect, to commit an injustice, has the power
of commanding another of his servants, called a Councillor of State, to
prevent the former from being punished; when I demonstrated to them
that the citizen who has been injured by the order of the sovereign is
obliged to solicit from the sovereign permission to obtain redress,
they refused to credit so flagrant an abuse, and were tempted to accuse
me of falsehood or of ignorance. It frequently happened before the
Revolution that a Parliament issued a warrant against a public officer
who had committed an offence, and sometimes the proceedings were
stopped by the authority of the Crown, which enforced compliance with
its absolute and despotic will. It is painful to perceive how much
lower we are sunk than our forefathers, since we allow things to pass
under the color of justice and the sanction of the law which violence
alone could impose upon them.




 Chapter VII: Political Jurisdiction In The United States




 Chapter Summary


Definition of political jurisdiction—What is understood by political
jurisdiction in France, in England, and in the United States—In America
the political judge can only pass sentence on public officers—He more
frequently passes a sentence of removal from office than a
penalty—Political jurisdiction as it exists in the United States is,
notwithstanding its mildness, and perhaps in consequence of that
mildness, a most powerful instrument in the hands of the majority.

Political Jurisdiction In The United States

I understand, by political jurisdiction, that temporary right of
pronouncing a legal decision with which a political body may be
invested.

In absolute governments no utility can accrue from the introduction of
extraordinary forms of procedure; the prince in whose name an offender
is prosecuted is as much the sovereign of the courts of justice as of
everything else, and the idea which is entertained of his power is of
itself a sufficient security. The only thing he has to fear is, that
the external formalities of justice should be neglected, and that his
authority should be dishonored from a wish to render it more absolute.
But in most free countries, in which the majority can never exercise
the same influence upon the tribunals as an absolute monarch, the
judicial power has occasionally been vested for a time in the
representatives of the nation. It has been thought better to introduce
a temporary confusion between the functions of the different
authorities than to violate the necessary principle of the unity of
government.

England, France, and the United States have established this political
jurisdiction by law; and it is curious to examine the different
adaptations which these three great nations have made of the principle.
In England and in France the House of Lords and the Chambre des Paris
*a constitute the highest criminal court of their respective nations,
and although they do not habitually try all political offences, they
are competent to try them all. Another political body enjoys the right
of impeachment before the House of Lords: the only difference which
exists between the two countries in this respect is, that in England
the Commons may impeach whomsoever they please before the Lords, whilst
in France the Deputies can only employ this mode of prosecution against
the ministers of the Crown.

a
[ [As it existed under the constitutional monarchy down to 1848.]]


In both countries the Upper House may make use of all the existing
penal laws of the nation to punish the delinquents.

In the United States, as well as in Europe, one branch of the
legislature is authorized to impeach and another to judge: the House of
Representatives arraigns the offender, and the Senate awards his
sentence. But the Senate can only try such persons as are brought
before it by the House of Representatives, and those persons must
belong to the class of public functionaries. Thus the jurisdiction of
the Senate is less extensive than that of the Peers of France, whilst
the right of impeachment by the Representatives is more general than
that of the Deputies. But the great difference which exists between
Europe and America is, that in Europe political tribunals are empowered
to inflict all the dispositions of the penal code, while in America,
when they have deprived the offender of his official rank, and have
declared him incapable of filling any political office for the future,
their jurisdiction terminates and that of the ordinary tribunals
begins.

Suppose, for instance, that the President of the United States has
committed the crime of high treason; the House of Representatives
impeaches him, and the Senate degrades him; he must then be tried by a
jury, which alone can deprive him of his liberty or his life. This
accurately illustrates the subject we are treating. The political
jurisdiction which is established by the laws of Europe is intended to
try great offenders, whatever may be their birth, their rank, or their
powers in the State; and to this end all the privileges of the courts
of justice are temporarily extended to a great political assembly. The
legislator is then transformed into the magistrate; he is called upon
to admit, to distinguish, and to punish the offence; and as he
exercises all the authority of a judge, the law restricts him to the
observance of all the duties of that high office, and of all the
formalities of justice. When a public functionary is impeached before
an English or a French political tribunal, and is found guilty, the
sentence deprives him ipso facto of his functions, and it may pronounce
him to be incapable of resuming them or any others for the future. But
in this case the political interdict is a consequence of the sentence,
and not the sentence itself. In Europe the sentence of a political
tribunal is to be regarded as a judicial verdict rather than as an
administrative measure. In the United States the contrary takes place;
and although the decision of the Senate is judicial in its form, since
the Senators are obliged to comply with the practices and formalities
of a court of justice; although it is judicial in respect to the
motives on which it is founded, since the Senate is in general obliged
to take an offence at common law as the basis of its sentence;
nevertheless the object of the proceeding is purely administrative. If
it had been the intention of the American legislator to invest a
political body with great judicial authority, its action would not have
been limited to the circle of public functionaries, since the most
dangerous enemies of the State may be in the possession of no functions
at all; and this is especially true in republics, where party influence
is the first of authorities, and where the strength of many a reader is
increased by his exercising no legal power.

If it had been the intention of the American legislator to give society
the means of repressing State offences by exemplary punishment,
according to the practice of ordinary justice, the resources of the
penal code would all have been placed at the disposal of the political
tribunals. But the weapon with which they are intrusted is an imperfect
one, and it can never reach the most dangerous offenders, since men who
aim at the entire subversion of the laws are not likely to murmur at a
political interdict.

The main object of the political jurisdiction which obtains in the
United States is, therefore, to deprive the ill-disposed citizen of an
authority which he has used amiss, and to prevent him from ever
acquiring it again. This is evidently an administrative measure
sanctioned by the formalities of a judicial decision. In this matter
the Americans have created a mixed system; they have surrounded the act
which removes a public functionary with the securities of a political
trial; and they have deprived all political condemnations of their
severest penalties. Every link of the system may easily be traced from
this point; we at once perceive why the American constitutions subject
all the civil functionaries to the jurisdiction of the Senate, whilst
the military, whose crimes are nevertheless more formidable, are
exempted from that tribunal. In the civil service none of the American
functionaries can be said to be removable; the places which some of
them occupy are inalienable, and the others are chosen for a term which
cannot be shortened. It is therefore necessary to try them all in order
to deprive them of their authority. But military officers are dependent
on the chief magistrate of the State, who is himself a civil
functionary, and the decision which condemns him is a blow upon them
all.

If we now compare the American and the European systems, we shall meet
with differences no less striking in the different effects which each
of them produces or may produce. In France and in England the
jurisdiction of political bodies is looked upon as an extraordinary
resource, which is only to be employed in order to rescue society from
unwonted dangers. It is not to be denied that these tribunals, as they
are constituted in Europe, are apt to violate the conservative
principle of the balance of power in the State, and to threaten
incessantly the lives and liberties of the subject. The same political
jurisdiction in the United States is only indirectly hostile to the
balance of power; it cannot menace the lives of the citizens, and it
does not hover, as in Europe, over the heads of the community, since
those only who have submitted to its authority on accepting office are
exposed to the severity of its investigations. It is at the same time
less formidable and less efficacious; indeed, it has not been
considered by the legislators of the United States as a remedy for the
more violent evils of society, but as an ordinary means of conducting
the government. In this respect it probably exercises more real
influence on the social body in America than in Europe. We must not be
misled by the apparent mildness of the American legislation in all that
relates to political jurisdiction. It is to be observed, in the first
place, that in the United States the tribunal which passes sentence is
composed of the same elements, and subject to the same influences, as
the body which impeaches the offender, and that this uniformity gives
an almost irresistible impulse to the vindictive passions of parties.
If political judges in the United States cannot inflict such heavy
penalties as those of Europe, there is the less chance of their
acquitting a prisoner; and the conviction, if it is less formidable, is
more certain. The principal object of the political tribunals of Europe
is to punish the offender; the purpose of those in America is to
deprive him of his authority. A political condemnation in the United
States may, therefore, be looked upon as a preventive measure; and
there is no reason for restricting the judges to the exact definitions
of criminal law. Nothing can be more alarming than the excessive
latitude with which political offences are described in the laws of
America. Article II., Section 4, of the Constitution of the United
States runs thus:—“The President, Vice-President, and all civil
officers of the United States shall be removed from office on
impeachment for, and conviction of, treason, bribery, or other high
crimes and misdemeanors.” Many of the Constitutions of the States are
even less explicit. “Public officers,” says the Constitution of
Massachusetts, *b “shall be impeached for misconduct or
maladministration;” the Constitution of Virginia declares that all the
civil officers who shall have offended against the State, by
maladministration, corruption, or other high crimes, may be impeached
by the House of Delegates; in some constitutions no offences are
specified, in order to subject the public functionaries to an unlimited
responsibility. *c But I will venture to affirm that it is precisely
their mildness which renders the American laws most formidable in this
respect. We have shown that in Europe the removal of a functionary and
his political interdiction are the consequences of the penalty he is to
undergo, and that in America they constitute the penalty itself. The
consequence is that in Europe political tribunals are invested with
rights which they are afraid to use, and that the fear of punishing too
much hinders them from punishing at all. But in America no one
hesitates to inflict a penalty from which humanity does not recoil. To
condemn a political opponent to death, in order to deprive him of his
power, is to commit what all the world would execrate as a horrible
assassination; but to declare that opponent unworthy to exercise that
authority, to deprive him of it, and to leave him uninjured in life and
limb, may be judged to be the fair issue of the struggle. But this
sentence, which it is so easy to pronounce, is not the less fatally
severe to the majority of those upon whom it is inflicted. Great
criminals may undoubtedly brave its intangible rigor, but ordinary
offenders will dread it as a condemnation which destroys their position
in the world, casts a blight upon their honor, and condemns them to a
shameful inactivity worse than death. The influence exercised in the
United States upon the progress of society by the jurisdiction of
political bodies may not appear to be formidable, but it is only the
more immense. It does not directly coerce the subject, but it renders
the majority more absolute over those in power; it does not confer an
unbounded authority on the legislator which can be exerted at some
momentous crisis, but it establishes a temperate and regular influence,
which is at all times available. If the power is decreased, it can, on
the other hand, be more conveniently employed and more easily abused.
By preventing political tribunals from inflicting judicial punishments
the Americans seem to have eluded the worst consequences of legislative
tyranny, rather than tyranny itself; and I am not sure that political
jurisdiction, as it is constituted in the United States, is not the
most formidable weapon which has ever been placed in the rude grasp of
a popular majority. When the American republics begin to degenerate it
will be easy to verify the truth of this observation, by remarking
whether the number of political impeachments augments.*d

b
[ Chap. I. sect. ii. Section 8.]


c
[ See the constitutions of Illinois, Maine, Connecticut, and Georgia.]


d
[ See Appendix, N.


[The impeachment of President Andrew Johnson in 1868—which was resorted
to by his political opponents solely as a means of turning him out of
office, for it could not be contended that he had been guilty of high
crimes and misdemeanors, and he was in fact honorably acquitted and
reinstated in office—is a striking confirmation of the truth of this
remark.—Translator’s Note, 1874.]]




 Chapter VIII: The Federal Constitution—Part I


I have hitherto considered each State as a separate whole, and I have
explained the different springs which the people sets in motion, and
the different means of action which it employs. But all the States
which I have considered as independent are forced to submit, in certain
cases, to the supreme authority of the Union. The time is now come for
me to examine separately the supremacy with which the Union has been
invested, and to cast a rapid glance over the Federal Constitution.




 Chapter Summary


Origin of the first Union—Its weakness—Congress appeals to the
constituent authority—Interval of two years between this appeal and the
promulgation of the new Constitution.

History Of The Federal Constitution

The thirteen colonies which simultaneously threw off the yoke of
England towards the end of the last century professed, as I have
already observed, the same religion, the same language, the same
customs, and almost the same laws; they were struggling against a
common enemy; and these reasons were sufficiently strong to unite them
one to another, and to consolidate them into one nation. But as each of
them had enjoyed a separate existence and a government within its own
control, the peculiar interests and customs which resulted from this
system were opposed to a compact and intimate union which would have
absorbed the individual importance of each in the general importance of
all. Hence arose two opposite tendencies, the one prompting the
Anglo-Americans to unite, the other to divide their strength. As long
as the war with the mother-country lasted the principle of union was
kept alive by necessity; and although the laws which constituted it
were defective, the common tie subsisted in spite of their
imperfections. *a But no sooner was peace concluded than the faults of
the legislation became manifest, and the State seemed to be suddenly
dissolved. Each colony became an independent republic, and assumed an
absolute sovereignty. The federal government, condemned to impotence by
its constitution, and no longer sustained by the presence of a common
danger, witnessed the outrages offered to its flag by the great nations
of Europe, whilst it was scarcely able to maintain its ground against
the Indian tribes, and to pay the interest of the debt which had been
contracted during the war of independence. It was already on the verge
of destruction, when it officially proclaimed its inability to conduct
the government, and appealed to the constituent authority of the
nation. *b If America ever approached (for however brief a time) that
lofty pinnacle of glory to which the fancy of its inhabitants is wont
to point, it was at the solemn moment at which the power of the nation
abdicated, as it were, the empire of the land. All ages have furnished
the spectacle of a people struggling with energy to win its
independence; and the efforts of the Americans in throwing off the
English yoke have been considerably exaggerated. Separated from their
enemies by three thousand miles of ocean, and backed by a powerful
ally, the success of the United States may be more justly attributed to
their geographical position than to the valor of their armies or the
patriotism of their citizens. It would be ridiculous to compare the
American was to the wars of the French Revolution, or the efforts of
the Americans to those of the French when they were attacked by the
whole of Europe, without credit and without allies, yet capable of
opposing a twentieth part of their population to the world, and of
bearing the torch of revolution beyond their frontiers whilst they
stifled its devouring flame within the bosom of their country. But it
is a novelty in the history of society to see a great people turn a
calm and scrutinizing eye upon itself, when apprised by the legislature
that the wheels of government are stopped; to see it carefully examine
the extent of the evil, and patiently wait for two whole years until a
remedy was discovered, which it voluntarily adopted without having
wrung a tear or a drop of blood from mankind. At the time when the
inadequacy of the first constitution was discovered America possessed
the double advantage of that calm which had succeeded the effervescence
of the revolution, and of those great men who had led the revolution to
a successful issue. The assembly which accepted the task of composing
the second constitution was small; *c but George Washington was its
President, and it contained the choicest talents and the noblest hearts
which had ever appeared in the New World. This national commission,
after long and mature deliberation, offered to the acceptance of the
people the body of general laws which still rules the Union. All the
States adopted it successively. *d The new Federal Government commenced
its functions in 1789, after an interregnum of two years. The
Revolution of America terminated when that of France began.

a
[ See the articles of the first confederation formed in 1778. This
constitution was not adopted by all the States until 1781. See also the
analysis given of this constitution in “The Federalist” from No. 15 to
No. 22, inclusive, and Story’s “Commentaries on the Constitution of the
United States,” pp. 85-115.]


b
[ Congress made this declaration on February 21, 1787.]


c
[ It consisted of fifty-five members; Washington, Madison, Hamilton,
and the two Morrises were amongst the number.]


d
[ It was not adopted by the legislative bodies, but representatives
were elected by the people for this sole purpose; and the new
constitution was discussed at length in each of these assemblies.]




 Summary Of The Federal Constitution


Division of authority between the Federal Government and the States—The
Government of the States is the rule, the Federal Government the
exception.

The first question which awaited the Americans was intricate, and by no
means easy of solution: the object was so to divide the authority of
the different States which composed the Union that each of them should
continue to govern itself in all that concerned its internal
prosperity, whilst the entire nation, represented by the Union, should
continue to form a compact body, and to provide for the general
exigencies of the people. It was as impossible to determine beforehand,
with any degree of accuracy, the share of authority which each of two
governments was to enjoy, as to foresee all the incidents in the
existence of a nation.

The obligations and the claims of the Federal Government were simple
and easily definable, because the Union had been formed with the
express purpose of meeting the general exigencies of the people; but
the claims and obligations of the States were, on the other hand,
complicated and various, because those Governments had penetrated into
all the details of social life. The attributes of the Federal
Government were therefore carefully enumerated and all that was not
included amongst them was declared to constitute a part of the
privileges of the several Governments of the States. Thus the
government of the States remained the rule, and that of the
Confederation became the exception. *e

e
[ See the Amendment to the Federal Constitution; “Federalist,” No. 32;
Story, p. 711; Kent’s “Commentaries,” vol. i. p. 364.


It is to be observed that whenever the exclusive right of regulating
certain matters is not reserved to Congress by the Constitution, the
States may take up the affair until it is brought before the National
Assembly. For instance, Congress has the right of making a general law
on bankruptcy, which, however, it neglects to do. Each State is then at
liberty to make a law for itself. This point has been established by
discussion in the law-courts, and may be said to belong more properly
to jurisprudence.]

But as it was foreseen that, in practice, questions might arise as to
the exact limits of this exceptional authority, and that it would be
dangerous to submit these questions to the decision of the ordinary
courts of justice, established in the States by the States themselves,
a high Federal court was created, *f which was destined, amongst other
functions, to maintain the balance of power which had been established
by the Constitution between the two rival Governments. *g

f
[ The action of this court is indirect, as we shall hereafter show.]


g
[ It is thus that “The Federalist,” No. 45, explains the division of
supremacy between the Union and the States: “The powers delegated by
the Constitution to the Federal Government are few and defined. Those
which are to remain in the State Governments are numerous and
indefinite. The former will be exercised principally on external
objects, as war, peace, negotiation, and foreign commerce. The powers
reserved to the several States will extend to all the objects which, in
the ordinary course of affairs, concern the internal order and
prosperity of the State.” I shall often have occasion to quote “The
Federalist” in this work. When the bill which has since become the
Constitution of the United States was submitted to the approval of the
people, and the discussions were still pending, three men, who had
already acquired a portion of that celebrity which they have since
enjoyed—John Jay, Hamilton, and Madison—formed an association with the
intention of explaining to the nation the advantages of the measure
which was proposed. With this view they published a series of articles
in the shape of a journal, which now form a complete treatise. They
entitled their journal “The Federalist,” a name which has been retained
in the work. “The Federalist” is an excellent book, which ought to be
familiar to the statesmen of all countries, although it especially
concerns America.]


Prerogative Of The Federal Government

Power of declaring war, making peace, and levying general taxes vested
in the Federal Government—What part of the internal policy of the
country it may direct—The Government of the Union in some respects more
central than the King’s Government in the old French monarchy.

The external relations of a people may be compared to those of private
individuals, and they cannot be advantageously maintained without the
agency of a single head of a Government. The exclusive right of making
peace and war, of concluding treaties of commerce, of raising armies,
and equipping fleets, was granted to the Union. *h The necessity of a
national Government was less imperiously felt in the conduct of the
internal policy of society; but there are certain general interests
which can only be attended to with advantage by a general authority.
The Union was invested with the power of controlling the monetary
system, of directing the post office, and of opening the great roads
which were to establish a communication between the different parts of
the country. *i The independence of the Government of each State was
formally recognized in its sphere; nevertheless, the Federal Government
was authorized to interfere in the internal affairs of the States *j in
a few predetermined cases, in which an indiscreet abuse of their
independence might compromise the security of the Union at large. Thus,
whilst the power of modifying and changing their legislation at
pleasure was preserved in all the republics, they were forbidden to
enact ex post facto laws, or to create a class of nobles in their
community. *k Lastly, as it was necessary that the Federal Government
should be able to fulfil its engagements, it was endowed with an
unlimited power of levying taxes. *l

h
[ See Constitution, sect. 8; “Federalist,” Nos. 41 and 42; Kent’s
“Commentaries,” vol. i. p. 207; Story, pp. 358-382; Ibid. pp. 409-426.]


i
[ Several other privileges of the same kind exist, such as that which
empowers the Union to legislate on bankruptcy, to grant patents, and
other matters in which its intervention is clearly necessary.]


j
[ Even in these cases its interference is indirect. The Union
interferes by means of the tribunals, as will be hereafter shown.]


k
[ Federal Constitution, sect. 10, art. I.]


l
[ Constitution, sects. 8, 9, and 10; “Federalist,” Nos. 30-36,
inclusive, and 41-44; Kent’s “Commentaries,” vol. i. pp. 207 and 381;
Story, pp. 329 and 514.]


In examining the balance of power as established by the Federal
Constitution; in remarking on the one hand the portion of sovereignty
which has been reserved to the several States, and on the other the
share of power which the Union has assumed, it is evident that the
Federal legislators entertained the clearest and most accurate notions
on the nature of the centralization of government. The United States
form not only a republic, but a confederation; nevertheless the
authority of the nation is more central than it was in several of the
monarchies of Europe when the American Constitution was formed. Take,
for instance, the two following examples.

Thirteen supreme courts of justice existed in France, which, generally
speaking, had the right of interpreting the law without appeal; and
those provinces which were styled pays d’etats were authorized to
refuse their assent to an impost which had been levied by the sovereign
who represented the nation. In the Union there is but one tribunal to
interpret, as there is one legislature to make the laws; and an impost
voted by the representatives of the nation is binding upon all the
citizens. In these two essential points, therefore, the Union exercises
more central authority than the French monarchy possessed, although the
Union is only an assemblage of confederate republics.

In Spain certain provinces had the right of establishing a system of
custom-house duties peculiar to themselves, although that privilege
belongs, by its very nature, to the national sovereignty. In America
the Congress alone has the right of regulating the commercial relations
of the States. The government of the Confederation is therefore more
centralized in this respect than the kingdom of Spain. It is true that
the power of the Crown in France or in Spain was always able to obtain
by force whatever the Constitution of the country denied, and that the
ultimate result was consequently the same; but I am here discussing the
theory of the Constitution.

Federal Powers

After having settled the limits within which the Federal Government was
to act, the next point was to determine the powers which it was to
exert.

Legislative Powers *m

m
[ [In this chapter the author points out the essence of the conflict
between the seceding States and the Union which caused the Civil War of
1861.]]


Division of the Legislative Body into two branches—Difference in the
manner of forming the two Houses—The principle of the independence of
the States predominates in the formation of the Senate—The principle of
the sovereignty of the nation in the composition of the House of
Representatives—Singular effects of the fact that a Constitution can
only be logical in the early stages of a nation.

The plan which had been laid down beforehand for the Constitutions of
the several States was followed, in many points, in the organization of
the powers of the Union. The Federal legislature of the Union was
composed of a Senate and a House of Representatives. A spirit of
conciliation prescribed the observance of distinct principles in the
formation of these two assemblies. I have already shown that two
contrary interests were opposed to each other in the establishment of
the Federal Constitution. These two interests had given rise to two
opinions. It was the wish of one party to convert the Union into a
league of independent States, or a sort of congress, at which the
representatives of the several peoples would meet to discuss certain
points of their common interests. The other party desired to unite the
inhabitants of the American colonies into one sole nation, and to
establish a Government which should act as the sole representative of
the nation, as far as the limited sphere of its authority would permit.
The practical consequences of these two theories were exceedingly
different.

The question was, whether a league was to be established instead of a
national Government; whether the majority of the State, instead of the
majority of the inhabitants of the Union, was to give the law: for
every State, the small as well as the great, would then remain in the
full enjoyment of its independence, and enter the Union upon a footing
of perfect equality. If, however, the inhabitants of the United States
were to be considered as belonging to one and the same nation, it would
be just that the majority of the citizens of the Union should prescribe
the law. Of course the lesser States could not subscribe to the
application of this doctrine without, in fact, abdicating their
existence in relation to the sovereignty of the Confederation; since
they would have passed from the condition of a co-equal and
co-legislative authority to that of an insignificant fraction of a
great people. But if the former system would have invested them with an
excessive authority, the latter would have annulled their influence
altogether. Under these circumstances the result was, that the strict
rules of logic were evaded, as is usually the case when interests are
opposed to arguments. A middle course was hit upon by the legislators,
which brought together by force two systems theoretically
irreconcilable.

The principle of the independence of the States prevailed in the
formation of the Senate, and that of the sovereignty of the nation
predominated in the composition of the House of Representatives. It was
decided that each State should send two senators to Congress, and a
number of representatives proportioned to its population. *n It results
from this arrangement that the State of New York has at the present day
forty representatives and only two senators; the State of Delaware has
two senators and only one representative; the State of Delaware is
therefore equal to the State of New York in the Senate, whilst the
latter has forty times the influence of the former in the House of
Representatives. Thus, if the minority of the nation preponderates in
the Senate,. it may paralyze the decisions of the majority represented
in the other House, which is contrary to the spirit of constitutional
government.

n
[ Every ten years Congress fixes anew the number of representatives
which each State is to furnish. The total number was 69 in 1789, and
240 in 1833. (See “American Almanac,” 1834, p. 194.) The Constitution
decided that there should not be more than one representative for every
30,000 persons; but no minimum was fixed on. The Congress has not
thought fit to augment the number of representatives in proportion to
the increase of population. The first Act which was passed on the
subject (April 14, 1792: see “Laws of the United States,” by Story,
vol. i. p. 235) decided that there should be one representative for
every 33,000 inhabitants. The last Act, which was passed in 1832, fixes
the proportion at one for 48,000. The population represented is
composed of all the free men and of three-fifths of the slaves.


[The last Act of apportionment, passed February 2, 1872, fixes the
representation at one to 134,684 inhabitants. There are now (1875) 283
members of the lower House of Congress, and 9 for the States at large,
making in all 292 members. The old States have of course lost the
representatives which the new States have gained.—Translator’s Note.]]

These facts show how rare and how difficult it is rationally and
logically to combine all the several parts of legislation. In the
course of time different interests arise, and different principles are
sanctioned by the same people; and when a general constitution is to be
established, these interests and principles are so many natural
obstacles to the rigorous application of any political system, with all
its consequences. The early stages of national existence are the only
periods at which it is possible to maintain the complete logic of
legislation; and when we perceive a nation in the enjoyment of this
advantage, before we hasten to conclude that it is wise, we should do
well to remember that it is young. When the Federal Constitution was
formed, the interests of independence for the separate States, and the
interest of union for the whole people, were the only two conflicting
interests which existed amongst the Anglo-Americans, and a compromise
was necessarily made between them.

It is, however, just to acknowledge that this part of the Constitution
has not hitherto produced those evils which might have been feared. All
the States are young and contiguous; their customs, their ideas, and
their exigencies are not dissimilar; and the differences which result
from their size or inferiority do not suffice to set their interests at
variance. The small States have consequently never been induced to
league themselves together in the Senate to oppose the designs of the
larger ones; and indeed there is so irresistible an authority in the
legitimate expression of the will of a people that the Senate could
offer but a feeble opposition to the vote of the majority of the House
of Representatives.

It must not be forgotten, on the other hand, that it was not in the
power of the American legislators to reduce to a single nation the
people for whom they were making laws. The object of the Federal
Constitution was not to destroy the independence of the States, but to
restrain it. By acknowledging the real authority of these secondary
communities (and it was impossible to deprive them of it), they
disavowed beforehand the habitual use of constraint in enforcing g the
decisions of the majority. Upon this principle the introduction of the
influence of the States into the mechanism of the Federal Government
was by no means to be wondered at, since it only attested the existence
of an acknowledged power, which was to be humored and not forcibly
checked.

A Further Difference Between The Senate And The House Of
Representatives

The Senate named by the provincial legislators, the Representatives by
the people—Double election of the former; single election of the
latter—Term of the different offices—Peculiar functions of each House.

The Senate not only differs from the other House in the principle which
it represents, but also in the mode of its election, in the term for
which it is chosen, and in the nature of its functions. The House of
Representatives is named by the people, the Senate by the legislators
of each State; the former is directly elected, the latter is elected by
an elected body; the term for which the representatives are chosen is
only two years, that of the senators is six. The functions of the House
of Representatives are purely legislative, and the only share it takes
in the judicial power is in the impeachment of public officers. The
Senate co-operates in the work of legislation, and tries those
political offences which the House of Representatives submits to its
decision. It also acts as the great executive council of the nation;
the treaties which are concluded by the President must be ratified by
the Senate, and the appointments he may make must be definitely
approved by the same body. *o

o
[ See “The Federalist,” Nos. 52-56, inclusive; Story, pp. 199-314;
Constitution of the United States, sects. 2 and 3.] The Executive Power
*p


p
[ See “The Federalist,” Nos. 67-77; Constitution of the United States,
art. 2; Story, p. 315, pp. 615-780; Kent’s “Commentaries,” p. 255.]


Dependence of the President—He is elective and responsible—He is free
to act in his own sphere under the inspection, but not under the
direction, of the Senate—His salary fixed at his entry into
office—Suspensive veto.

The American legislators undertook a difficult task in attempting to
create an executive power dependent on the majority of the people, and
nevertheless sufficiently strong to act without restraint in its own
sphere. It was indispensable to the maintenance of the republican form
of government that the representative of the executive power should be
subject to the will of the nation.

The President is an elective magistrate. His honor, his property, his
liberty, and his life are the securities which the people has for the
temperate use of his power. But in the exercise of his authority he
cannot be said to be perfectly independent; the Senate takes cognizance
of his relations with foreign powers, and of the distribution of public
appointments, so that he can neither be bribed nor can he employ the
means of corruption. The legislators of the Union acknowledged that the
executive power would be incompetent to fulfil its task with dignity
and utility, unless it enjoyed a greater degree of stability and of
strength than had been granted to it in the separate States.

The President is chosen for four years, and he may be reelected; so
that the chances of a prolonged administration may inspire him with
hopeful undertakings for the public good, and with the means of
carrying them into execution. The President was made the sole
representative of the executive power of the Union, and care was taken
not to render his decisions subordinate to the vote of a council—a
dangerous measure, which tends at the same time to clog the action of
the Government and to diminish its responsibility. The Senate has the
right of annulling g certain acts of the President; but it cannot
compel him to take any steps, nor does it participate in the exercise
of the executive power.

The action of the legislature on the executive power may be direct; and
we have just shown that the Americans carefully obviated this
influence; but it may, on the other hand, be indirect. Public
assemblies which have the power of depriving an officer of state of his
salary encroach upon his independence; and as they are free to make the
laws, it is to be feared lest they should gradually appropriate to
themselves a portion of that authority which the Constitution had
vested in his hands. This dependence of the executive power is one of
the defects inherent in republican constitutions. The Americans have
not been able to counteract the tendency which legislative assemblies
have to get possession of the government, but they have rendered this
propensity less irresistible. The salary of the President is fixed, at
the time of his entering upon office, for the whole period of his
magistracy. The President is, moreover, provided with a suspensive
veto, which allows him to oppose the passing of such laws as might
destroy the portion of independence which the Constitution awards him.
The struggle between the President and the legislature must always be
an unequal one, since the latter is certain of bearing down all
resistance by persevering in its plans; but the suspensive veto forces
it at least to reconsider the matter, and, if the motion be persisted
in, it must then be backed by a majority of two-thirds of the whole
house. The veto is, in fact, a sort of appeal to the people. The
executive power, which, without this security, might have been secretly
oppressed, adopts this means of pleading its cause and stating its
motives. But if the legislature is certain of overpowering all
resistance by persevering in its plans, I reply, that in the
constitutions of all nations, of whatever kind they may be, a certain
point exists at which the legislator is obliged to have recourse to the
good sense and the virtue of his fellow-citizens. This point is more
prominent and more discoverable in republics, whilst it is more remote
and more carefully concealed in monarchies, but it always exists
somewhere. There is no country in the world in which everything can be
provided for by the laws, or in which political institutions can prove
a substitute for common sense and public morality.

Differences Between The Position Of The President Of The United States
And That Of A Constitutional King Of France

Executive power in the Northern States as limited and as partial as the
supremacy which it represents—Executive power in France as universal as
the supremacy it represents—The King a branch of the legislature—The
President the mere executor of the law—Other differences resulting from
the duration of the two powers—The President checked in the exercise of
the executive authority—The King independent in its
exercise—Notwithstanding these discrepancies France is more akin to a
republic than the Union to a monarchy—Comparison of the number of
public officers depending upon the executive power in the two
countries.

The executive power has so important an influence on the destinies of
nations that I am inclined to pause for an instant at this portion of
my subject, in order more clearly to explain the part it sustains in
America. In order to form an accurate idea of the position of the
President of the United States, it may not be irrelevant to compare it
to that of one of the constitutional kings of Europe. In this
comparison I shall pay but little attention to the external signs of
power, which are more apt to deceive the eye of the observer than to
guide his researches. When a monarchy is being gradually transformed
into a republic, the executive power retains the titles, the honors,
the etiquette, and even the funds of royalty long after its authority
has disappeared. The English, after having cut off the head of one king
and expelled another from his throne, were accustomed to accost the
successor of those princes upon their knees. On the other hand, when a
republic falls under the sway of a single individual, the demeanor of
the sovereign is simple and unpretending, as if his authority was not
yet paramount. When the emperors exercised an unlimited control over
the fortunes and the lives of their fellow-citizens, it was customary
to call them Caesar in conversation, and they were in the habit of
supping without formality at their friends’ houses. It is therefore
necessary to look below the surface.

The sovereignty of the United States is shared between the Union and
the States, whilst in France it is undivided and compact: hence arises
the first and the most notable difference which exists between the
President of the United States and the King of France. In the United
States the executive power is as limited and partial as the sovereignty
of the Union in whose name it acts; in France it is as universal as the
authority of the State. The Americans have a federal and the French a
national Government.




 Chapter VIII: The Federal Constitution—Part II


This cause of inferiority results from the nature of things, but it is
not the only one; the second in importance is as follows: Sovereignty
may be defined to be the right of making laws: in France, the King
really exercises a portion of the sovereign power, since the laws have
no weight till he has given his assent to them; he is, moreover, the
executor of all they ordain. The President is also the executor of the
laws, but he does not really co-operate in their formation, since the
refusal of his assent does not annul them. He is therefore merely to be
considered as the agent of the sovereign power. But not only does the
King of France exercise a portion of the sovereign power, he also
contributes to the nomination of the legislature, which exercises the
other portion. He has the privilege of appointing the members of one
chamber, and of dissolving the other at his pleasure; whereas the
President of the United States has no share in the formation of the
legislative body, and cannot dissolve any part of it. The King has the
same right of bringing forward measures as the Chambers; a right which
the President does not possess. The King is represented in each
assembly by his ministers, who explain his intentions, support his
opinions, and maintain the principles of the Government. The President
and his ministers are alike excluded from Congress; so that his
influence and his opinions can only penetrate indirectly into that
great body. The King of France is therefore on an equal footing with
the legislature, which can no more act without him than he can without
it. The President exercises an authority inferior to, and depending
upon, that of the legislature.

Even in the exercise of the executive power, properly so called—the
point upon which his position seems to be most analogous to that of the
King of France—the President labors under several causes of
inferiority. The authority of the King, in France, has, in the first
place, the advantage of duration over that of the President, and
durability is one of the chief elements of strength; nothing is either
loved or feared but what is likely to endure. The President of the
United States is a magistrate elected for four years; the King, in
France, is an hereditary sovereign. In the exercise of the executive
power the President of the United States is constantly subject to a
jealous scrutiny. He may make, but he cannot conclude, a treaty; he may
designate, but he cannot appoint, a public officer. *q The King of
France is absolute within the limits of his authority. The President of
the United States is responsible for his actions; but the person of the
King is declared inviolable by the French Charter. *r

q
[ The Constitution had left it doubtful whether the President was
obliged to consult the Senate in the removal as well as in the
appointment of Federal officers. “The Federalist” (No. 77) seemed to
establish the affirmative; but in 1789 Congress formally decided that,
as the President was responsible for his actions, he ought not to be
forced to employ agents who had forfeited his esteem. See Kent’s
“Commentaries”, vol. i. p. 289.]


r
[ [This comparison applied to the Constitutional King of France and to
the powers he held under the Charter of 1830, till the overthrow of the
monarchy in 1848.—Translator’s Note.]]


Nevertheless, the supremacy of public opinion is no less above the head
of the one than of the other. This power is less definite, less
evident, and less sanctioned by the laws in France than in America, but
in fact it exists. In America, it acts by elections and decrees; in
France it proceeds by revolutions; but notwithstanding the different
constitutions of these two countries, public opinion is the predominant
authority in both of them. The fundamental principle of legislation—a
principle essentially republican—is the same in both countries,
although its consequences may be different, and its results more or
less extensive. Whence I am led to conclude that France with its King
is nearer akin to a republic than the Union with its President is to a
monarchy.

In what I have been saying I have only touched upon the main points of
distinction; and if I could have entered into details, the contrast
would have been rendered still more striking. I have remarked that the
authority of the President in the United States is only exercised
within the limits of a partial sovereignty, whilst that of the King in
France is undivided. I might have gone on to show that the power of the
King’s government in France exceeds its natural limits, however
extensive they may be, and penetrates in a thousand different ways into
the administration of private interests. Amongst the examples of this
influence may be quoted that which results from the great number of
public functionaries, who all derive their appointments from the
Government. This number now exceeds all previous limits; it amounts to
138,000 *s nominations, each of which may be considered as an element
of power. The President of the United States has not the exclusive
right of making any public appointments, and their whole number
scarcely exceeds 12,000. *t

s
[ The sums annually paid by the State to these officers amount to
200,000,000 fr. ($40,000,000).]


t
[ This number is extracted from the “National Calendar” for 1833. The
“National Calendar” is an American almanac which contains the names of
all the Federal officers. It results from this comparison that the King
of France has eleven times as many places at his disposal as the
President, although the population of France is not much more than
double that of the Union.


[I have not the means of ascertaining the number of appointments now at
the disposal of the President of the United States, but his patronage
and the abuse of it have largely increased since 1833.—Translator’s
Note, 1875.]]

Accidental Causes Which May Increase The Influence Of The Executive
Government

External security of the Union—Army of six thousand men—Few ships—The
President has no opportunity of exercising his great prerogatives—In
the prerogatives he exercises he is weak.

If the executive government is feebler in America than in France, the
cause is more attributable to the circumstances than to the laws of the
country.

It is chiefly in its foreign relations that the executive power of a
nation is called upon to exert its skill and its vigor. If the
existence of the Union were perpetually threatened, and if its chief
interests were in daily connection with those of other powerful
nations, the executive government would assume an increased importance
in proportion to the measures expected of it, and those which it would
carry into effect. The President of the United States is the
commander-in-chief of the army, but of an army composed of only six
thousand men; he commands the fleet, but the fleet reckons but few
sail; he conducts the foreign relations of the Union, but the United
States are a nation without neighbors. Separated from the rest of the
world by the ocean, and too weak as yet to aim at the dominion of the
seas, they have no enemies, and their interests rarely come into
contact with those of any other nation of the globe.

The practical part of a Government must not be judged by the theory of
its constitution. The President of the United States is in the
possession of almost royal prerogatives, which he has no opportunity of
exercising; and those privileges which he can at present use are very
circumscribed. The laws allow him to possess a degree of influence
which circumstances do not permit him to employ.

On the other hand, the great strength of the royal prerogative in
France arises from circumstances far more than from the laws. There the
executive government is constantly struggling against prodigious
obstacles, and exerting all its energies to repress them; so that it
increases by the extent of its achievements, and by the importance of
the events it controls, without modifying its constitution. If the laws
had made it as feeble and as circumscribed as it is in the Union, its
influence would very soon become still more preponderant.

Why The President Of The United States Does Not Require The Majority Of
The Two Houses In Order To Carry On The Government It is an established
axiom in Europe that a constitutional King cannot persevere in a system
of government which is opposed by the two other branches of the
legislature. But several Presidents of the United States have been
known to lose the majority in the legislative body without being
obliged to abandon the supreme power, and without inflicting a serious
evil upon society. I have heard this fact quoted as an instance of the
independence and the power of the executive government in America: a
moment’s reflection will convince us, on the contrary, that it is a
proof of its extreme weakness.

A King in Europe requires the support of the legislature to enable him
to perform the duties imposed upon him by the Constitution, because
those duties are enormous. A constitutional King in Europe is not
merely the executor of the law, but the execution of its provisions
devolves so completely upon him that he has the power of paralyzing its
influence if it opposes his designs. He requires the assistance of the
legislative assemblies to make the law, but those assemblies stand in
need of his aid to execute it: these two authorities cannot subsist
without each other, and the mechanism of government is stopped as soon
as they are at variance.

In America the President cannot prevent any law from being passed, nor
can he evade the obligation of enforcing it. His sincere and zealous
co-operation is no doubt useful, but it is not indispensable, in the
carrying on of public affairs. All his important acts are directly or
indirectly submitted to the legislature, and of his own free authority
he can do but little. It is therefore his weakness, and not his power,
which enables him to remain in opposition to Congress. In Europe,
harmony must reign between the Crown and the other branches of the
legislature, because a collision between them may prove serious; in
America, this harmony is not indispensable, because such a collision is
impossible.

Election Of The President

Dangers of the elective system increase in proportion to the extent of
the prerogative—This system possible in America because no powerful
executive authority is required—What circumstances are favorable to the
elective system—Why the election of the President does not cause a
deviation from the principles of the Government—Influence of the
election of the President on secondary functionaries.

The dangers of the system of election applied to the head of the
executive government of a great people have been sufficiently
exemplified by experience and by history, and the remarks I am about to
make refer to America alone. These dangers may be more or less
formidable in proportion to the place which the executive power
occupies, and to the importance it possesses in the State; and they may
vary according to the mode of election and the circumstances in which
the electors are placed. The most weighty argument against the election
of a chief magistrate is, that it offers so splendid a lure to private
ambition, and is so apt to inflame men in the pursuit of power, that
when legitimate means are wanting force may not unfrequently seize what
right denied.

It is clear that the greater the privileges of the executive authority
are, the greater is the temptation; the more the ambition of the
candidates is excited, the more warmly are their interests espoused by
a throng of partisans who hope to share the power when their patron has
won the prize. The dangers of the elective system increase, therefore,
in the exact ratio of the influence exercised by the executive power in
the affairs of State. The revolutions of Poland were not solely
attributable to the elective system in general, but to the fact that
the elected monarch was the sovereign of a powerful kingdom. Before we
can discuss the absolute advantages of the elective system we must make
preliminary inquiries as to whether the geographical position, the
laws, the habits, the manners, and the opinions of the people amongst
whom it is to be introduced will admit of the establishment of a weak
and dependent executive government; for to attempt to render the
representative of the State a powerful sovereign, and at the same time
elective, is, in my opinion, to entertain two incompatible designs. To
reduce hereditary royalty to the condition of an elective authority,
the only means that I am acquainted with are to circumscribe its sphere
of action beforehand, gradually to diminish its prerogatives, and to
accustom the people to live without its protection. Nothing, however,
is further from the designs of the republicans of Europe than this
course: as many of them owe their hatred of tyranny to the sufferings
which they have personally undergone, it is oppression, and not the
extent of the executive power, which excites their hostility, and they
attack the former without perceiving how nearly it is connected with
the latter.

Hitherto no citizen has shown any disposition to expose his honor and
his life in order to become the President of the United States; because
the power of that office is temporary, limited, and subordinate. The
prize of fortune must be great to encourage adventurers in so desperate
a game. No candidate has as yet been able to arouse the dangerous
enthusiasm or the passionate sympathies of the people in his favor, for
the very simple reason that when he is at the head of the Government he
has but little power, but little wealth, and but little glory to share
amongst his friends; and his influence in the State is too small for
the success or the ruin of a faction to depend upon the elevation of an
individual to power.

The great advantage of hereditary monarchies is, that as the private
interest of a family is always intimately connected with the interests
of the State, the executive government is never suspended for a single
instant; and if the affairs of a monarchy are not better conducted than
those of a republic, at least there is always some one to conduct them,
well or ill, according to his capacity. In elective States, on the
contrary, the wheels of government cease to act, as it were, of their
own accord at the approach of an election, and even for some time
previous to that event. The laws may indeed accelerate the operation of
the election, which may be conducted with such simplicity and rapidity
that the seat of power will never be left vacant; but, notwithstanding
these precautions, a break necessarily occurs in the minds of the
people.

At the approach of an election the head of the executive government is
wholly occupied by the coming struggle; his future plans are doubtful;
he can undertake nothing new, and the he will only prosecute with
indifference those designs which another will perhaps terminate. “I am
so near the time of my retirement from office,” said President
Jefferson on the 21st of January, 1809 (six weeks before the election),
“that I feel no passion, I take no part, I express no sentiment. It
appears to me just to leave to my successor the commencement of those
measures which he will have to prosecute, and for which he will be
responsible.”

On the other hand, the eyes of the nation are centred on a single
point; all are watching the gradual birth of so important an event. The
wider the influence of the executive power extends, the greater and the
more necessary is its constant action, the more fatal is the term of
suspense; and a nation which is accustomed to the government, or, still
more, one used to the administrative protection of a powerful executive
authority would be infallibly convulsed by an election of this kind. In
the United States the action of the Government may be slackened with
impunity, because it is always weak and circumscribed. *u

u
[ [This, however, may be a great danger. The period during which Mr.
Buchanan retained office, after the election of Mr. Lincoln, from
November, 1860, to March, 1861, was that which enabled the seceding
States of the South to complete their preparations for the Civil War,
and the Executive Government was paralyzed. No greater evil could
befall a nation.—Translator’s Note.]]


One of the principal vices of the elective system is that it always
introduces a certain degree of instability into the internal and
external policy of the State. But this disadvantage is less sensibly
felt if the share of power vested in the elected magistrate is small.
In Rome the principles of the Government underwent no variation,
although the Consuls were changed every year, because the Senate, which
was an hereditary assembly, possessed the directing authority. If the
elective system were adopted in Europe, the condition of most of the
monarchical States would be changed at every new election. In America
the President exercises a certain influence on State affairs, but he
does not conduct them; the preponderating power is vested in the
representatives of the whole nation. The political maxims of the
country depend therefore on the mass of the people, not on the
President alone; and consequently in America the elective system has no
very prejudicial influence on the fixed principles of the Government.
But the want of fixed principles is an evil so inherent in the elective
system that it is still extremely perceptible in the narrow sphere to
which the authority of the President extends.

The Americans have admitted that the head of the executive power, who
has to bear the whole responsibility of the duties he is called upon to
fulfil, ought to be empowered to choose his own agents, and to remove
them at pleasure: the legislative bodies watch the conduct of the
President more than they direct it. The consequence of this arrangement
is, that at every new election the fate of all the Federal public
officers is in suspense. Mr. Quincy Adams, on his entry into office,
discharged the majority of the individuals who had been appointed by
his predecessor: and I am not aware that General Jackson allowed a
single removable functionary employed in the Federal service to retain
his place beyond the first year which succeeded his election. It is
sometimes made a subject of complaint that in the constitutional
monarchies of Europe the fate of the humbler servants of an
Administration depends upon that of the Ministers. But in elective
Governments this evil is far greater. In a constitutional monarchy
successive ministries are rapidly formed; but as the principal
representative of the executive power does not change, the spirit of
innovation is kept within bounds; the changes which take place are in
the details rather than in the principles of the administrative system;
but to substitute one system for another, as is done in America every
four years, by law, is to cause a sort of revolution. As to the
misfortunes which may fall upon individuals in consequence of this
state of things, it must be allowed that the uncertain situation of the
public officers is less fraught with evil consequences in America than
elsewhere. It is so easy to acquire an independent position in the
United States that the public officer who loses his place may be
deprived of the comforts of life, but not of the means of subsistence.

I remarked at the beginning of this chapter that the dangers of the
elective system applied to the head of the State are augmented or
decreased by the peculiar circumstances of the people which adopts it.
However the functions of the executive power may be restricted, it must
always exercise a great influence upon the foreign policy of the
country, for a negotiation cannot be opened or successfully carried on
otherwise than by a single agent. The more precarious and the more
perilous the position of a people becomes, the more absolute is the
want of a fixed and consistent external policy, and the more dangerous
does the elective system of the Chief Magistrate become. The policy of
the Americans in relation to the whole world is exceedingly simple; for
it may almost be said that no country stands in need of them, nor do
they require the co-operation of any other people. Their independence
is never threatened. In their present condition, therefore, the
functions of the executive power are no less limited by circumstances
than by the laws; and the President may frequently change his line of
policy without involving the State in difficulty or destruction.

Whatever the prerogatives of the executive power may be, the period
which immediately precedes an election and the moment of its duration
must always be considered as a national crisis, which is perilous in
proportion to the internal embarrassments and the external dangers of
the country. Few of the nations of Europe could escape the calamities
of anarchy or of conquest every time they might have to elect a new
sovereign. In America society is so constituted that it can stand
without assistance upon its own basis; nothing is to be feared from the
pressure of external dangers, and the election of the President is a
cause of agitation, but not of ruin.

Mode Of Election

Skill of the American legislators shown in the mode of election adopted
by them—Creation of a special electoral body—Separate votes of these
electors—Case in which the House of Representatives is called upon to
choose the President—Results of the twelve elections which have taken
place since the Constitution has been established.

Besides the dangers which are inherent in the system, many other
difficulties may arise from the mode of election, which may be obviated
by the precaution of the legislator. When a people met in arms on some
public spot to choose its head, it was exposed to all the chances of
civil war resulting from so martial a mode of proceeding, besides the
dangers of the elective system in itself. The Polish laws, which
subjected the election of the sovereign to the veto of a single
individual, suggested the murder of that individual or prepared the way
to anarchy.

In the examination of the institutions and the political as well as
social condition of the United States, we are struck by the admirable
harmony of the gifts of fortune and the efforts of man. The nation
possessed two of the main causes of internal peace; it was a new
country, but it was inhabited by a people grown old in the exercise of
freedom. America had no hostile neighbors to dread; and the American
legislators, profiting by these favorable circumstances, created a weak
and subordinate executive power which could without danger be made
elective.

It then only remained for them to choose the least dangerous of the
various modes of election; and the rules which they laid down upon this
point admirably correspond to the securities which the physical and
political constitution of the country already afforded. Their object
was to find the mode of election which would best express the choice of
the people with the least possible excitement and suspense. It was
admitted in the first place that the simple majority should be
decisive; but the difficulty was to obtain this majority without an
interval of delay which it was most important to avoid. It rarely
happens that an individual can at once collect the majority of the
suffrages of a great people; and this difficulty is enhanced in a
republic of confederate States, where local influences are apt to
preponderate. The means by which it was proposed to obviate this second
obstacle was to delegate the electoral powers of the nation to a body
of representatives. This mode of election rendered a majority more
probable; for the fewer the electors are, the greater is the chance of
their coming to a final decision. It also offered an additional
probability of a judicious choice. It then remained to be decided
whether this right of election was to be entrusted to a legislative
body, the habitual representative assembly of the nation, or whether an
electoral assembly should be formed for the express purpose of
proceeding to the nomination of a President. The Americans chose the
latter alternative, from a belief that the individuals who were
returned to make the laws were incompetent to represent the wishes of
the nation in the election of its chief magistrate; and that, as they
are chosen for more than a year, the constituency they represent might
have changed its opinion in that time. It was thought that if the
legislature was empowered to elect the head of the executive power, its
members would, for some time before the election, be exposed to the
manoeuvres of corruption and the tricks of intrigue; whereas the
special electors would, like a jury, remain mixed up with the crowd
till the day of action, when they would appear for the sole purpose of
giving their votes.

It was therefore established that every State should name a certain
number of electors, *v who in their turn should elect the President;
and as it had been observed that the assemblies to which the choice of
a chief magistrate had been entrusted in elective countries inevitably
became the centres of passion and of cabal; that they sometimes usurped
an authority which did not belong to them; and that their proceedings,
or the uncertainty which resulted from them, were sometimes prolonged
so much as to endanger the welfare of the State, it was determined that
the electors should all vote upon the same day, without being convoked
to the same place. *w This double election rendered a majority
probable, though not certain; for it was possible that as many
differences might exist between the electors as between their
constituents. In this case it was necessary to have recourse to one of
three measures; either to appoint new electors, or to consult a second
time those already appointed, or to defer the election to another
authority. The first two of these alternatives, independently of the
uncertainty of their results, were likely to delay the final decision,
and to perpetuate an agitation which must always be accompanied with
danger. The third expedient was therefore adopted, and it was agreed
that the votes should be transmitted sealed to the President of the
Senate, and that they should be opened and counted in the presence of
the Senate and the House of Representatives. If none of the candidates
has a majority, the House of Representatives then proceeds immediately
to elect a President, but with the condition that it must fix upon one
of the three candidates who have the highest numbers. *x

v
[ As many as it sends members to Congress. The number of electors at
the election of 1833 was 288. (See “The National Calendar,” 1833.)]


w
[ The electors of the same State assemble, but they transmit to the
central government the list of their individual votes, and not the mere
result of the vote of the majority.] [Footnote x: In this case it is
the majority of the States, and not the majority of the members, which
decides the question; so that New York has not more influence in the
debate than Rhode Island. Thus the citizens of the Union are first
consulted as members of one and the same community; and, if they cannot
agree, recourse is had to the division of the States, each of which has
a separate and independent vote. This is one of the singularities of
the Federal Constitution which can only be explained by the jar of
conflicting interests.]


Thus it is only in case of an event which cannot often happen, and
which can never be foreseen, that the election is entrusted to the
ordinary representatives of the nation; and even then they are obliged
to choose a citizen who has already been designated by a powerful
minority of the special electors. It is by this happy expedient that
the respect which is due to the popular voice is combined with the
utmost celerity of execution and those precautions which the peace of
the country demands. But the decision of the question by the House of
Representatives does not necessarily offer an immediate solution of the
difficulty, for the majority of that assembly may still be doubtful,
and in this case the Constitution prescribes no remedy. Nevertheless,
by restricting the number of candidates to three, and by referring the
matter to the judgment of an enlightened public body, it has smoothed
all the obstacles *y which are not inherent in the elective system.

y
[ Jefferson, in 1801, was not elected until the thirty-sixth time of
balloting.]


In the forty-four years which have elapsed since the promulgation of
the Federal Constitution the United States have twelve times chosen a
President. Ten of these elections took place simultaneously by the
votes of the special electors in the different States. The House of
Representatives has only twice exercised its conditional privilege of
deciding in cases of uncertainty; the first time was at the election of
Mr. Jefferson in 1801; the second was in 1825, when Mr. Quincy Adams
was named. *z

z
[ [General Grant is now (1874) the eighteenth President of the United
States.]]


Crises Of The Election

The Election may be considered as a national crisis—Why?—Passions of
the people—Anxiety of the President—Calm which succeeds the agitation
of the election.

I have shown what the circumstances are which favored the adoption of
the elective system in the United States, and what precautions were
taken by the legislators to obviate its dangers. The Americans are
habitually accustomed to all kinds of elections, and they know by
experience the utmost degree of excitement which is compatible with
security. The vast extent of the country and the dissemination of the
inhabitants render a collision between parties less probable and less
dangerous there than elsewhere. The political circumstances under which
the elections have hitherto been carried on have presented no real
embarrassments to the nation.

Nevertheless, the epoch of the election of a President of the United
States may be considered as a crisis in the affairs of the nation. The
influence which he exercises on public business is no doubt feeble and
indirect; but the choice of the President, which is of small importance
to each individual citizen, concerns the citizens collectively; and
however trifling an interest may be, it assumes a great degree of
importance as soon as it becomes general. The President possesses but
few means of rewarding his supporters in comparison to the kings of
Europe, but the places which are at his disposal are sufficiently
numerous to interest, directly or indirectly, several thousand electors
in his success. Political parties in the United States are led to rally
round an individual, in order to acquire a more tangible shape in the
eyes of the crowd, and the name of the candidate for the Presidency is
put forward as the symbol and personification of their theories. For
these reasons parties are strongly interested in gaining the election,
not so much with a view to the triumph of their principles under the
auspices of the President-elect as to show by the majority which
returned him, the strength of the supporters of those principles.

For a long while before the appointed time is at hand the election
becomes the most important and the all-engrossing topic of discussion.
The ardor of faction is redoubled; and all the artificial passions
which the imagination can create in the bosom of a happy and peaceful
land are agitated and brought to light. The President, on the other
hand, is absorbed by the cares of self-defence. He no longer governs
for the interest of the State, but for that of his re-election; he does
homage to the majority, and instead of checking its passions, as his
duty commands him to do, he frequently courts its worst caprices. As
the election draws near, the activity of intrigue and the agitation of
the populace increase; the citizens are divided into hostile camps,
each of which assumes the name of its favorite candidate; the whole
nation glows with feverish excitement; the election is the daily theme
of the public papers, the subject of private conversation, the end of
every thought and every action, the sole interest of the present. As
soon as the choice is determined, this ardor is dispelled; and as a
calmer season returns, the current of the State, which had nearly
broken its banks, sinks to its usual level: *a but who can refrain from
astonishment at the causes of the storm.

a
[ [Not always. The election of President Lincoln was the signal of
civil war.—Translator’s Note.]]




 Chapter VIII: The Federal Constitution—Part III

Re-election Of The President

When the head of the executive power is re-eligible, it is the State
which is the source of intrigue and corruption—The desire of being
re-elected the chief aim of a President of the United
States—Disadvantage of the system peculiar to America—The natural evil
of democracy is that it subordinates all authority to the slightest
desires of the majority—The re-election of the President encourages
this evil.

It may be asked whether the legislators of the United States did right
or wrong in allowing the re-election of the President. It seems at
first sight contrary to all reason to prevent the head of the executive
power from being elected a second time. The influence which the talents
and the character of a single individual may exercise upon the fate of
a whole people, in critical circumstances or arduous times, is well
known: a law preventing the re-election of the chief magistrate would
deprive the citizens of the surest pledge of the prosperity and the
security of the commonwealth; and, by a singular inconsistency, a man
would be excluded from the government at the very time when he had
shown his ability in conducting its affairs.

But if these arguments are strong, perhaps still more powerful reasons
may be advanced against them. Intrigue and corruption are the natural
defects of elective government; but when the head of the State can be
re-elected these evils rise to a great height, and compromise the very
existence of the country. When a simple candidate seeks to rise by
intrigue, his manoeuvres must necessarily be limited to a narrow
sphere; but when the chief magistrate enters the lists, he borrows the
strength of the government for his own purposes. In the former case the
feeble resources of an individual are in action; in the latter, the
State itself, with all its immense influence, is busied in the work of
corruption and cabal. The private citizen, who employs the most immoral
practices to acquire power, can only act in a manner indirectly
prejudicial to the public prosperity. But if the representative of the
executive descends into the combat, the cares of government dwindle
into second-rate importance, and the success of his election is his
first concern. All laws and all the negotiations he undertakes are to
him nothing more than electioneering schemes; places become the reward
of services rendered, not to the nation, but to its chief; and the
influence of the government, if not injurious to the country, is at
least no longer beneficial to the community for which it was created.

It is impossible to consider the ordinary course of affairs in the
United States without perceiving that the desire of being re-elected is
the chief aim of the President; that his whole administration, and even
his most indifferent measures, tend to this object; and that, as the
crisis approaches, his personal interest takes the place of his
interest in the public good. The principle of re-eligibility renders
the corrupt influence of elective government still more extensive and
pernicious.

In America it exercises a peculiarly fatal influence on the sources of
national existence. Every government seems to be afflicted by some evil
which is inherent in its nature, and the genius of the legislator is
shown in eluding its attacks. A State may survive the influence of a
host of bad laws, and the mischief they cause is frequently
exaggerated; but a law which encourages the growth of the canker within
must prove fatal in the end, although its bad consequences may not be
immediately perceived.

The principle of destruction in absolute monarchies lies in the
excessive and unreasonable extension of the prerogative of the crown;
and a measure tending to remove the constitutional provisions which
counterbalance this influence would be radically bad, even if its
immediate consequences were unattended with evil. By a parity of
reasoning, in countries governed by a democracy, where the people is
perpetually drawing all authority to itself, the laws which increase or
accelerate its action are the direct assailants of the very principle
of the government.

The greatest proof of the ability of the American legislators is, that
they clearly discerned this truth, and that they had the courage to act
up to it. They conceived that a certain authority above the body of the
people was necessary, which should enjoy a degree of independence,
without, however, being entirely beyond the popular control; an
authority which would be forced to comply with the permanent
determinations of the majority, but which would be able to resist its
caprices, and to refuse its most dangerous demands. To this end they
centred the whole executive power of the nation in a single arm; they
granted extensive prerogatives to the President, and they armed him
with the veto to resist the encroachments of the legislature.

But by introducing the principle of re-election they partly destroyed
their work; and they rendered the President but little inclined to
exert the great power they had vested in his hands. If ineligible a
second time, the President would be far from independent of the people,
for his responsibility would not be lessened; but the favor of the
people would not be so necessary to him as to induce him to court it by
humoring its desires. If re-eligible (and this is more especially true
at the present day, when political morality is relaxed, and when great
men are rare), the President of the United States becomes an easy tool
in the hands of the majority. He adopts its likings and its
animosities, he hastens to anticipate its wishes, he forestalls its
complaints, he yields to its idlest cravings, and instead of guiding
it, as the legislature intended that he should do, he is ever ready to
follow its bidding. Thus, in order not to deprive the State of the
talents of an individual, those talents have been rendered almost
useless; and to reserve an expedient for extraordinary perils, the
country has been exposed to daily dangers.

Federal Courts *b

b
[ See chap. VI, entitled “Judicial Power in the United States.” This
chapter explains the general principles of the American theory of
judicial institutions. See also the Federal Constitution, Art. 3. See
“The Federalists,” Nos. 78-83, inclusive; and a work entitled
“Constitutional Law,” being a view of the practice and jurisdiction of
the courts of the United States, by Thomas Sergeant. See Story, pp.
134, 162, 489, 511, 581, 668; and the organic law of September 24,
1789, in the “Collection of the Laws of the United States,” by Story,
vol. i. p. 53.]


Political importance of the judiciary in the United States—Difficulty
of treating this subject—Utility of judicial power in
confederations—What tribunals could be introduced into the
Union—Necessity of establishing federal courts of justice—Organization
of the national judiciary—The Supreme Court—In what it differs from all
known tribunals.

I have inquired into the legislative and executive power of the Union,
and the judicial power now remains to be examined; but in this place I
cannot conceal my fears from the reader. Their judicial institutions
exercise a great influence on the condition of the Anglo-Americans, and
they occupy a prominent place amongst what are probably called
political institutions: in this respect they are peculiarly deserving
of our attention. But I am at a loss to explain the political action of
the American tribunals without entering into some technical details of
their constitution and their forms of proceeding; and I know not how to
descend to these minutiae without wearying the curiosity of the reader
by the natural aridity of the subject, or without risking to fall into
obscurity through a desire to be succinct. I can scarcely hope to
escape these various evils; for if I appear too lengthy to a man of the
world, a lawyer may on the other hand complain of my brevity. But these
are the natural disadvantages of my subject, and more especially of the
point which I am about to discuss.

The great difficulty was, not to devise the Constitution to the Federal
Government, but to find out a method of enforcing its laws. Governments
have in general but two means of overcoming the opposition of the
people they govern, viz., the physical force which is at their own
disposal, and the moral force which they derive from the decisions of
the courts of justice.

A government which should have no other means of exacting obedience
than open war must be very near its ruin, for one of two alternatives
would then probably occur: if its authority was small and its character
temperate, it would not resort to violence till the last extremity, and
it would connive at a number of partial acts of insubordination, in
which case the State would gradually fall into anarchy; if it was
enterprising and powerful, it would perpetually have recourse to its
physical strength, and would speedily degenerate into a military
despotism. So that its activity would not be less prejudicial to the
community than its inaction.

The great end of justice is to substitute the notion of right for that
of violence, and to place a legal barrier between the power of the
government and the use of physical force. The authority which is
awarded to the intervention of a court of justice by the general
opinion of mankind is so surprisingly great that it clings to the mere
formalities of justice, and gives a bodily influence to the shadow of
the law. The moral force which courts of justice possess renders the
introduction of physical force exceedingly rare, and is very frequently
substituted for it; but if the latter proves to be indispensable, its
power is doubled by the association of the idea of law.

A federal government stands in greater need of the support of judicial
institutions than any other, because it is naturally weak and exposed
to formidable opposition. *c If it were always obliged to resort to
violence in the first instance, it could not fulfil its task. The
Union, therefore, required a national judiciary to enforce the
obedience of the citizens to the laws, and to repeal the attacks which
might be directed against them. The question then remained as to what
tribunals were to exercise these privileges; were they to be entrusted
to the courts of justice which were already organized in every State?
or was it necessary to create federal courts? It may easily be proved
that the Union could not adapt the judicial power of the States to its
wants. The separation of the judiciary from the administrative power of
the State no doubt affects the security of every citizen and the
liberty of all. But it is no less important to the existence of the
nation that these several powers should have the same origin, should
follow the same principles, and act in the same sphere; in a word, that
they should be correlative and homogeneous. No one, I presume, ever
suggested the advantage of trying offences committed in France by a
foreign court of justice, in order to secure the impartiality of the
judges. The Americans form one people in relation to their Federal
Government; but in the bosom of this people divers political bodies
have been allowed to subsist which are dependent on the national
Government in a few points, and independent in all the rest; which have
all a distinct origin, maxims peculiar to themselves, and special means
of carrying on their affairs. To entrust the execution of the laws of
the Union to tribunals instituted by these political bodies would be to
allow foreign judges to preside over the nation. Nay, more; not only is
each State foreign to the Union at large, but it is in perpetual
opposition to the common interests, since whatever authority the Union
loses turns to the advantage of the States. Thus to enforce the laws of
the Union by means of the tribunals of the States would be to allow not
only foreign but partial judges to preside over the nation.

c
[ Federal laws are those which most require courts of justice, and
those at the same time which have most rarely established them. The
reason is that confederations have usually been formed by independent
States, which entertained no real intention of obeying the central
Government, and which very readily ceded the right of command to the
federal executive, and very prudently reserved the right of
non-compliance to themselves.]


But the number, still more than the mere character, of the tribunals of
the States rendered them unfit for the service of the nation. When the
Federal Constitution was formed there were already thirteen courts of
justice in the United States which decided causes without appeal. That
number is now increased to twenty-four. To suppose that a State can
subsist when its fundamental laws may be subjected to four-and-twenty
different interpretations at the same time is to advance a proposition
alike contrary to reason and to experience.

The American legislators therefore agreed to create a federal judiciary
power to apply the laws of the Union, and to determine certain
questions affecting general interests, which were carefully determined
beforehand. The entire judicial power of the Union was centred in one
tribunal, which was denominated the Supreme Court of the United States.
But, to facilitate the expedition of business, inferior courts were
appended to it, which were empowered to decide causes of small
importance without appeal, and with appeal causes of more magnitude.
The members of the Supreme Court are named neither by the people nor
the legislature, but by the President of the United States, acting with
the advice of the Senate. In order to render them independent of the
other authorities, their office was made inalienable; and it was
determined that their salary, when once fixed, should not be altered by
the legislature. *d It was easy to proclaim the principle of a Federal
judiciary, but difficulties multiplied when the extent of its
jurisdiction was to be determined.

d
[ The Union was divided into districts, in each of which a resident
Federal judge was appointed, and the court in which he presided was
termed a “District Court.” Each of the judges of the Supreme Court
annually visits a certain portion of the Republic, in order to try the
most important causes upon the spot; the court presided over by this
magistrate is styled a “Circuit Court.” Lastly, all the most serious
cases of litigation are brought before the Supreme Court, which holds a
solemn session once a year, at which all the judges of the Circuit
Courts must attend. The jury was introduced into the Federal Courts in
the same manner, and in the same cases, as into the courts of the
States.


It will be observed that no analogy exists between the Supreme Court of
the United States and the French Cour de Cassation, since the latter
only hears appeals on questions of law. The Supreme Court decides upon
the evidence of the fact as well as upon the law of the case, whereas
the Cour de Cassation does not pronounce a decision of its own, but
refers the cause to the arbitration of another tribunal. See the law of
September 24, 1789, “Laws of the United States,” by Story, vol. i. p.
53.]

Means Of Determining The Jurisdiction Of The Federal Courts Difficulty
of determining the jurisdiction of separate courts of justice in
confederations—The courts of the Union obtained the right of fixing
their own jurisdiction—In what respect this rule attacks the portion of
sovereignty reserved to the several States—The sovereignty of these
States restricted by the laws, and the interpretation of the
laws—Consequently, the danger of the several States is more apparent
than real.

As the Constitution of the United States recognized two distinct powers
in presence of each other, represented in a judicial point of view by
two distinct classes of courts of justice, the utmost care which could
be taken in defining their separate jurisdictions would have been
insufficient to prevent frequent collisions between those tribunals.
The question then arose to whom the right of deciding the competency of
each court was to be referred.

In nations which constitute a single body politic, when a question is
debated between two courts relating to their mutual jurisdiction, a
third tribunal is generally within reach to decide the difference; and
this is effected without difficulty, because in these nations the
questions of judicial competency have no connection with the privileges
of the national supremacy. But it was impossible to create an arbiter
between a superior court of the Union and the superior court of a
separate State which would not belong to one of these two classes. It
was, therefore, necessary to allow one of these courts to judge its own
cause, and to take or to retain cognizance of the point which was
contested. To grant this privilege to the different courts of the
States would have been to destroy the sovereignty of the Union de facto
after having established it de jure; for the interpretation of the
Constitution would soon have restored that portion of independence to
the States of which the terms of that act deprived them. The object of
the creation of a Federal tribunal was to prevent the courts of the
States from deciding questions affecting the national interests in
their own department, and so to form a uniform body of jurisprudene for
the interpretation of the laws of the Union. This end would not have
been accomplished if the courts of the several States had been
competent to decide upon cases in their separate capacities from which
they were obliged to abstain as Federal tribunals. The Supreme Court of
the United States was therefore invested with the right of determining
all questions of jurisdiction. *e

e
[ In order to diminish the number of these suits, it was decided that
in a great many Federal causes the courts of the States should be
empowered to decide conjointly with those of the Union, the losing
party having then a right of appeal to the Supreme Court of the United
States. The Supreme Court of Virginia contested the right of the
Supreme Court of the United States to judge an appeal from its
decisions, but unsuccessfully. See “Kent’s Commentaries,” vol. i. p.
300, pp. 370 et seq.; Story’s “Commentaries,” p. 646; and “The Organic
Law of the United States,” vol. i. p. 35.]


This was a severe blow upon the independence of the States, which was
thus restricted not only by the laws, but by the interpretation of
them; by one limit which was known, and by another which was dubious;
by a rule which was certain, and a rule which was arbitrary. It is true
the Constitution had laid down the precise limits of the Federal
supremacy, but whenever this supremacy is contested by one of the
States, a Federal tribunal decides the question. Nevertheless, the
dangers with which the independence of the States was threatened by
this mode of proceeding are less serious than they appeared to be. We
shall see hereafter that in America the real strength of the country is
vested in the provincial far more than in the Federal Government. The
Federal judges are conscious of the relative weakness of the power in
whose name they act, and they are more inclined to abandon a right of
jurisdiction in cases where it is justly their own than to assert a
privilege to which they have no legal claim.

Different Cases Of Jurisdiction

The matter and the party are the first conditions of the Federal
jurisdiction—Suits in which ambassadors are engaged—Suits of the
Union—Of a separate State—By whom tried—Causes resulting from the laws
of the Union—Why judged by the Federal tribunals—Causes relating to the
performance of contracts tried by the Federal courts—Consequence of
this arrangement.

After having appointed the means of fixing the competency of the
Federal courts, the legislators of the Union defined the cases which
should come within their jurisdiction. It was established, on the one
hand, that certain parties must always be brought before the Federal
courts, without any regard to the special nature of the cause; and, on
the other, that certain causes must always be brought before the same
courts, without any regard to the quality of the parties in the suit.
These distinctions were therefore admitted to be the basis of the
Federal jurisdiction.

Ambassadors are the representatives of nations in a state of amity with
the Union, and whatever concerns these personages concerns in some
degree the whole Union. When an ambassador is a party in a suit, that
suit affects the welfare of the nation, and a Federal tribunal is
naturally called upon to decide it.

The Union itself may be invoked in legal proceedings, and in this case
it would be alike contrary to the customs of all nations and to common
sense to appeal to a tribunal representing any other sovereignty than
its own; the Federal courts, therefore, take cognizance of these
affairs.

When two parties belonging to two different States are engaged in a
suit, the case cannot with propriety be brought before a court of
either State. The surest expedient is to select a tribunal like that of
the Union, which can excite the suspicions of neither party, and which
offers the most natural as well as the most certain remedy.

When the two parties are not private individuals, but States, an
important political consideration is added to the same motive of
equity. The quality of the parties in this case gives a national
importance to all their disputes; and the most trifling litigation of
the States may be said to involve the peace of the whole Union. *f

f
[ The Constitution also says that the Federal courts shall decide
“controversies between a State and the citizens of another State.” And
here a most important question of a constitutional nature arose, which
was, whether the jurisdiction given by the Constitution in cases in
which a State is a party extended to suits brought against a State as
well as by it, or was exclusively confined to the latter. The question
was most elaborately considered in the case of Chisholm v. Georgia, and
was decided by the majority of the Supreme Court in the affirmative.
The decision created general alarm among the States, and an amendment
was proposed and ratified by which the power was entirely taken away,
so far as it regards suits brought against a State. See Story’s
“Commentaries,” p. 624, or in the large edition Section 1677.]


The nature of the cause frequently prescribes the rule of competency.
Thus all the questions which concern maritime commerce evidently fall
under the cognizance of the Federal tribunals. *g Almost all these
questions are connected with the interpretation of the law of nations,
and in this respect they essentially interest the Union in relation to
foreign powers. Moreover, as the sea is not included within the limits
of any peculiar jurisdiction, the national courts can only hear causes
which originate in maritime affairs.

g
[ As for instance, all cases of piracy.]


The Constitution comprises under one head almost all the cases which by
their very nature come within the limits of the Federal courts. The
rule which it lays down is simple, but pregnant with an entire system
of ideas, and with a vast multitude of facts. It declares that the
judicial power of the Supreme Court shall extend to all cases in law
and equity arising under the laws of the United States.

Two examples will put the intention of the legislator in the clearest
light:

The Constitution prohibits the States from making laws on the value and
circulation of money: If, notwithstanding this prohibition, a State
passes a law of this kind, with which the interested parties refuse to
comply because it is contrary to the Constitution, the case must come
before a Federal court, because it arises under the laws of the United
States. Again, if difficulties arise in the levying of import duties
which have been voted by Congress, the Federal court must decide the
case, because it arises under the interpretation of a law of the United
States.

This rule is in perfect accordance with the fundamental principles of
the Federal Constitution. The Union, as it was established in 1789,
possesses, it is true, a limited supremacy; but it was intended that
within its limits it should form one and the same people. *h Within
those limits the Union is sovereign. When this point is established and
admitted, the inference is easy; for if it be acknowledged that the
United States constitute one and the same people within the bounds
prescribed by their Constitution, it is impossible to refuse them the
rights which belong to other nations. But it has been allowed, from the
origin of society, that every nation has the right of deciding by its
own courts those questions which concern the execution of its own laws.
To this it is answered that the Union is in so singular a position that
in relation to some matters it constitutes a people, and that in
relation to all the rest it is a nonentity. But the inference to be
drawn is, that in the laws relating to these matters the Union
possesses all the rights of absolute sovereignty. The difficulty is to
know what these matters are; and when once it is resolved (and we have
shown how it was resolved, in speaking of the means of determining the
jurisdiction of the Federal courts) no further doubt can arise; for as
soon as it is established that a suit is Federal—that is to say, that
it belongs to the share of sovereignty reserved by the Constitution of
the Union—the natural consequence is that it should come within the
jurisdiction of a Federal court.

h
[ This principle was in some measure restricted by the introduction of
the several States as independent powers into the Senate, and by
allowing them to vote separately in the House of Representatives when
the President is elected by that body. But these are exceptions, and
the contrary principle is the rule.]


Whenever the laws of the United States are attacked, or whenever they
are resorted to in self-defence, the Federal courts must be appealed
to. Thus the jurisdiction of the tribunals of the Union extends and
narrows its limits exactly in the same ratio as the sovereignty of the
Union augments or decreases. We have shown that the principal aim of
the legislators of 1789 was to divide the sovereign authority into two
parts. In the one they placed the control of all the general interests
of the Union, in the other the control of the special interests of its
component States. Their chief solicitude was to arm the Federal
Government with sufficient power to enable it to resist, within its
sphere, the encroachments of the several States. As for these
communities, the principle of independence within certain limits of
their own was adopted in their behalf; and they were concealed from the
inspection, and protected from the control, of the central Government.
In speaking of the division of authority, I observed that this latter
principle had not always been held sacred, since the States are
prevented from passing certain laws which apparently belong to their
own particular sphere of interest. When a State of the Union passes a
law of this kind, the citizens who are injured by its execution can
appeal to the Federal courts.

Thus the jurisdiction of the Federal courts extends not only to all the
cases which arise under the laws of the Union, but also to those which
arise under laws made by the several States in opposition to the
Constitution. The States are prohibited from making ex post facto laws
in criminal cases, and any person condemned by virtue of a law of this
kind can appeal to the judicial power of the Union. The States are
likewise prohibited from making laws which may have a tendency to
impair the obligations of contracts. *i If a citizen thinks that an
obligation of this kind is impaired by a law passed in his State, he
may refuse to obey it, and may appeal to the Federal courts. *j

i
[ It is perfectly clear, says Mr. Story (“Commentaries,” p. 503, or in
the large edition Section 1379), that any law which enlarges, abridges,
or in any manner changes the intention of the parties, resulting from
the stipulations in the contract, necessarily impairs it. He gives in
the same place a very long and careful definition of what is understood
by a contract in Federal jurisprudence. A grant made by the State to a
private individual, and accepted by him, is a contract, and cannot be
revoked by any future law. A charter granted by the State to a company
is a contract, and equally binding to the State as to the grantee. The
clause of the Constitution here referred to insures, therefore, the
existence of a great part of acquired rights, but not of all. Property
may legally be held, though it may not have passed into the possessor’s
hands by means of a contract; and its possession is an acquired right,
not guaranteed by the Federal Constitution.]


j
[ A remarkable instance of this is given by Mr. Story (p. 508, or in
the large edition Section 1388): “Dartmouth College in New Hampshire
had been founded by a charter granted to certain individuals before the
American Revolution, and its trustees formed a corporation under this
charter. The legislature of New Hampshire had, without the consent of
this corporation, passed an act changing the organization of the
original provincial charter of the college, and transferring all the
rights, privileges, and franchises from the old charter trustees to new
trustees appointed under the act. The constitutionality of the act was
contested, and, after solemn arguments, it was deliberately held by the
Supreme Court that the provincial charter was a contract within the
meaning of the Constitution (Art. I. Section 10), and that the
emendatory act was utterly void, as impairing the obligation of that
charter. The college was deemed, like other colleges of private
foundation, to be a private eleemosynary institution, endowed by its
charter with a capacity to take property unconnected with the
Government. Its funds were bestowed upon the faith of the charter, and
those funds consisted entirely of private donations. It is true that
the uses were in some sense public, that is, for the general benefit,
and not for the mere benefit of the corporators; but this did not make
the corporation a public corporation. It was a private institution for
general charity. It was not distinguishable in principle from a private
donation, vested in private trustees, for a public charity, or for a
particular purpose of beneficence. And the State itself, if it had
bestowed funds upon a charity of the same nature, could not resume
those funds.”]


This provision appears to me to be the most serious attack upon the
independence of the States. The rights awarded to the Federal
Government for purposes of obvious national importance are definite and
easily comprehensible; but those with which this last clause invests it
are not either clearly appreciable or accurately defined. For there are
vast numbers of political laws which influence the existence of
obligations of contracts, which may thus furnish an easy pretext for
the aggressions of the central authority.




 Chapter VIII: The Federal Constitution—Part IV

Procedure Of The Federal Courts

Natural weakness of the judiciary power in confederations—Legislators
ought to strive as much as possible to bring private individuals, and
not States, before the Federal Courts—How the Americans have succeeded
in this—Direct prosecution of private individuals in the Federal
Courts—Indirect prosecution of the States which violate the laws of the
Union—The decrees of the Supreme Court enervate but do not destroy the
provincial laws.

I have shown what the privileges of the Federal courts are, and it is
no less important to point out the manner in which they are exercised.
The irresistible authority of justice in countries in which the
sovereignty in undivided is derived from the fact that the tribunals of
those countries represent the entire nation at issue with the
individual against whom their decree is directed, and the idea of power
is thus introduced to corroborate the idea of right. But this is not
always the case in countries in which the sovereignty is divided; in
them the judicial power is more frequently opposed to a fraction of the
nation than to an isolated individual, and its moral authority and
physical strength are consequently diminished. In federal States the
power of the judge is naturally decreased, and that of the justiciable
parties is augmented. The aim of the legislator in confederate States
ought therefore to be to render the position of the courts of justice
analogous to that which they occupy in countries where the sovereignty
is undivided; in other words, his efforts ought constantly to tend to
maintain the judicial power of the confederation as the representative
of the nation, and the justiciable party as the representative of an
individual interest.

Every government, whatever may be its constitution, requires the means
of constraining its subjects to discharge their obligations, and of
protecting its privileges from their assaults. As far as the direct
action of the Government on the community is concerned, the
Constitution of the United States contrived, by a master-stroke of
policy, that the federal courts, acting in the name of the laws, should
only take cognizance of parties in an individual capacity. For, as it
had been declared that the Union consisted of one and the same people
within the limits laid down by the Constitution, the inference was that
the Government created by this Constitution, and acting within these
limits, was invested with all the privileges of a national government,
one of the principal of which is the right of transmitting its
injunctions directly to the private citizen. When, for instance, the
Union votes an impost, it does not apply to the States for the levying
of it, but to every American citizen in proportion to his assessment.
The Supreme Court, which is empowered to enforce the execution of this
law of the Union, exerts its influence not upon a refractory State, but
upon the private taxpayer; and, like the judicial power of other
nations, it is opposed to the person of an individual. It is to be
observed that the Union chose its own antagonist; and as that
antagonist is feeble, he is naturally worsted.

But the difficulty increases when the proceedings are not brought
forward by but against the Union. The Constitution recognizes the
legislative power of the States; and a law so enacted may impair the
privileges of the Union, in which case a collision in unavoidable
between that body and the State which has passed the law: and it only
remains to select the least dangerous remedy, which is very clearly
deducible from the general principles I have before established. *k

k
[ See Chapter VI. on “Judicial Power in America.”]


It may be conceived that, in the case under consideration, the Union
might have used the State before a Federal court, which would have
annulled the act, and by this means it would have adopted a natural
course of proceeding; but the judicial power would have been placed in
open hostility to the State, and it was desirable to avoid this
predicament as much as possible. The Americans hold that it is nearly
impossible that a new law should not impair the interests of some
private individual by its provisions: these private interests are
assumed by the American legislators as the ground of attack against
such measures as may be prejudicial to the Union, and it is to these
cases that the protection of the Supreme Court is extended.

Suppose a State vends a certain portion of its territory to a company,
and that a year afterwards it passes a law by which the territory is
otherwise disposed of, and that clause of the Constitution which
prohibits laws impairing the obligation of contracts violated. When the
purchaser under the second act appears to take possession, the
possessor under the first act brings his action before the tribunals of
the Union, and causes the title of the claimant to be pronounced null
and void. *l Thus, in point of fact, the judicial power of the Union is
contesting the claims of the sovereignty of a State; but it only acts
indirectly and upon a special application of detail: it attacks the law
in its consequences, not in its principle, and it rather weakens than
destroys it.

l
[ See Kent’s “Commentaries,” vol. i. p. 387.]


The last hypothesis that remained was that each State formed a
corporation enjoying a separate existence and distinct civil rights,
and that it could therefore sue or be sued before a tribunal. Thus a
State could bring an action against another State. In this instance the
Union was not called upon to contest a provincial law, but to try a
suit in which a State was a party. This suit was perfectly similar to
any other cause, except that the quality of the parties was different;
and here the danger pointed out at the beginning of this chapter exists
with less chance of being avoided. The inherent disadvantage of the
very essence of Federal constitutions is that they engender parties in
the bosom of the nation which present powerful obstacles to the free
course of justice.

High Rank Of The Supreme Court Amongst The Great Powers Of State No
nation ever constituted so great a judicial power as the
Americans—Extent of its prerogative—Its political influence—The
tranquillity and the very existence of the Union depend on the
discretion of the seven Federal Judges.

When we have successively examined in detail the organization of the
Supreme Court, and the entire prerogatives which it exercises, we shall
readily admit that a more imposing judicial power was never constituted
by any people. The Supreme Court is placed at the head of all known
tribunals, both by the nature of its rights and the class of
justiciable parties which it controls.

In all the civilized countries of Europe the Government has always
shown the greatest repugnance to allow the cases to which it was itself
a party to be decided by the ordinary course of justice. This
repugnance naturally attains its utmost height in an absolute
Government; and, on the other hand, the privileges of the courts of
justice are extended with the increasing liberties of the people: but
no European nation has at present held that all judicial controversies,
without regard to their origin, can be decided by the judges of common
law.

In America this theory has been actually put in practice, and the
Supreme Court of the United States is the sole tribunal of the nation.
Its power extends to all the cases arising under laws and treaties made
by the executive and legislative authorities, to all cases of admiralty
and maritime jurisdiction, and in general to all points which affect
the law of nations. It may even be affirmed that, although its
constitution is essentially judicial, its prerogatives are almost
entirely political. Its sole object is to enforce the execution of the
laws of the Union; and the Union only regulates the relations of the
Government with the citizens, and of the nation with Foreign Powers:
the relations of citizens amongst themselves are almost exclusively
regulated by the sovereignty of the States.

A second and still greater cause of the preponderance of this court may
be adduced. In the nations of Europe the courts of justice are only
called upon to try the controversies of private individuals; but the
Supreme Court of the United States summons sovereign powers to its bar.
When the clerk of the court advances on the steps of the tribunal, and
simply says, “The State of New York versus the State of Ohio,” it is
impossible not to feel that the Court which he addresses is no ordinary
body; and when it is recollected that one of these parties represents
one million, and the other two millions of men, one is struck by the
responsibility of the seven judges whose decision is about to satisfy
or to disappoint so large a number of their fellow-citizens.

The peace, the prosperity, and the very existence of the Union are
vested in the hands of the seven judges. Without their active
co-operation the Constitution would be a dead letter: the Executive
appeals to them for assistance against the encroachments of the
legislative powers; the Legislature demands their protection from the
designs of the Executive; they defend the Union from the disobedience
of the States, the States from the exaggerated claims of the Union, the
public interest against the interests of private citizens, and the
conservative spirit of order against the fleeting innovations of
democracy. Their power is enormous, but it is clothed in the authority
of public opinion. They are the all-powerful guardians of a people
which respects law, but they would be impotent against popular neglect
or popular contempt. The force of public opinion is the most
intractable of agents, because its exact limits cannot be defined; and
it is not less dangerous to exceed than to remain below the boundary
prescribed.

The Federal judges must not only be good citizens, and men possessed of
that information and integrity which are indispensable to magistrates,
but they must be statesmen—politicians, not unread in the signs of the
times, not afraid to brave the obstacles which can be subdued, nor slow
to turn aside such encroaching elements as may threaten the supremacy
of the Union and the obedience which is due to the laws.

The President, who exercises a limited power, may err without causing
great mischief in the State. Congress may decide amiss without
destroying the Union, because the electoral body in which Congress
originates may cause it to retract its decision by changing its
members. But if the Supreme Court is ever composed of imprudent men or
bad citizens, the Union may be plunged into anarchy or civil war.

The real cause of this danger, however, does not lie in the
constitution of the tribunal, but in the very nature of Federal
Governments. We have observed that in confederate peoples it is
especially necessary to consolidate the judicial authority, because in
no other nations do those independent persons who are able to cope with
the social body exist in greater power or in a better condition to
resist the physical strength of the Government. But the more a power
requires to be strengthened, the more extensive and independent it must
be made; and the dangers which its abuse may create are heightened by
its independence and its strength. The source of the evil is not,
therefore, in the constitution of the power, but in the constitution of
those States which render its existence necessary.

In What Respects The Federal Constitution Is Superior To That Of The
States

In what respects the Constitution of the Union can be compared to that
of the States—Superiority of the Constitution of the Union attributable
to the wisdom of the Federal legislators—Legislature of the Union less
dependent on the people than that of the States—Executive power more
independent in its sphere—Judicial power less subjected to the
inclinations of the majority—Practical consequence of these facts—The
dangers inherent in a democratic government eluded by the Federal
legislators, and increased by the legislators of the States.

The Federal Constitution differs essentially from that of the States in
the ends which it is intended to accomplish, but in the means by which
these ends are promoted a greater analogy exists between them. The
objects of the Governments are different, but their forms are the same;
and in this special point of view there is some advantage in comparing
them together.

I am of opinion that the Federal Constitution is superior to all the
Constitutions of the States, for several reasons.

The present Constitution of the Union was formed at a later period than
those of the majority of the States, and it may have derived some
ameliorations from past experience. But we shall be led to acknowledge
that this is only a secondary cause of its superiority, when we
recollect that eleven new States *n have been added to the American
Confederation since the promulgation of the Federal Constitution, and
that these new republics have always rather exaggerated than avoided
the defects which existed in the former Constitutions.

n
[ [The number of States has now risen to 46 (1874), besides the
District of Columbia.]]


The chief cause of the superiority of the Federal Constitution lay in
the character of the legislators who composed it. At the time when it
was formed the dangers of the Confederation were imminent, and its ruin
seemed inevitable. In this extremity the people chose the men who most
deserved the esteem, rather than those who had gained the affections,
of the country. I have already observed that distinguished as almost
all the legislators of the Union were for their intelligence, they were
still more so for their patriotism. They had all been nurtured at a
time when the spirit of liberty was braced by a continual struggle
against a powerful and predominant authority. When the contest was
terminated, whilst the excited passions of the populace persisted in
warring with dangers which had ceased to threaten them, these men
stopped short in their career; they cast a calmer and more penetrating
look upon the country which was now their own; they perceived that the
war of independence was definitely ended, and that the only dangers
which America had to fear were those which might result from the abuse
of the freedom she had won. They had the courage to say what they
believed to be true, because they were animated by a warm and sincere
love of liberty; and they ventured to propose restrictions, because
they were resolutely opposed to destruction. *o

o
[ At this time Alexander Hamilton, who was one of the principal
founders of the Constitution, ventured to express the following
sentiments in “The Federalist,” No. 71:—


“There are some who would be inclined to regard the servile pliancy of
the Executive to a prevailing current, either in the community or in
the Legislature, as its best recommendation. But such men entertain
very crude notions, as well of the purposes for which government was
instituted as of the true means by which the public happiness may be
promoted. The Republican principle demands that the deliberative sense
of the community should govern the conduct of those to whom they
entrust the management of their affairs; but it does not require an
unqualified complaisance to every sudden breeze of passion, or to every
transient impulse which the people may receive from the arts of men who
flatter their prejudices to betray their interests. It is a just
observation, that the people commonly intend the public good. This
often applies to their very errors. But their good sense would despise
the adulator who should pretend that they always reason right about the
means of promoting it. They know from experience that they sometimes
err; and the wonder is that they so seldom err as they do, beset, as
they continually are, by the wiles of parasites and sycophants; by the
snares of the ambitious, the avaricious, the desperate; by the
artifices of men who possess their confidence more than they deserve
it, and of those who seek to possess rather than to deserve it. When
occasions present themselves in which the interests of the people are
at variance with their inclinations, it is the duty of persons whom
they have appointed to be the guardians of those interests to withstand
the temporary delusion, in order to give them time and opportunity for
more cool and sedate reflection. Instances might be cited in which a
conduct of this kind has saved the people from very fatal consequences
of their own mistakes, and has procured lasting monuments of their
gratitude to the men who had courage and magnanimity enough to serve
them at the peril of their displeasure.”]

The greater number of the Constitutions of the States assign one year
for the duration of the House of Representatives, and two years for
that of the Senate; so that members of the legislative body are
constantly and narrowly tied down by the slightest desires of their
constituents. The legislators of the Union were of opinion that this
excessive dependence of the Legislature tended to alter the nature of
the main consequences of the representative system, since it vested the
source, not only of authority, but of government, in the people. They
increased the length of the time for which the representatives were
returned, in order to give them freer scope for the exercise of their
own judgment.

The Federal Constitution, as well as the Constitutions of the different
States, divided the legislative body into two branches. But in the
States these two branches were composed of the same elements, and
elected in the same manner. The consequence was that the passions and
inclinations of the populace were as rapidly and as energetically
represented in one chamber as in the other, and that laws were made
with all the characteristics of violence and precipitation. By the
Federal Constitution the two houses originate in like manner in the
choice of the people; but the conditions of eligibility and the mode of
election were changed, to the end that, if, as is the case in certain
nations, one branch of the Legislature represents the same interests as
the other, it may at least represent a superior degree of intelligence
and discretion. A mature age was made one of the conditions of the
senatorial dignity, and the Upper House was chosen by an elected
assembly of a limited number of members.

To concentrate the whole social force in the hands of the legislative
body is the natural tendency of democracies; for as this is the power
which emanates the most directly from the people, it is made to
participate most fully in the preponderating authority of the
multitude, and it is naturally led to monopolize every species of
influence. This concentration is at once prejudicial to a
well-conducted administration, and favorable to the despotism of the
majority. The legislators of the States frequently yielded to these
democratic propensities, which were invariably and courageously
resisted by the founders of the Union.

In the States the executive power is vested in the hands of a
magistrate, who is apparently placed upon a level with the Legislature,
but who is in reality nothing more than the blind agent and the passive
instrument of its decisions. He can derive no influence from the
duration of his functions, which terminate with the revolving year, or
from the exercise of prerogatives which can scarcely be said to exist.
The Legislature can condemn him to inaction by intrusting the execution
of the laws to special committees of its own members, and can annul his
temporary dignity by depriving him of his salary. The Federal
Constitution vests all the privileges and all the responsibility of the
executive power in a single individual. The duration of the Presidency
is fixed at four years; the salary of the individual who fills that
office cannot be altered during the term of his functions; he is
protected by a body of official dependents, and armed with a suspensive
veto. In short, every effort was made to confer a strong and
independent position upon the executive authority within the limits
which had been prescribed to it.

In the Constitutions of all the States the judicial power is that which
remains the most independent of the legislative authority;
nevertheless, in all the States the Legislature has reserved to itself
the right of regulating the emoluments of the judges, a practice which
necessarily subjects these magistrates to its immediate influence. In
some States the judges are only temporarily appointed, which deprives
them of a great portion of their power and their freedom. In others the
legislative and judicial powers are entirely confounded; thus the
Senate of New York, for instance, constitutes in certain cases the
Superior Court of the State. The Federal Constitution, on the other
hand, carefully separates the judicial authority from all external
influences; and it provides for the independence of the judges, by
declaring that their salary shall not be altered, and that their
functions shall be inalienable.

The practical consequences of these different systems may easily be
perceived. An attentive observer will soon remark that the business of
the Union is incomparably better conducted than that of any individual
State. The conduct of the Federal Government is more fair and more
temperate than that of the States, its designs are more fraught with
wisdom, its projects are more durable and more skilfully combined, its
measures are put into execution with more vigor and consistency.

I recapitulate the substance of this chapter in a few words: The
existence of democracies is threatened by two dangers, viz., the
complete subjection of the legislative body to the caprices of the
electoral body, and the concentration of all the powers of the
Government in the legislative authority. The growth of these evils has
been encouraged by the policy of the legislators of the States, but it
has been resisted by the legislators of the Union by every means which
lay within their control.

Characteristics Which Distinguish The Federal Constitution Of The
United States Of America From All Other Federal Constitutions American
Union appears to resemble all other confederations—Nevertheless its
effects are different—Reason of this—Distinctions between the Union and
all other confederations—The American Government not a federal but an
imperfect national Government.

The United States of America do not afford either the first or the only
instance of confederate States, several of which have existed in modern
Europe, without adverting to those of antiquity. Switzerland, the
Germanic Empire, and the Republic of the United Provinces either have
been or still are confederations. In studying the constitutions of
these different countries, the politician is surprised to observe that
the powers with which they invested the Federal Government are nearly
identical with the privileges awarded by the American Constitution to
the Government of the United States. They confer upon the central power
the same rights of making peace and war, of raising money and troops,
and of providing for the general exigencies and the common interests of
the nation. Nevertheless the Federal Government of these different
peoples has always been as remarkable for its weakness and inefficiency
as that of the Union is for its vigorous and enterprising spirit.
Again, the first American Confederation perished through the excessive
weakness of its Government; and this weak Government was,
notwithstanding, in possession of rights even more extensive than those
of the Federal Government of the present day. But the more recent
Constitution of the United States contains certain principles which
exercise a most important influence, although they do not at once
strike the observer.

This Constitution, which may at first sight be confounded with the
federal constitutions which preceded it, rests upon a novel theory,
which may be considered as a great invention in modern political
science. In all the confederations which had been formed before the
American Constitution of 1789 the allied States agreed to obey the
injunctions of a Federal Government; but they reserved to themselves
the right of ordaining and enforcing the execution of the laws of the
Union. The American States which combined in 1789 agreed that the
Federal Government should not only dictate the laws, but that it should
execute it own enactments. In both cases the right is the same, but the
exercise of the right is different; and this alteration produced the
most momentous consequences.

In all the confederations which had been formed before the American
Union the Federal Government demanded its supplies at the hands of the
separate Governments; and if the measure it prescribed was onerous to
any one of those bodies means were found to evade its claims: if the
State was powerful, it had recourse to arms; if it was weak, it
connived at the resistance which the law of the Union, its sovereign,
met with, and resorted to inaction under the plea of inability. Under
these circumstances one of the two alternatives has invariably
occurred; either the most preponderant of the allied peoples has
assumed the privileges of the Federal authority and ruled all the
States in its name, *p or the Federal Government has been abandoned by
its natural supporters, anarchy has arisen between the confederates,
and the Union has lost all powers of action. *q

p
[ This was the case in Greece, when Philip undertook to execute the
decree of the Amphictyons; in the Low Countries, where the province of
Holland always gave the law; and, in our own time, in the Germanic
Confederation, in which Austria and Prussia assume a great degree of
influence over the whole country, in the name of the Diet.]


q
[ Such has always been the situation of the Swiss Confederation, which
would have perished ages ago but for the mutual jealousies of its
neighbors.]


In America the subjects of the Union are not States, but private
citizens: the national Government levies a tax, not upon the State of
Massachusetts, but upon each inhabitant of Massachusetts. All former
confederate governments presided over communities, but that of the
Union rules individuals; its force is not borrowed, but self-derived;
and it is served by its own civil and military officers, by its own
army, and its own courts of justice. It cannot be doubted that the
spirit of the nation, the passions of the multitude, and the provincial
prejudices of each State tend singularly to diminish the authority of a
Federal authority thus constituted, and to facilitate the means of
resistance to its mandates; but the comparative weakness of a
restricted sovereignty is an evil inherent in the Federal system. In
America, each State has fewer opportunities of resistance and fewer
temptations to non-compliance; nor can such a design be put in
execution (if indeed it be entertained) without an open violation of
the laws of the Union, a direct interruption of the ordinary course of
justice, and a bold declaration of revolt; in a word, without taking a
decisive step which men hesitate to adopt.

In all former confederations the privileges of the Union furnished more
elements of discord than of power, since they multiplied the claims of
the nation without augmenting the means of enforcing them: and in
accordance with this fact it may be remarked that the real weakness of
federal governments has almost always been in the exact ratio of their
nominal power. Such is not the case in the American Union, in which, as
in ordinary governments, the Federal Government has the means of
enforcing all it is empowered to demand.

The human understanding more easily invents new things than new words,
and we are thence constrained to employ a multitude of improper and
inadequate expressions. When several nations form a permanent league
and establish a supreme authority, which, although it has not the same
influence over the members of the community as a national government,
acts upon each of the Confederate States in a body, this Government,
which is so essentially different from all others, is denominated a
Federal one. Another form of society is afterwards discovered, in which
several peoples are fused into one and the same nation with regard to
certain common interests, although they remain distinct, or at least
only confederate, with regard to all their other concerns. In this case
the central power acts directly upon those whom it governs, whom it
rules, and whom it judges, in the same manner, as, but in a more
limited circle than, a national government. Here the term Federal
Government is clearly no longer applicable to a state of things which
must be styled an incomplete national Government: a form of government
has been found out which is neither exactly national nor federal; but
no further progress has been made, and the new word which will one day
designate this novel invention does not yet exist.

The absence of this new species of confederation has been the cause
which has brought all Unions to Civil War, to subjection, or to a
stagnant apathy, and the peoples which formed these leagues have been
either too dull to discern, or too pusillanimous to apply this great
remedy. The American Confederation perished by the same defects.

But the Confederate States of America had been long accustomed to form
a portion of one empire before they had won their independence; they
had not contracted the habit of governing themselves, and their
national prejudices had not taken deep root in their minds. Superior to
the rest of the world in political knowledge, and sharing that
knowledge equally amongst themselves, they were little agitated by the
passions which generally oppose the extension of federal authority in a
nation, and those passions were checked by the wisdom of the chief
citizens. The Americans applied the remedy with prudent firmness as
soon as they were conscious of the evil; they amended their laws, and
they saved their country.




 Chapter VIII: The Federal Constitution—Part V


Advantages Of The Federal System In General, And Its Special Utility In
America.

Happiness and freedom of small nations—Power of great nations—Great
empires favorable to the growth of civilization—Strength often the
first element of national prosperity—Aim of the Federal system to unite
the twofold advantages resulting from a small and from a large
territory—Advantages derived by the United States from this system—The
law adapts itself to the exigencies of the population; population does
not conform to the exigencies of the law—Activity, amelioration, love
and enjoyment of freedom in the American communities—Public spirit of
the Union the abstract of provincial patriotism—Principles and things
circulate freely over the territory of the United States—The Union is
happy and free as a little nation, and respected as a great empire.

In small nations the scrutiny of society penetrates into every part,
and the spirit of improvement enters into the most trifling details; as
the ambition of the people is necessarily checked by its weakness, all
the efforts and resources of the citizens are turned to the internal
benefit of the community, and are not likely to evaporate in the
fleeting breath of glory. The desires of every individual are limited,
because extraordinary faculties are rarely to be met with. The gifts of
an equal fortune render the various conditions of life uniform, and the
manners of the inhabitants are orderly and simple. Thus, if one
estimate the gradations of popular morality and enlightenment, we shall
generally find that in small nations there are more persons in easy
circumstances, a more numerous population, and a more tranquil state of
society, than in great empires.

When tyranny is established in the bosom of a small nation, it is more
galling than elsewhere, because, as it acts within a narrow circle,
every point of that circle is subject to its direct influence. It
supplies the place of those great designs which it cannot entertain by
a violent or an exasperating interference in a multitude of minute
details; and it leaves the political world, to which it properly
belongs, to meddle with the arrangements of domestic life. Tastes as
well as actions are to be regulated at its pleasure; and the families
of the citizens as well as the affairs of the State are to be governed
by its decisions. This invasion of rights occurs, however, but seldom,
and freedom is in truth the natural state of small communities. The
temptations which the Government offers to ambition are too weak, and
the resources of private individuals are too slender, for the sovereign
power easily to fall within the grasp of a single citizen; and should
such an event have occurred, the subjects of the State can without
difficulty overthrow the tyrant and his oppression by a simultaneous
effort.

Small nations have therefore ever been the cradle of political liberty;
and the fact that many of them have lost their immunities by extending
their dominion shows that the freedom they enjoyed was more a
consequence of the inferior size than of the character of the people.

The history of the world affords no instance of a great nation
retaining the form of republican government for a long series of years,
*r and this has led to the conclusion that such a state of things is
impracticable. For my own part, I cannot but censure the imprudence of
attempting to limit the possible and to judge the future on the part of
a being who is hourly deceived by the most palpable realities of life,
and who is constantly taken by surprise in the circumstances with which
he is most familiar. But it may be advanced with confidence that the
existence of a great republic will always be exposed to far greater
perils than that of a small one.

r
[ I do not speak of a confederation of small republics, but of a great
consolidated Republic.]


All the passions which are most fatal to republican institutions spread
with an increasing territory, whilst the virtues which maintain their
dignity do not augment in the same proportion. The ambition of the
citizens increases with the power of the State; the strength of parties
with the importance of the ends they have in view; but that devotion to
the common weal which is the surest check on destructive passions is
not stronger in a large than in a small republic. It might, indeed, be
proved without difficulty that it is less powerful and less sincere.
The arrogance of wealth and the dejection of wretchedness, capital
cities of unwonted extent, a lax morality, a vulgar egotism, and a
great confusion of interests, are the dangers which almost invariably
arise from the magnitude of States. But several of these evils are
scarcely prejudicial to a monarchy, and some of them contribute to
maintain its existence. In monarchical States the strength of the
government is its own; it may use, but it does not depend on, the
community, and the authority of the prince is proportioned to the
prosperity of the nation; but the only security which a republican
government possesses against these evils lies in the support of the
majority. This support is not, however, proportionably greater in a
large republic than it is in a small one; and thus, whilst the means of
attack perpetually increase both in number and in influence, the power
of resistance remains the same, or it may rather be said to diminish,
since the propensities and interests of the people are diversified by
the increase of the population, and the difficulty of forming a compact
majority is constantly augmented. It has been observed, moreover, that
the intensity of human passions is heightened, not only by the
importance of the end which they propose to attain, but by the
multitude of individuals who are animated by them at the same time.
Every one has had occasion to remark that his emotions in the midst of
a sympathizing crowd are far greater than those which he would have
felt in solitude. In great republics the impetus of political passion
is irresistible, not only because it aims at gigantic purposes, but
because it is felt and shared by millions of men at the same time.

It may therefore be asserted as a general proposition that nothing is
more opposed to the well-being and the freedom of man than vast
empires. Nevertheless it is important to acknowledge the peculiar
advantages of great States. For the very reason which renders the
desire of power more intense in these communities than amongst ordinary
men, the love of glory is also more prominent in the hearts of a class
of citizens, who regard the applause of a great people as a reward
worthy of their exertions, and an elevating encouragement to man. If we
would learn why it is that great nations contribute more powerfully to
the spread of human improvement than small States, we shall discover an
adequate cause in the rapid and energetic circulation of ideas, and in
those great cities which are the intellectual centres where all the
rays of human genius are reflected and combined. To this it may be
added that most important discoveries demand a display of national
power which the Government of a small State is unable to make; in great
nations the Government entertains a greater number of general notions,
and is more completely disengaged from the routine of precedent and the
egotism of local prejudice; its designs are conceived with more talent,
and executed with more boldness.

In time of peace the well-being of small nations is undoubtedly more
general and more complete, but they are apt to suffer more acutely from
the calamities of war than those great empires whose distant frontiers
may for ages avert the presence of the danger from the mass of the
people, which is therefore more frequently afflicted than ruined by the
evil.

But in this matter, as in many others, the argument derived from the
necessity of the case predominates over all others. If none but small
nations existed, I do not doubt that mankind would be more happy and
more free; but the existence of great nations is unavoidable.

This consideration introduces the element of physical strength as a
condition of national prosperity. It profits a people but little to be
affluent and free if it is perpetually exposed to be pillaged or
subjugated; the number of its manufactures and the extent of its
commerce are of small advantage if another nation has the empire of the
seas and gives the law in all the markets of the globe. Small nations
are often impoverished, not because they are small, but because they
are weak; the great empires prosper less because they are great than
because they are strong. Physical strength is therefore one of the
first conditions of the happiness and even of the existence of nations.
Hence it occurs that, unless very peculiar circumstances intervene,
small nations are always united to large empires in the end, either by
force or by their own consent: yet I am unacquainted with a more
deplorable spectacle than that of a people unable either to defend or
to maintain its independence.

The Federal system was created with the intention of combining the
different advantages which result from the greater and the lesser
extent of nations; and a single glance over the United States of
America suffices to discover the advantages which they have derived
from its adoption.

In great centralized nations the legislator is obliged to impart a
character of uniformity to the laws which does not always suit the
diversity of customs and of districts; as he takes no cognizance of
special cases, he can only proceed upon general principles; and the
population is obliged to conform to the exigencies of the legislation,
since the legislation cannot adapt itself to the exigencies and the
customs of the population, which is the cause of endless trouble and
misery. This disadvantage does not exist in confederations. Congress
regulates the principal measures of the national Government, and all
the details of the administration are reserved to the provincial
legislatures. It is impossible to imagine how much this division of
sovereignty contributes to the well-being of each of the States which
compose the Union. In these small communities, which are never agitated
by the desire of aggrandizement or the cares of self-defence, all
public authority and private energy is employed in internal
amelioration. The central government of each State, which is in
immediate juxtaposition to the citizens, is daily apprised of the wants
which arise in society; and new projects are proposed every year, which
are discussed either at town meetings or by the legislature of the
State, and which are transmitted by the press to stimulate the zeal and
to excite the interest of the citizens. This spirit of amelioration is
constantly alive in the American republics, without compromising their
tranquillity; the ambition of power yields to the less refined and less
dangerous love of comfort. It is generally believed in America that the
existence and the permanence of the republican form of government in
the New World depend upon the existence and the permanence of the
Federal system; and it is not unusual to attribute a large share of the
misfortunes which have befallen the new States of South America to the
injudicious erection of great republics, instead of a divided and
confederate sovereignty.

It is incontestably true that the love and the habits of republican
government in the United States were engendered in the townships and in
the provincial assemblies. In a small State, like that of Connecticut
for instance, where cutting a canal or laying down a road is a
momentous political question, where the State has no army to pay and no
wars to carry on, and where much wealth and much honor cannot be
bestowed upon the chief citizens, no form of government can be more
natural or more appropriate than that of a republic. But it is this
same republican spirit, it is these manners and customs of a free
people, which are engendered and nurtured in the different States, to
be afterwards applied to the country at large. The public spirit of the
Union is, so to speak, nothing more than an abstract of the patriotic
zeal of the provinces. Every citizen of the United States transfuses
his attachment to his little republic in the common store of American
patriotism. In defending the Union he defends the increasing prosperity
of his own district, the right of conducting its affairs, and the hope
of causing measures of improvement to be adopted which may be favorable
to his own interest; and these are motives which are wont to stir men
more readily than the general interests of the country and the glory of
the nation.

On the other hand, if the temper and the manners of the inhabitants
especially fitted them to promote the welfare of a great republic, the
Federal system smoothed the obstacles which they might have
encountered. The confederation of all the American States presents none
of the ordinary disadvantages resulting from great agglomerations of
men. The Union is a great republic in extent, but the paucity of
objects for which its Government provides assimilates it to a small
State. Its acts are important, but they are rare. As the sovereignty of
the Union is limited and incomplete, its exercise is not incompatible
with liberty; for it does not excite those insatiable desires of fame
and power which have proved so fatal to great republics. As there is no
common centre to the country, vast capital cities, colossal wealth,
abject poverty, and sudden revolutions are alike unknown; and political
passion, instead of spreading over the land like a torrent of
desolation, spends its strength against the interests and the
individual passions of every State.

Nevertheless, all commodities and ideas circulate throughout the Union
as freely as in a country inhabited by one people. Nothing checks the
spirit of enterprise. Government avails itself of the assistance of all
who have talents or knowledge to serve it. Within the frontiers of the
Union the profoundest peace prevails, as within the heart of some great
empire; abroad, it ranks with the most powerful nations of the earth;
two thousand miles of coast are open to the commerce of the world; and
as it possesses the keys of the globe, its flags is respected in the
most remote seas. The Union is as happy and as free as a small people,
and as glorious and as strong as a great nation.

Why The Federal System Is Not Adapted To All Peoples, And How The
Anglo-Americans Were Enabled To Adopt It.

Every Federal system contains defects which baffle the efforts of the
legislator—The Federal system is complex—It demands a daily exercise of
discretion on the part of the citizens—Practical knowledge of
government common amongst the Americans—Relative weakness of the
Government of the Union, another defect inherent in the Federal
system—The Americans have diminished without remedying it—The
sovereignty of the separate States apparently weaker, but really
stronger, than that of the Union—Why?—Natural causes of union must
exist between confederate peoples besides the laws—What these causes
are amongst the Anglo-Americans—Maine and Georgia, separated by a
distance of a thousand miles, more naturally united than Normandy and
Brittany—War, the main peril of confederations—This proved even by the
example of the United States—The Union has no great wars to
fear—Why?—Dangers to which Europeans would be exposed if they adopted
the Federal system of the Americans.

When a legislator succeeds, after persevering efforts, in exercising an
indirect influence upon the destiny of nations, his genius is lauded by
mankind, whilst, in point of fact, the geographical position of the
country which he is unable to change, a social condition which arose
without his co-operation, manners and opinions which he cannot trace to
their source, and an origin with which he is unacquainted, exercise so
irresistible an influence over the courses of society that he is
himself borne away by the current, after an ineffectual resistance.
Like the navigator, he may direct the vessel which bears him along, but
he can neither change its structure, nor raise the winds, nor lull the
waters which swell beneath him.

I have shown the advantages which the Americans derive from their
federal system; it remains for me to point out the circumstances which
rendered that system practicable, as its benefits are not to be enjoyed
by all nations. The incidental defects of the Federal system which
originate in the laws may be corrected by the skill of the legislator,
but there are further evils inherent in the system which cannot be
counteracted by the peoples which adopt it. These nations must
therefore find the strength necessary to support the natural
imperfections of their Government.

The most prominent evil of all Federal systems is the very complex
nature of the means they employ. Two sovereignties are necessarily in
presence of each other. The legislator may simplify and equalize the
action of these two sovereignties, by limiting each of them to a sphere
of authority accurately defined; but he cannot combine them into one,
or prevent them from coming into collision at certain points. The
Federal system therefore rests upon a theory which is necessarily
complicated, and which demands the daily exercise of a considerable
share of discretion on the part of those it governs.

A proposition must be plain to be adopted by the understanding of a
people. A false notion which is clear and precise will always meet with
a greater number of adherents in the world than a true principle which
is obscure or involved. Hence it arises that parties, which are like
small communities in the heart of the nation, invariably adopt some
principle or some name as a symbol, which very inadequately represents
the end they have in view and the means which are at their disposal,
but without which they could neither act nor subsist. The governments
which are founded upon a single principle or a single feeling which is
easily defined are perhaps not the best, but they are unquestionably
the strongest and the most durable in the world.

In examining the Constitution of the United States, which is the most
perfect federal constitution that ever existed, one is startled, on the
other hand, at the variety of information and the excellence of
discretion which it presupposes in the people whom it is meant to
govern. The government of the Union depends entirely upon legal
fictions; the Union is an ideal nation which only exists in the mind,
and whose limits and extent can only be discerned by the understanding.

When once the general theory is comprehended, numberless difficulties
remain to be solved in its application; for the sovereignty of the
Union is so involved in that of the States that it is impossible to
distinguish its boundaries at the first glance. The whole structure of
the Government is artificial and conventional; and it would be ill
adapted to a people which has not been long accustomed to conduct its
own affairs, or to one in which the science of politics has not
descended to the humblest classes of society. I have never been more
struck by the good sense and the practical judgment of the Americans
than in the ingenious devices by which they elude the numberless
difficulties resulting from their Federal Constitution. I scarcely ever
met with a plain American citizen who could not distinguish, with
surprising facility, the obligations created by the laws of Congress
from those created by the laws of his own State; and who, after having
discriminated between the matters which come under the cognizance of
the Union and those which the local legislature is competent to
regulate, could not point out the exact limit of the several
jurisdictions of the Federal courts and the tribunals of the State.

The Constitution of the United States is like those exquisite
productions of human industry which ensure wealth and renown to their
inventors, but which are profitless in any other hands. This truth is
exemplified by the condition of Mexico at the present time. The
Mexicans were desirous of establishing a federal system, and they took
the Federal Constitution of their neighbors, the Anglo-Americans, as
their model, and copied it with considerable accuracy. *s But although
they had borrowed the letter of the law, they were unable to create or
to introduce the spirit and the sense which give it life. They were
involved in ceaseless embarrassments between the mechanism of their
double government; the sovereignty of the States and that of the Union
perpetually exceeded their respective privileges, and entered into
collision; and to the present day Mexico is alternately the victim of
anarchy and the slave of military despotism.

s
[ See the Mexican Constitution of 1824.]


The second and the most fatal of all the defects I have alluded to, and
that which I believe to be inherent in the federal system, is the
relative weakness of the government of the Union. The principle upon
which all confederations rest is that of a divided sovereignty. The
legislator may render this partition less perceptible, he may even
conceal it for a time from the public eye, but he cannot prevent it
from existing, and a divided sovereignty must always be less powerful
than an entire supremacy. The reader has seen in the remarks I have
made on the Constitution of the United States that the Americans have
displayed singular ingenuity in combining the restriction of the power
of the Union within the narrow limits of a federal government with the
semblance and, to a certain extent, with the force of a national
government. By this means the legislators of the Union have succeeded
in diminishing, though not in counteracting the natural danger of
confederations.

It has been remarked that the American Government does not apply itself
to the States, but that it immediately transmits its injunctions to the
citizens, and compels them as isolated individuals to comply with its
demands. But if the Federal law were to clash with the interests and
the prejudices of a State, it might be feared that all the citizens of
that State would conceive themselves to be interested in the cause of a
single individual who should refuse to obey. If all the citizens of the
State were aggrieved at the same time and in the same manner by the
authority of the Union, the Federal Government would vainly attempt to
subdue them individually; they would instinctively unite in a common
defence, and they would derive a ready-prepared organization from the
share of sovereignty which the institution of their State allows them
to enjoy. Fiction would give way to reality, and an organized portion
of the territory might then contest the central authority. *t The same
observation holds good with regard to the Federal jurisdiction. If the
courts of the Union violated an important law of a State in a private
case, the real, if not the apparent, contest would arise between the
aggrieved State represented by a citizen and the Union represented by
its courts of justice. *u

t
[ [This is precisely what occurred in 1862, and the following paragraph
describes correctly the feelings and notions of the South. General Lee
held that his primary allegiance was due, not to the Union, but to
Virginia.]]


u
[ For instance, the Union possesses by the Constitution the right of
selling unoccupied lands for its own profit. Supposing that the State
of Ohio should claim the same right in behalf of certain territories
lying within its boundaries, upon the plea that the Constitution refers
to those lands alone which do not belong to the jurisdiction of any
particular State, and consequently should choose to dispose of them
itself, the litigation would be carried on in the names of the
purchasers from the State of Ohio and the purchasers from the Union,
and not in the names of Ohio and the Union. But what would become of
this legal fiction if the Federal purchaser was confirmed in his right
by the courts of the Union, whilst the other competitor was ordered to
retain possession by the tribunals of the State of Ohio?]


He would have but a partial knowledge of the world who should imagine
that it is possible, by the aid of legal fictions, to prevent men from
finding out and employing those means of gratifying their passions
which have been left open to them; and it may be doubted whether the
American legislators, when they rendered a collision between the two
sovereigns less probable, destroyed the cause of such a misfortune. But
it may even be affirmed that they were unable to ensure the
preponderance of the Federal element in a case of this kind. The Union
is possessed of money and of troops, but the affections and the
prejudices of the people are in the bosom of the States. The
sovereignty of the Union is an abstract being, which is connected with
but few external objects; the sovereignty of the States is hourly
perceptible, easily understood, constantly active; and if the former is
of recent creation, the latter is coeval with the people itself. The
sovereignty of the Union is factitious, that of the States is natural,
and derives its existence from its own simple influence, like the
authority of a parent. The supreme power of the nation only affects a
few of the chief interests of society; it represents an immense but
remote country, and claims a feeling of patriotism which is vague and
ill defined; but the authority of the States controls every individual
citizen at every hour and in all circumstances; it protects his
property, his freedom, and his life; and when we recollect the
traditions, the customs, the prejudices of local and familiar
attachment with which it is connected, we cannot doubt of the
superiority of a power which is interwoven with every circumstance that
renders the love of one’s native country instinctive in the human
heart.

Since legislators are unable to obviate such dangerous collisions as
occur between the two sovereignties which coexist in the federal
system, their first object must be, not only to dissuade the
confederate States from warfare, but to encourage such institutions as
may promote the maintenance of peace. Hence it results that the Federal
compact cannot be lasting unless there exists in the communities which
are leagued together a certain number of inducements to union which
render their common dependence agreeable, and the task of the
Government light, and that system cannot succeed without the presence
of favorable circumstances added to the influence of good laws. All the
peoples which have ever formed a confederation have been held together
by a certain number of common interests, which served as the
intellectual ties of association.

But the sentiments and the principles of man must be taken into
consideration as well as his immediate interests. A certain uniformity
of civilization is not less necessary to the durability of a
confederation than a uniformity of interests in the States which
compose it. In Switzerland the difference which exists between the
Canton of Uri and the Canton of Vaud is equal to that between the
fifteenth and the nineteenth centuries; and, properly speaking,
Switzerland has never possessed a federal government. The union between
these two cantons only subsists upon the map, and their discrepancies
would soon be perceived if an attempt were made by a central authority
to prescribe the same laws to the whole territory.

One of the circumstances which most powerfully contribute to support
the Federal Government in America is that the States have not only
similar interests, a common origin, and a common tongue, but that they
are also arrived at the same stage of civilization; which almost always
renders a union feasible. I do not know of any European nation, how
small soever it may be, which does not present less uniformity in its
different provinces than the American people, which occupies a
territory as extensive as one-half of Europe. The distance from the
State of Maine to that of Georgia is reckoned at about one thousand
miles; but the difference between the civilization of Maine and that of
Georgia is slighter than the difference between the habits of Normandy
and those of Brittany. Maine and Georgia, which are placed at the
opposite extremities of a great empire, are consequently in the natural
possession of more real inducements to form a confederation than
Normandy and Brittany, which are only separated by a bridge.

The geographical position of the country contributed to increase the
facilities which the American legislators derived from the manners and
customs of the inhabitants; and it is to this circumstance that the
adoption and the maintenance of the Federal system are mainly
attributable.

The most important occurrence which can mark the annals of a people is
the breaking out of a war. In war a people struggles with the energy of
a single man against foreign nations in the defence of its very
existence. The skill of a government, the good sense of the community,
and the natural fondness which men entertain for their country, may
suffice to maintain peace in the interior of a district, and to favor
its internal prosperity; but a nation can only carry on a great war at
the cost of more numerous and more painful sacrifices; and to suppose
that a great number of men will of their own accord comply with these
exigencies of the State is to betray an ignorance of mankind. All the
peoples which have been obliged to sustain a long and serious warfare
have consequently been led to augment the power of their government.
Those which have not succeeded in this attempt have been subjugated. A
long war almost always places nations in the wretched alternative of
being abandoned to ruin by defeat or to despotism by success. War
therefore renders the symptoms of the weakness of a government most
palpable and most alarming; and I have shown that the inherent defeat
of federal governments is that of being weak.

The Federal system is not only deficient in every kind of centralized
administration, but the central government itself is imperfectly
organized, which is invariably an influential cause of inferiority when
the nation is opposed to other countries which are themselves governed
by a single authority. In the Federal Constitution of the United
States, by which the central government possesses more real force, this
evil is still extremely sensible. An example will illustrate the case
to the reader.

The Constitution confers upon Congress the right of calling forth
militia to execute the laws of the Union, suppress insurrections, and
repel invasions; and another article declares that the President of the
United States is the commander-in-chief of the militia. In the war of
1812 the President ordered the militia of the Northern States to march
to the frontiers; but Connecticut and Massachusetts, whose interests
were impaired by the war, refused to obey the command. They argued that
the Constitution authorizes the Federal Government to call forth the
militia in case of insurrection or invasion, but that in the present
instance there was neither invasion nor insurrection. They added, that
the same Constitution which conferred upon the Union the right of
calling forth the militia reserved to the States that of naming the
officers; and that consequently (as they understood the clause) no
officer of the Union had any right to command the militia, even during
war, except the President in person; and in this case they were ordered
to join an army commanded by another individual. These absurd and
pernicious doctrines received the sanction not only of the governors
and the legislative bodies, but also of the courts of justice in both
States; and the Federal Government was constrained to raise elsewhere
the troops which it required. *v

v
[ Kent’s “Commentaries,” vol. i. p. 244. I have selected an example
which relates to a time posterior to the promulgation of the present
Constitution. If I had gone back to the days of the Confederation, I
might have given still more striking instances. The whole nation was at
that time in a state of enthusiastic excitement; the Revolution was
represented by a man who was the idol of the people; but at that very
period Congress had, to say the truth, no resources at all at its
disposal. Troops and supplies were perpetually wanting. The
best-devised projects failed in the execution, and the Union, which was
constantly on the verge of destruction, was saved by the weakness of
its enemies far more than by its own strength. [All doubt as to the
powers of the Federal Executive was, however, removed by its efforts in
the Civil War, and those powers were largely extended.]]


The only safeguard which the American Union, with all the relative
perfection of its laws, possesses against the dissolution which would
be produced by a great war, lies in its probable exemption from that
calamity. Placed in the centre of an immense continent, which offers a
boundless field for human industry, the Union is almost as much
insulated from the world as if its frontiers were girt by the ocean.
Canada contains only a million of inhabitants, and its population is
divided into two inimical nations. The rigor of the climate limits the
extension of its territory, and shuts up its ports during the six
months of winter. From Canada to the Gulf of Mexico a few savage tribes
are to be met with, which retire, perishing in their retreat, before
six thousand soldiers. To the South, the Union has a point of contact
with the empire of Mexico; and it is thence that serious hostilities
may one day be expected to arise. But for a long while to come the
uncivilized state of the Mexican community, the depravity of its
morals, and its extreme poverty, will prevent that country from ranking
high amongst nations. *w As for the Powers of Europe, they are too
distant to be formidable.

w
[ [War broke out between the United States and Mexico in 1846, and
ended in the conquest of an immense territory, including California.]]


The great advantage of the United States does not, then, consist in a
Federal Constitution which allows them to carry on great wars, but in a
geographical position which renders such enterprises extremely
improbable.

No one can be more inclined than I am myself to appreciate the
advantages of the federal system, which I hold to be one of the
combinations most favorable to the prosperity and freedom of man. I
envy the lot of those nations which have been enabled to adopt it; but
I cannot believe that any confederate peoples could maintain a long or
an equal contest with a nation of similar strength in which the
government should be centralized. A people which should divide its
sovereignty into fractional powers, in the presence of the great
military monarchies of Europe, would, in my opinion, by that very act,
abdicate its power, and perhaps its existence and its name. But such is
the admirable position of the New World that man has no other enemy
than himself; and that, in order to be happy and to be free, it
suffices to seek the gifts of prosperity and the knowledge of freedom.




 Chapter IX: Why The People May Strictly Be Said To Govern In The
 United


States

I have hitherto examined the institutions of the United States; I have
passed their legislation in review, and I have depicted the present
characteristics of political society in that country. But a sovereign
power exists above these institutions and beyond these characteristic
features which may destroy or modify them at its pleasure—I mean that
of the people. It remains to be shown in what manner this power, which
regulates the laws, acts: its propensities and its passions remain to
be pointed out, as well as the secret springs which retard, accelerate,
or direct its irresistible course; and the effects of its unbounded
authority, with the destiny which is probably reserved for it.

In America the people appoints the legislative and the executive power,
and furnishes the jurors who punish all offences against the laws. The
American institutions are democratic, not only in their principle but
in all their consequences; and the people elects its representatives
directly, and for the most part annually, in order to ensure their
dependence. The people is therefore the real directing power; and
although the form of government is representative, it is evident that
the opinions, the prejudices, the interests, and even the passions of
the community are hindered by no durable obstacles from exercising a
perpetual influence on society. In the United States the majority
governs in the name of the people, as is the case in all the countries
in which the people is supreme. The majority is principally composed of
peaceful citizens who, either by inclination or by interest, are
sincerely desirous of the welfare of their country. But they are
surrounded by the incessant agitation of parties, which attempt to gain
their co-operation and to avail themselves of their support.




 Chapter X: Parties In The United States




 Chapter Summary


Great distinction to be made between parties—Parties which are to each
other as rival nations—Parties properly so called—Difference between
great and small parties—Epochs which produce them—Their
characteristics—America has had great parties—They are
extinct—Federalists—Republicans—Defeat of the Federalists—Difficulty of
creating parties in the United States—What is done with this
intention—Aristocratic or democratic character to be met with in all
parties—Struggle of General Jackson against the Bank.




 Parties In The United States


A great distinction must be made between parties. Some countries are so
large that the different populations which inhabit them have
contradictory interests, although they are the subjects of the same
Government, and they may thence be in a perpetual state of opposition.
In this case the different fractions of the people may more properly be
considered as distinct nations than as mere parties; and if a civil war
breaks out, the struggle is carried on by rival peoples rather than by
factions in the State.

But when the citizens entertain different opinions upon subjects which
affect the whole country alike, such, for instance, as the principles
upon which the government is to be conducted, then distinctions arise
which may correctly be styled parties. Parties are a necessary evil in
free governments; but they have not at all times the same character and
the same propensities.

At certain periods a nation may be oppressed by such insupportable
evils as to conceive the design of effecting a total change in its
political constitution; at other times the mischief lies still deeper,
and the existence of society itself is endangered. Such are the times
of great revolutions and of great parties. But between these epochs of
misery and of confusion there are periods during which human society
seems to rest, and mankind to make a pause. This pause is, indeed, only
apparent, for time does not stop its course for nations any more than
for men; they are all advancing towards a goal with which they are
unacquainted; and we only imagine them to be stationary when their
progress escapes our observation, as men who are going at a foot-pace
seem to be standing still to those who run.

But however this may be, there are certain epochs at which the changes
that take place in the social and political constitution of nations are
so slow and so insensible that men imagine their present condition to
be a final state; and the human mind, believing itself to be firmly
based upon certain foundations, does not extend its researches beyond
the horizon which it descries. These are the times of small parties and
of intrigue.

The political parties which I style great are those which cling to
principles more than to their consequences; to general, and not to
especial cases; to ideas, and not to men. These parties are usually
distinguished by a nobler character, by more generous passions, more
genuine convictions, and a more bold and open conduct than the others.
In them private interest, which always plays the chief part in
political passions, is more studiously veiled under the pretext of the
public good; and it may even be sometimes concealed from the eyes of
the very persons whom it excites and impels.

Minor parties are, on the other hand, generally deficient in political
faith. As they are not sustained or dignified by a lofty purpose, they
ostensibly display the egotism of their character in their actions.
They glow with a factitious zeal; their language is vehement, but their
conduct is timid and irresolute. The means they employ are as wretched
as the end at which they aim. Hence it arises that when a calm state of
things succeeds a violent revolution, the leaders of society seem
suddenly to disappear, and the powers of the human mind to lie
concealed. Society is convulsed by great parties, by minor ones it is
agitated; it is torn by the former, by the latter it is degraded; and
if these sometimes save it by a salutary perturbation, those invariably
disturb it to no good end.

America has already lost the great parties which once divided the
nation; and if her happiness is considerably increased, her morality
has suffered by their extinction. When the War of Independence was
terminated, and the foundations of the new Government were to be laid
down, the nation was divided between two opinions—two opinions which
are as old as the world, and which are perpetually to be met with under
all the forms and all the names which have ever obtained in free
communities—the one tending to limit, the other to extend indefinitely,
the power of the people. The conflict of these two opinions never
assumed that degree of violence in America which it has frequently
displayed elsewhere. Both parties of the Americans were, in fact,
agreed upon the most essential points; and neither of them had to
destroy a traditionary constitution, or to overthrow the structure of
society, in order to ensure its own triumph. In neither of them,
consequently, were a great number of private interests affected by
success or by defeat; but moral principles of a high order, such as the
love of equality and of independence, were concerned in the struggle,
and they sufficed to kindle violent passions.

The party which desired to limit the power of the people endeavored to
apply its doctrines more especially to the Constitution of the Union,
whence it derived its name of Federal. The other party, which affected
to be more exclusively attached to the cause of liberty, took that of
Republican. America is a land of democracy, and the Federalists were
always in a minority; but they reckoned on their side almost all the
great men who had been called forth by the War of Independence, and
their moral influence was very considerable. Their cause was, moreover,
favored by circumstances. The ruin of the Confederation had impressed
the people with a dread of anarchy, and the Federalists did not fail to
profit by this transient disposition of the multitude. For ten or
twelve years they were at the head of affairs, and they were able to
apply some, though not all, of their principles; for the hostile
current was becoming from day to day too violent to be checked or
stemmed. In 1801 the Republicans got possession of the Government;
Thomas Jefferson was named President; and he increased the influence of
their party by the weight of his celebrity, the greatness of his
talents, and the immense extent of his popularity.

The means by which the Federalists had maintained their position were
artificial, and their resources were temporary; it was by the virtues
or the talents of their leaders that they had risen to power. When the
Republicans attained to that lofty station, their opponents were
overwhelmed by utter defeat. An immense majority declared itself
against the retiring party, and the Federalists found themselves in so
small a minority that they at once despaired of their future success.
From that moment the Republican or Democratic party *a has proceeded
from conquest to conquest, until it has acquired absolute supremacy in
the country. The Federalists, perceiving that they were vanquished
without resource, and isolated in the midst of the nation, fell into
two divisions, of which one joined the victorious Republicans, and the
other abandoned its rallying-point and its name. Many years have
already elapsed since they ceased to exist as a party.

a
[ [It is scarcely necessary to remark that in more recent times the
signification of these terms has changed. The Republicans are the
representatives of the old Federalists, and the Democrats of the old
Republicans.—Trans. Note (1861).]] The accession of the Federalists to
power was, in my opinion, one of the most fortunate incidents which
accompanied the formation of the great American Union; they resisted
the inevitable propensities of their age and of the country. But
whether their theories were good or bad, they had the effect of being
inapplicable, as a system, to the society which they professed to
govern, and that which occurred under the auspices of Jefferson must
therefore have taken place sooner or later. But their Government gave
the new republic time to acquire a certain stability, and afterwards to
support the rapid growth of the very doctrines which they had combated.
A considerable number of their principles were in point of fact
embodied in the political creed of their opponents; and the Federal
Constitution which subsists at the present day is a lasting monument of
their patriotism and their wisdom.


Great political parties are not, then, to be met with in the United
States at the present time. Parties, indeed, may be found which
threaten the future tranquillity of the Union; but there are none which
seem to contest the present form of Government or the present course of
society. The parties by which the Union is menaced do not rest upon
abstract principles, but upon temporal interests. These interests,
disseminated in the provinces of so vast an empire, may be said to
constitute rival nations rather than parties. Thus, upon a recent
occasion, the North contended for the system of commercial prohibition,
and the South took up arms in favor of free trade, simply because the
North is a manufacturing and the South an agricultural district; and
that the restrictive system which was profitable to the one was
prejudicial to the other. *b

b
[ [The divisions of North and South have since acquired a far greater
degree of intensity, and the South, though conquered, still presents a
formidable spirit of opposition to Northern government.—Translator’s
Note, 1875.]]


In the absence of great parties, the United States abound with lesser
controversies; and public opinion is divided into a thousand minute
shades of difference upon questions of very little moment. The pains
which are taken to create parties are inconceivable, and at the present
day it is no easy task. In the United States there is no religious
animosity, because all religion is respected, and no sect is
predominant; there is no jealousy of rank, because the people is
everything, and none can contest its authority; lastly, there is no
public indigence to supply the means of agitation, because the physical
position of the country opens so wide a field to industry that man is
able to accomplish the most surprising undertakings with his own native
resources. Nevertheless, ambitious men are interested in the creation
of parties, since it is difficult to eject a person from authority upon
the mere ground that his place is coveted by others. The skill of the
actors in the political world lies therefore in the art of creating
parties. A political aspirant in the United States begins by
discriminating his own interest, and by calculating upon those
interests which may be collected around and amalgamated with it; he
then contrives to discover some doctrine or some principle which may
suit the purposes of this new association, and which he adopts in order
to bring forward his party and to secure his popularity; just as the
imprimatur of a King was in former days incorporated with the volume
which it authorized, but to which it nowise belonged. When these
preliminaries are terminated, the new party is ushered into the
political world.

All the domestic controversies of the Americans at first appear to a
stranger to be so incomprehensible and so puerile that he is at a loss
whether to pity a people which takes such arrant trifles in good
earnest, or to envy the happiness which enables it to discuss them. But
when he comes to study the secret propensities which govern the
factions of America, he easily perceives that the greater part of them
are more or less connected with one or the other of those two divisions
which have always existed in free communities. The deeper we penetrate
into the working of these parties, the more do we perceive that the
object of the one is to limit, and that of the other to extend, the
popular authority. I do not assert that the ostensible end, or even
that the secret aim, of American parties is to promote the rule of
aristocracy or democracy in the country; but I affirm that aristocratic
or democratic passions may easily be detected at the bottom of all
parties, and that, although they escape a superficial observation, they
are the main point and the very soul of every faction in the United
States.

To quote a recent example. When the President attacked the Bank, the
country was excited and parties were formed; the well-informed classes
rallied round the Bank, the common people round the President. But it
must not be imagined that the people had formed a rational opinion upon
a question which offers so many difficulties to the most experienced
statesmen. The Bank is a great establishment which enjoys an
independent existence, and the people, accustomed to make and unmake
whatsoever it pleases, is startled to meet with this obstacle to its
authority. In the midst of the perpetual fluctuation of society the
community is irritated by so permanent an institution, and is led to
attack it in order to see whether it can be shaken and controlled, like
all the other institutions of the country.

Remains Of The Aristocratic Party In The United States

Secret opposition of wealthy individuals to democracy—Their
retirement—Their taste for exclusive pleasures and for luxury at
home—Their simplicity abroad—Their affected condescension towards the
people.

It sometimes happens in a people amongst which various opinions prevail
that the balance of the several parties is lost, and one of them
obtains an irresistible preponderance, overpowers all obstacles,
harasses its opponents, and appropriates all the resources of society
to its own purposes. The vanquished citizens despair of success and
they conceal their dissatisfaction in silence and in general apathy.
The nation seems to be governed by a single principle, and the
prevailing party assumes the credit of having restored peace and
unanimity to the country. But this apparent unanimity is merely a cloak
to alarming dissensions and perpetual opposition.

This is precisely what occurred in America; when the democratic party
got the upper hand, it took exclusive possession of the conduct of
affairs, and from that time the laws and the customs of society have
been adapted to its caprices. At the present day the more affluent
classes of society are so entirely removed from the direction of
political affairs in the United States that wealth, far from conferring
a right to the exercise of power, is rather an obstacle than a means of
attaining to it. The wealthy members of the community abandon the
lists, through unwillingness to contend, and frequently to contend in
vain, against the poorest classes of their fellow citizens. They
concentrate all their enjoyments in the privacy of their homes, where
they occupy a rank which cannot be assumed in public; and they
constitute a private society in the State, which has its own tastes and
its own pleasures. They submit to this state of things as an
irremediable evil, but they are careful not to show that they are
galled by its continuance; it is even not uncommon to hear them laud
the delights of a republican government, and the advantages of
democratic institutions when they are in public. Next to hating their
enemies, men are most inclined to flatter them.

Mark, for instance, that opulent citizen, who is as anxious as a Jew of
the Middle Ages to conceal his wealth. His dress is plain, his demeanor
unassuming; but the interior of his dwelling glitters with luxury, and
none but a few chosen guests whom he haughtily styles his equals are
allowed to penetrate into this sanctuary. No European noble is more
exclusive in his pleasures, or more jealous of the smallest advantages
which his privileged station confers upon him. But the very same
individual crosses the city to reach a dark counting-house in the
centre of traffic, where every one may accost him who pleases. If he
meets his cobbler upon the way, they stop and converse; the two
citizens discuss the affairs of the State in which they have an equal
interest, and they shake hands before they part.

But beneath this artificial enthusiasm, and these obsequious attentions
to the preponderating power, it is easy to perceive that the wealthy
members of the community entertain a hearty distaste to the democratic
institutions of their country. The populace is at once the object of
their scorn and of their fears. If the maladministration of the
democracy ever brings about a revolutionary crisis, and if monarchical
institutions ever become practicable in the United States, the truth of
what I advance will become obvious.

The two chief weapons which parties use in order to ensure success are
the public press and the formation of associations.




 Chapter XI: Liberty Of The Press In The United States




 Chapter Summary


Difficulty of restraining the liberty of the press—Particular reasons
which some nations have to cherish this liberty—The liberty of the
press a necessary consequence of the sovereignty of the people as it is
understood in America—Violent language of the periodical press in the
United States—Propensities of the periodical press—Illustrated by the
United States—Opinion of the Americans upon the repression of the abuse
of the liberty of the press by judicial prosecutions—Reasons for which
the press is less powerful in America than in France.

Liberty Of The Press In The United States

The influence of the liberty of the press does not affect political
opinions alone, but it extends to all the opinions of men, and it
modifies customs as well as laws. In another part of this work I shall
attempt to determinate the degree of influence which the liberty of the
press has exercised upon civil society in the United States, and to
point out the direction which it has given to the ideas, as well as the
tone which it has imparted to the character and the feelings, of the
Anglo-Americans, but at present I purpose simply to examine the effects
produced by the liberty of the press in the political world.

I confess that I do not entertain that firm and complete attachment to
the liberty of the press which things that are supremely good in their
very nature are wont to excite in the mind; and I approve of it more
from a recollection of the evils it prevents than from a consideration
of the advantages it ensures.

If any one could point out an intermediate and yet a tenable position
between the complete independence and the entire subjection of the
public expression of opinion, I should perhaps be inclined to adopt it;
but the difficulty is to discover this position. If it is your
intention to correct the abuses of unlicensed printing and to restore
the use of orderly language, you may in the first instance try the
offender by a jury; but if the jury acquits him, the opinion which was
that of a single individual becomes the opinion of the country at
large. Too much and too little has therefore hitherto been done. If you
proceed, you must bring the delinquent before a court of permanent
judges. But even here the cause must be heard before it can be decided;
and the very principles which no book would have ventured to avow are
blazoned forth in the pleadings, and what was obscurely hinted at in a
single composition is then repeated in a multitude of other
publications. The language in which a thought is embodied is the mere
carcass of the thought, and not the idea itself; tribunals may condemn
the form, but the sense and spirit of the work is too subtle for their
authority. Too much has still been done to recede, too little to attain
your end; you must therefore proceed. If you establish a censorship of
the press, the tongue of the public speaker will still make itself
heard, and you have only increased the mischief. The powers of thought
do not rely, like the powers of physical strength, upon the number of
their mechanical agents, nor can a host of authors be reckoned like the
troops which compose an army; on the contrary, the authority of a
principle is often increased by the smallness of the number of men by
whom it is expressed. The words of a strong-minded man, which penetrate
amidst the passions of a listening assembly, have more power than the
vociferations of a thousand orators; and if it be allowed to speak
freely in any public place, the consequence is the same as if free
speaking was allowed in every village. The liberty of discourse must
therefore be destroyed as well as the liberty of the press; this is the
necessary term of your efforts; but if your object was to repress the
abuses of liberty, they have brought you to the feet of a despot. You
have been led from the extreme of independence to the extreme of
subjection without meeting with a single tenable position for shelter
or repose.

There are certain nations which have peculiar reasons for cherishing
the liberty of the press, independently of the general motives which I
have just pointed out. For in certain countries which profess to enjoy
the privileges of freedom every individual agent of the Government may
violate the laws with impunity, since those whom he oppresses cannot
prosecute him before the courts of justice. In this case the liberty of
the press is not merely a guarantee, but it is the only guarantee, of
their liberty and their security which the citizens possess. If the
rulers of these nations propose to abolish the independence of the
press, the people would be justified in saying: Give us the right of
prosecuting your offences before the ordinary tribunals, and perhaps we
may then waive our right of appeal to the tribunal of public opinion.

But in the countries in which the doctrine of the sovereignty of the
people ostensibly prevails, the censorship of the press is not only
dangerous, but it is absurd. When the right of every citizen to
co-operate in the government of society is acknowledged, every citizen
must be presumed to possess the power of discriminating between the
different opinions of his contemporaries, and of appreciating the
different facts from which inferences may be drawn. The sovereignty of
the people and the liberty of the press may therefore be looked upon as
correlative institutions; just as the censorship of the press and
universal suffrage are two things which are irreconcilably opposed, and
which cannot long be retained among the institutions of the same
people. Not a single individual of the twelve millions who inhabit the
territory of the United States has as yet dared to propose any
restrictions to the liberty of the press. The first newspaper over
which I cast my eyes, upon my arrival in America, contained the
following article:

In all this affair the language of Jackson has been that of a heartless
despot, solely occupied with the preservation of his own authority.
Ambition is his crime, and it will be his punishment too: intrigue is
his native element, and intrigue will confound his tricks, and will
deprive him of his power: he governs by means of corruption, and his
immoral practices will redound to his shame and confusion. His conduct
in the political arena has been that of a shameless and lawless
gamester. He succeeded at the time, but the hour of retribution
approaches, and he will be obliged to disgorge his winnings, to throw
aside his false dice, and to end his days in some retirement, where he
may curse his madness at his leisure; for repentance is a virtue with
which his heart is likely to remain forever unacquainted.

It is not uncommonly imagined in France that the virulence of the press
originates in the uncertain social condition, in the political
excitement, and the general sense of consequent evil which prevail in
that country; and it is therefore supposed that as soon as society has
resumed a certain degree of composure the press will abandon its
present vehemence. I am inclined to think that the above causes explain
the reason of the extraordinary ascendency it has acquired over the
nation, but that they do not exercise much influence upon the tone of
its language. The periodical press appears to me to be actuated by
passions and propensities independent of the circumstances in which it
is placed, and the present position of America corroborates this
opinion.

America is perhaps, at this moment, the country of the whole world
which contains the fewest germs of revolution; but the press is not
less destructive in its principles than in France, and it displays the
same violence without the same reasons for indignation. In America, as
in France, it constitutes a singular power, so strangely composed of
mingled good and evil that it is at the same time indispensable to the
existence of freedom, and nearly incompatible with the maintenance of
public order. Its power is certainly much greater in France than in the
United States; though nothing is more rare in the latter country than
to hear of a prosecution having been instituted against it. The reason
of this is perfectly simple: the Americans, having once admitted the
doctrine of the sovereignty of the people, apply it with perfect
consistency. It was never their intention to found a permanent state of
things with elements which undergo daily modifications; and there is
consequently nothing criminal in an attack upon the existing laws,
provided it be not attended with a violent infraction of them. They are
moreover of opinion that courts of justice are unable to check the
abuses of the press; and that as the subtilty of human language
perpetually eludes the severity of judicial analysis, offences of this
nature are apt to escape the hand which attempts to apprehend them.
They hold that to act with efficacy upon the press it would be
necessary to find a tribunal, not only devoted to the existing order of
things, but capable of surmounting the influence of public opinion; a
tribunal which should conduct its proceedings without publicity, which
should pronounce its decrees without assigning its motives, and punish
the intentions even more than the language of an author. Whosoever
should have the power of creating and maintaining a tribunal of this
kind would waste his time in prosecuting the liberty of the press; for
he would be the supreme master of the whole community, and he would be
as free to rid himself of the authors as of their writings. In this
question, therefore, there is no medium between servitude and extreme
license; in order to enjoy the inestimable benefits which the liberty
of the press ensures, it is necessary to submit to the inevitable evils
which it engenders. To expect to acquire the former and to escape the
latter is to cherish one of those illusions which commonly mislead
nations in their times of sickness, when, tired with faction and
exhausted by effort, they attempt to combine hostile opinions and
contrary principles upon the same soil.

The small influence of the American journals is attributable to several
reasons, amongst which are the following:

The liberty of writing, like all other liberty, is most formidable when
it is a novelty; for a people which has never been accustomed to
co-operate in the conduct of State affairs places implicit confidence
in the first tribune who arouses its attention. The Anglo-Americans
have enjoyed this liberty ever since the foundation of the settlements;
moreover, the press cannot create human passions by its own power,
however skillfully it may kindle them where they exist. In America
politics are discussed with animation and a varied activity, but they
rarely touch those deep passions which are excited whenever the
positive interest of a part of the community is impaired: but in the
United States the interests of the community are in a most prosperous
condition. A single glance upon a French and an American newspaper is
sufficient to show the difference which exists between the two nations
on this head. In France the space allotted to commercial advertisements
is very limited, and the intelligence is not considerable, but the most
essential part of the journal is that which contains the discussion of
the politics of the day. In America three-quarters of the enormous
sheet which is set before the reader are filled with advertisements,
and the remainder is frequently occupied by political intelligence or
trivial anecdotes: it is only from time to time that one finds a corner
devoted to passionate discussions like those with which the journalists
of France are wont to indulge their readers.

It has been demonstrated by observation, and discovered by the innate
sagacity of the pettiest as well as the greatest of despots, that the
influence of a power is increased in proportion as its direction is
rendered more central. In France the press combines a twofold
centralization; almost all its power is centred in the same spot, and
vested in the same hands, for its organs are far from numerous. The
influence of a public press thus constituted, upon a sceptical nation,
must be unbounded. It is an enemy with which a Government may sign an
occasional truce, but which it is difficult to resist for any length of
time.

Neither of these kinds of centralization exists in America. The United
States have no metropolis; the intelligence as well as the power of the
country are dispersed abroad, and instead of radiating from a point,
they cross each other in every direction; the Americans have
established no central control over the expression of opinion, any more
than over the conduct of business. These are circumstances which do not
depend on human foresight; but it is owing to the laws of the Union
that there are no licenses to be granted to printers, no securities
demanded from editors as in France, and no stamp duty as in France and
formerly in England. The consequence of this is that nothing is easier
than to set up a newspaper, and a small number of readers suffices to
defray the expenses of the editor.

The number of periodical and occasional publications which appears in
the United States actually surpasses belief. The most enlightened
Americans attribute the subordinate influence of the press to this
excessive dissemination; and it is adopted as an axiom of political
science in that country that the only way to neutralize the effect of
public journals is to multiply them indefinitely. I cannot conceive
that a truth which is so self-evident should not already have been more
generally admitted in Europe; it is comprehensible that the persons who
hope to bring about revolutions by means of the press should be
desirous of confining its action to a few powerful organs, but it is
perfectly incredible that the partisans of the existing state of
things, and the natural supporters of the law, should attempt to
diminish the influence of the press by concentrating its authority. The
Governments of Europe seem to treat the press with the courtesy of the
knights of old; they are anxious to furnish it with the same central
power which they have found to be so trusty a weapon, in order to
enhance the glory of their resistance to its attacks.

In America there is scarcely a hamlet which has not its own newspaper.
It may readily be imagined that neither discipline nor unity of design
can be communicated to so multifarious a host, and each one is
consequently led to fight under his own standard. All the political
journals of the United States are indeed arrayed on the side of the
administration or against it; but they attack and defend in a thousand
different ways. They cannot succeed in forming those great currents of
opinion which overwhelm the most solid obstacles. This division of the
influence of the press produces a variety of other consequences which
are scarcely less remarkable. The facility with which journals can be
established induces a multitude of individuals to take a part in them;
but as the extent of competition precludes the possibility of
considerable profit, the most distinguished classes of society are
rarely led to engage in these undertakings. But such is the number of
the public prints that, even if they were a source of wealth, writers
of ability could not be found to direct them all. The journalists of
the United States are usually placed in a very humble position, with a
scanty education and a vulgar turn of mind. The will of the majority is
the most general of laws, and it establishes certain habits which form
the characteristics of each peculiar class of society; thus it dictates
the etiquette practised at courts and the etiquette of the bar. The
characteristics of the French journalist consist in a violent, but
frequently an eloquent and lofty, manner of discussing the politics of
the day; and the exceptions to this habitual practice are only
occasional. The characteristics of the American journalist consist in
an open and coarse appeal to the passions of the populace; and he
habitually abandons the principles of political science to assail the
characters of individuals, to track them into private life, and
disclose all their weaknesses and errors.

Nothing can be more deplorable than this abuse of the powers of
thought; I shall have occasion to point out hereafter the influence of
the newspapers upon the taste and the morality of the American people,
but my present subject exclusively concerns the political world. It
cannot be denied that the effects of this extreme license of the press
tend indirectly to the maintenance of public order. The individuals who
are already in the possession of a high station in the esteem of their
fellow-citizens are afraid to write in the newspapers, and they are
thus deprived of the most powerful instrument which they can use to
excite the passions of the multitude to their own advantage. *a

a
[ They only write in the papers when they choose to address the people
in their own name; as, for instance, when they are called upon to repel
calumnious imputations, and to correct a misstatement of facts.]


The personal opinions of the editors have no kind of weight in the eyes
of the public: the only use of a journal is, that it imparts the
knowledge of certain facts, and it is only by altering or distorting
those facts that a journalist can contribute to the support of his own
views.

But although the press is limited to these resources, its influence in
America is immense. It is the power which impels the circulation of
political life through all the districts of that vast territory. Its
eye is constantly open to detect the secret springs of political
designs, and to summon the leaders of all parties to the bar of public
opinion. It rallies the interests of the community round certain
principles, and it draws up the creed which factions adopt; for it
affords a means of intercourse between parties which hear, and which
address each other without ever having been in immediate contact. When
a great number of the organs of the press adopt the same line of
conduct, their influence becomes irresistible; and public opinion, when
it is perpetually assailed from the same side, eventually yields to the
attack. In the United States each separate journal exercises but little
authority, but the power of the periodical press is only second to that
of the people. *b

b
[ See Appendix, P.]


The opinions established in the United States under the empire of the
liberty of the press are frequently more firmly rooted than those which
are formed elsewhere under the sanction of a censor.

In the United States the democracy perpetually raises fresh individuals
to the conduct of public affairs; and the measures of the
administration are consequently seldom regulated by the strict rules of
consistency or of order. But the general principles of the Government
are more stable, and the opinions most prevalent in society are
generally more durable than in many other countries. When once the
Americans have taken up an idea, whether it be well or ill founded,
nothing is more difficult than to eradicate it from their minds. The
same tenacity of opinion has been observed in England, where, for the
last century, greater freedom of conscience and more invincible
prejudices have existed than in all the other countries of Europe. I
attribute this consequence to a cause which may at first sight appear
to have a very opposite tendency, namely, to the liberty of the press.
The nations amongst which this liberty exists are as apt to cling to
their opinions from pride as from conviction. They cherish them because
they hold them to be just, and because they exercised their own
free-will in choosing them; and they maintain them not only because
they are true, but because they are their own. Several other reasons
conduce to the same end.

It was remarked by a man of genius that “ignorance lies at the two ends
of knowledge.” Perhaps it would have been more correct to have said,
that absolute convictions are to be met with at the two extremities,
and that doubt lies in the middle; for the human intellect may be
considered in three distinct states, which frequently succeed one
another. A man believes implicitly, because he adopts a proposition
without inquiry. He doubts as soon as he is assailed by the objections
which his inquiries may have aroused. But he frequently succeeds in
satisfying these doubts, and then he begins to believe afresh: he no
longer lays hold on a truth in its most shadowy and uncertain form, but
he sees it clearly before him, and he advances onwards by the light it
gives him. *c

c
[ It may, however, be doubted whether this rational and self-guiding
conviction arouses as much fervor or enthusiastic devotedness in men as
their first dogmatical belief.]


When the liberty of the press acts upon men who are in the first of
these three states, it does not immediately disturb their habit of
believing implicitly without investigation, but it constantly modifies
the objects of their intuitive convictions. The human mind continues to
discern but one point upon the whole intellectual horizon, and that
point is in continual motion. Such are the symptoms of sudden
revolutions, and of the misfortunes which are sure to befall those
generations which abruptly adopt the unconditional freedom of the
press.

The circle of novel ideas is, however, soon terminated; the touch of
experience is upon them, and the doubt and mistrust which their
uncertainty produces become universal. We may rest assured that the
majority of mankind will either believe they know not wherefore, or
will not know what to believe. Few are the beings who can ever hope to
attain to that state of rational and independent conviction which true
knowledge can beget in defiance of the attacks of doubt.

It has been remarked that in times of great religious fervor men
sometimes change their religious opinions; whereas in times of general
scepticism everyone clings to his own persuasion. The same thing takes
place in politics under the liberty of the press. In countries where
all the theories of social science have been contested in their turn,
the citizens who have adopted one of them stick to it, not so much
because they are assured of its excellence, as because they are not
convinced of the superiority of any other. In the present age men are
not very ready to die in defence of their opinions, but they are rarely
inclined to change them; and there are fewer martyrs as well as fewer
apostates.

Another still more valid reason may yet be adduced: when no abstract
opinions are looked upon as certain, men cling to the mere propensities
and external interests of their position, which are naturally more
tangible and more permanent than any opinions in the world.

It is not a question of easy solution whether aristocracy or democracy
is most fit to govern a country. But it is certain that democracy
annoys one part of the community, and that aristocracy oppresses
another part. When the question is reduced to the simple expression of
the struggle between poverty and wealth, the tendency of each side of
the dispute becomes perfectly evident without further controversy.




 Chapter XII: Political Associations In The United States




 Chapter Summary


Daily use which the Anglo-Americans make of the right of
association—Three kinds of political associations—In what manner the
Americans apply the representative system to associations—Dangers
resulting to the State—Great Convention of 1831 relative to the
Tariff—Legislative character of this Convention—Why the unlimited
exercise of the right of association is less dangerous in the United
States than elsewhere—Why it may be looked upon as necessary—Utility of
associations in a democratic people.

Political Associations In The United States

In no country in the world has the principle of association been more
successfully used, or more unsparingly applied to a multitude of
different objects, than in America. Besides the permanent associations
which are established by law under the names of townships, cities, and
counties, a vast number of others are formed and maintained by the
agency of private individuals.

The citizen of the United States is taught from his earliest infancy to
rely upon his own exertions in order to resist the evils and the
difficulties of life; he looks upon social authority with an eye of
mistrust and anxiety, and he only claims its assistance when he is
quite unable to shift without it. This habit may even be traced in the
schools of the rising generation, where the children in their games are
wont to submit to rules which they have themselves established, and to
punish misdemeanors which they have themselves defined. The same spirit
pervades every act of social life. If a stoppage occurs in a
thoroughfare, and the circulation of the public is hindered, the
neighbors immediately constitute a deliberative body; and this
extemporaneous assembly gives rise to an executive power which remedies
the inconvenience before anybody has thought of recurring to an
authority superior to that of the persons immediately concerned. If the
public pleasures are concerned, an association is formed to provide for
the splendor and the regularity of the entertainment. Societies are
formed to resist enemies which are exclusively of a moral nature, and
to diminish the vice of intemperance: in the United States associations
are established to promote public order, commerce, industry, morality,
and religion; for there is no end which the human will, seconded by the
collective exertions of individuals, despairs of attaining.

I shall hereafter have occasion to show the effects of association upon
the course of society, and I must confine myself for the present to the
political world. When once the right of association is recognized, the
citizens may employ it in several different ways.

An association consists simply in the public assent which a number of
individuals give to certain doctrines, and in the engagement which they
contract to promote the spread of those doctrines by their exertions.
The right of association with these views is very analogous to the
liberty of unlicensed writing; but societies thus formed possess more
authority than the press. When an opinion is represented by a society,
it necessarily assumes a more exact and explicit form. It numbers its
partisans, and compromises their welfare in its cause: they, on the
other hand, become acquainted with each other, and their zeal is
increased by their number. An association unites the efforts of minds
which have a tendency to diverge in one single channel, and urges them
vigorously towards one single end which it points out.

The second degree in the right of association is the power of meeting.
When an association is allowed to establish centres of action at
certain important points in the country, its activity is increased and
its influence extended. Men have the opportunity of seeing each other;
means of execution are more readily combined, and opinions are
maintained with a degree of warmth and energy which written language
cannot approach.

Lastly, in the exercise of the right of political association, there is
a third degree: the partisans of an opinion may unite in electoral
bodies, and choose delegates to represent them in a central assembly.
This is, properly speaking, the application of the representative
system to a party.

Thus, in the first instance, a society is formed between individuals
professing the same opinion, and the tie which keeps it together is of
a purely intellectual nature; in the second case, small assemblies are
formed which only represent a fraction of the party. Lastly, in the
third case, they constitute a separate nation in the midst of the
nation, a government within the Government. Their delegates, like the
real delegates of the majority, represent the entire collective force
of their party; and they enjoy a certain degree of that national
dignity and great influence which belong to the chosen representatives
of the people. It is true that they have not the right of making the
laws, but they have the power of attacking those which are in being,
and of drawing up beforehand those which they may afterwards cause to
be adopted.

If, in a people which is imperfectly accustomed to the exercise of
freedom, or which is exposed to violent political passions, a
deliberating minority, which confines itself to the contemplation of
future laws, be placed in juxtaposition to the legislative majority, I
cannot but believe that public tranquillity incurs very great risks in
that nation. There is doubtless a very wide difference between proving
that one law is in itself better than another and proving that the
former ought to be substituted for the latter. But the imagination of
the populace is very apt to overlook this difference, which is so
apparent to the minds of thinking men. It sometimes happens that a
nation is divided into two nearly equal parties, each of which affects
to represent the majority. If, in immediate contiguity to the directing
power, another power be established, which exercises almost as much
moral authority as the former, it is not to be believed that it will
long be content to speak without acting; or that it will always be
restrained by the abstract consideration of the nature of associations
which are meant to direct but not to enforce opinions, to suggest but
not to make the laws.

The more we consider the independence of the press in its principal
consequences, the more are we convinced that it is the chief and, so to
speak, the constitutive element of freedom in the modern world. A
nation which is determined to remain free is therefore right in
demanding the unrestrained exercise of this independence. But the
unrestrained liberty of political association cannot be entirely
assimilated to the liberty of the press. The one is at the same time
less necessary and more dangerous than the other. A nation may confine
it within certain limits without forfeiting any part of its
self-control; and it may sometimes be obliged to do so in order to
maintain its own authority.

In America the liberty of association for political purposes is
unbounded. An example will show in the clearest light to what an extent
this privilege is tolerated.

The question of the tariff, or of free trade, produced a great
manifestation of party feeling in America; the tariff was not only a
subject of debate as a matter of opinion, but it exercised a favorable
or a prejudicial influence upon several very powerful interests of the
States. The North attributed a great portion of its prosperity, and the
South all its sufferings, to this system; insomuch that for a long time
the tariff was the sole source of the political animosities which
agitated the Union.

In 1831, when the dispute was raging with the utmost virulence, a
private citizen of Massachusetts proposed to all the enemies of the
tariff, by means of the public prints, to send delegates to
Philadelphia in order to consult together upon the means which were
most fitted to promote freedom of trade. This proposal circulated in a
few days from Maine to New Orleans by the power of the printing-press:
the opponents of the tariff adopted it with enthusiasm; meetings were
formed on all sides, and delegates were named. The majority of these
individuals were well known, and some of them had earned a considerable
degree of celebrity. South Carolina alone, which afterwards took up
arms in the same cause, sent sixty-three delegates. On October 1, 1831,
this assembly, which according to the American custom had taken the
name of a Convention, met at Philadelphia; it consisted of more than
two hundred members. Its debates were public, and they at once assumed
a legislative character; the extent of the powers of Congress, the
theories of free trade, and the different clauses of the tariff, were
discussed in turn. At the end of ten days’ deliberation the Convention
broke up, after having published an address to the American people, in
which it declared:

I. That Congress had not the right of making a tariff, and that the
existing tariff was unconstitutional;

II. That the prohibition of free trade was prejudicial to the interests
of all nations, and to that of the American people in particular.

It must be acknowledged that the unrestrained liberty of political
association has not hitherto produced, in the United States, those
fatal consequences which might perhaps be expected from it elsewhere.
The right of association was imported from England, and it has always
existed in America; so that the exercise of this privilege is now
amalgamated with the manners and customs of the people. At the present
time the liberty of association is become a necessary guarantee against
the tyranny of the majority. In the United States, as soon as a party
is become preponderant, all public authority passes under its control;
its private supporters occupy all the places, and have all the force of
the administration at their disposal. As the most distinguished
partisans of the other side of the question are unable to surmount the
obstacles which exclude them from power, they require some means of
establishing themselves upon their own basis, and of opposing the moral
authority of the minority to the physical power which domineers over
it. Thus a dangerous expedient is used to obviate a still more
formidable danger.

The omnipotence of the majority appears to me to present such extreme
perils to the American Republics that the dangerous measure which is
used to repress it seems to be more advantageous than prejudicial. And
here I am about to advance a proposition which may remind the reader of
what I said before in speaking of municipal freedom: There are no
countries in which associations are more needed, to prevent the
despotism of faction or the arbitrary power of a prince, than those
which are democratically constituted. In aristocratic nations the body
of the nobles and the more opulent part of the community are in
themselves natural associations, which act as checks upon the abuses of
power. In countries in which these associations do not exist, if
private individuals are unable to create an artificial and a temporary
substitute for them, I can imagine no permanent protection against the
most galling tyranny; and a great people may be oppressed by a small
faction, or by a single individual, with impunity.

The meeting of a great political Convention (for there are Conventions
of all kinds), which may frequently become a necessary measure, is
always a serious occurrence, even in America, and one which is never
looked forward to, by the judicious friends of the country, without
alarm. This was very perceptible in the Convention of 1831, at which
the exertions of all the most distinguished members of the Assembly
tended to moderate its language, and to restrain the subjects which it
treated within certain limits. It is probable, in fact, that the
Convention of 1831 exercised a very great influence upon the minds of
the malcontents, and prepared them for the open revolt against the
commercial laws of the Union which took place in 1832.

It cannot be denied that the unrestrained liberty of association for
political purposes is the privilege which a people is longest in
learning how to exercise. If it does not throw the nation into anarchy,
it perpetually augments the chances of that calamity. On one point,
however, this perilous liberty offers a security against dangers of
another kind; in countries where associations are free, secret
societies are unknown. In America there are numerous factions, but no
conspiracies.

Different ways in which the right of association is understood in
Europe and in the United States—Different use which is made of it.

The most natural privilege of man, next to the right of acting for
himself, is that of combining his exertions with those of his
fellow-creatures, and of acting in common with them. I am therefore led
to conclude that the right of association is almost as inalienable as
the right of personal liberty. No legislator can attack it without
impairing the very foundations of society. Nevertheless, if the liberty
of association is a fruitful source of advantages and prosperity to
some nations, it may be perverted or carried to excess by others, and
the element of life may be changed into an element of destruction. A
comparison of the different methods which associations pursue in those
countries in which they are managed with discretion, as well as in
those where liberty degenerates into license, may perhaps be thought
useful both to governments and to parties.

The greater part of Europeans look upon an association as a weapon
which is to be hastily fashioned, and immediately tried in the
conflict. A society is formed for discussion, but the idea of impending
action prevails in the minds of those who constitute it: it is, in
fact, an army; and the time given to parley serves to reckon up the
strength and to animate the courage of the host, after which they
direct their march against the enemy. Resources which lie within the
bounds of the law may suggest themselves to the persons who compose it
as means, but never as the only means, of success.

Such, however, is not the manner in which the right of association is
understood in the United States. In America the citizens who form the
minority associate, in order, in the first place, to show their
numerical strength, and so to diminish the moral authority of the
majority; and, in the second place, to stimulate competition, and to
discover those arguments which are most fitted to act upon the
majority; for they always entertain hopes of drawing over their
opponents to their own side, and of afterwards disposing of the supreme
power in their name. Political associations in the United States are
therefore peaceable in their intentions, and strictly legal in the
means which they employ; and they assert with perfect truth that they
only aim at success by lawful expedients.

The difference which exists between the Americans and ourselves depends
on several causes. In Europe there are numerous parties so
diametrically opposed to the majority that they can never hope to
acquire its support, and at the same time they think that they are
sufficiently strong in themselves to struggle and to defend their
cause. When a party of this kind forms an association, its object is,
not to conquer, but to fight. In America the individuals who hold
opinions very much opposed to those of the majority are no sort of
impediment to its power, and all other parties hope to win it over to
their own principles in the end. The exercise of the right of
association becomes dangerous in proportion to the impossibility which
excludes great parties from acquiring the majority. In a country like
the United States, in which the differences of opinion are mere
differences of hue, the right of association may remain unrestrained
without evil consequences. The inexperience of many of the European
nations in the enjoyment of liberty leads them only to look upon the
liberty of association as a right of attacking the Government. The
first notion which presents itself to a party, as well as to an
individual, when it has acquired a consciousness of its own strength,
is that of violence: the notion of persuasion arises at a later period
and is only derived from experience. The English, who are divided into
parties which differ most essentially from each other, rarely abuse the
right of association, because they have long been accustomed to
exercise it. In France the passion for war is so intense that there is
no undertaking so mad, or so injurious to the welfare of the State,
that a man does not consider himself honored in defending it, at the
risk of his life.

But perhaps the most powerful of the causes which tend to mitigate the
excesses of political association in the United States is Universal
Suffrage. In countries in which universal suffrage exists the majority
is never doubtful, because neither party can pretend to represent that
portion of the community which has not voted. The associations which
are formed are aware, as well as the nation at large, that they do not
represent the majority: this is, indeed, a condition inseparable from
their existence; for if they did represent the preponderating power,
they would change the law instead of soliciting its reform. The
consequence of this is that the moral influence of the Government which
they attack is very much increased, and their own power is very much
enfeebled.

In Europe there are few associations which do not affect to represent
the majority, or which do not believe that they represent it. This
conviction or this pretension tends to augment their force amazingly,
and contributes no less to legalize their measures. Violence may seem
to be excusable in defence of the cause of oppressed right. Thus it is,
in the vast labyrinth of human laws, that extreme liberty sometimes
corrects the abuses of license, and that extreme democracy obviates the
dangers of democratic government. In Europe, associations consider
themselves, in some degree, as the legislative and executive councils
of the people, which is unable to speak for itself. In America, where
they only represent a minority of the nation, they argue and they
petition.

The means which the associations of Europe employ are in accordance
with the end which they propose to obtain. As the principal aim of
these bodies is to act, and not to debate, to fight rather than to
persuade, they are naturally led to adopt a form of organization which
differs from the ordinary customs of civil bodies, and which assumes
the habits and the maxims of military life. They centralize the
direction of their resources as much as possible, and they intrust the
power of the whole party to a very small number of leaders.

The members of these associations respond to a watchword, like soldiers
on duty; they profess the doctrine of passive obedience; say rather,
that in uniting together they at once abjure the exercise of their own
judgment and free will; and the tyrannical control which these
societies exercise is often far more insupportable than the authority
possessed over society by the Government which they attack. Their moral
force is much diminished by these excesses, and they lose the powerful
interest which is always excited by a struggle between oppressors and
the oppressed. The man who in given cases consents to obey his fellows
with servility, and who submits his activity and even his opinions to
their control, can have no claim to rank as a free citizen.

The Americans have also established certain forms of government which
are applied to their associations, but these are invariably borrowed
from the forms of the civil administration. The independence of each
individual is formally recognized; the tendency of the members of the
association points, as it does in the body of the community, towards
the same end, but they are not obliged to follow the same track. No one
abjures the exercise of his reason and his free will; but every one
exerts that reason and that will for the benefit of a common
undertaking.




 Chapter XIII: Government Of The Democracy In America—Part I


I am well aware of the difficulties which attend this part of my
subject, but although every expression which I am about to make use of
may clash, upon some one point, with the feelings of the different
parties which divide my country, I shall speak my opinion with the most
perfect openness.

In Europe we are at a loss how to judge the true character and the more
permanent propensities of democracy, because in Europe two conflicting
principles exist, and we do not know what to attribute to the
principles themselves, and what to refer to the passions which they
bring into collision. Such, however, is not the case in America; there
the people reigns without any obstacle, and it has no perils to dread
and no injuries to avenge. In America, democracy is swayed by its own
free propensities; its course is natural and its activity is
unrestrained; the United States consequently afford the most favorable
opportunity of studying its real character. And to no people can this
inquiry be more vitally interesting than to the French nation, which is
blindly driven onwards by a daily and irresistible impulse towards a
state of things which may prove either despotic or republican, but
which will assuredly be democratic.

Universal Suffrage

I have already observed that universal suffrage has been adopted in all
the States of the Union; it consequently occurs amongst different
populations which occupy very different positions in the scale of
society. I have had opportunities of observing its effects in different
localities, and amongst races of men who are nearly strangers to each
other by their language, their religion, and their manner of life; in
Louisiana as well as in New England, in Georgia and in Canada. I have
remarked that Universal Suffrage is far from producing in America
either all the good or all the evil consequences which are assigned to
it in Europe, and that its effects differ very widely from those which
are usually attributed to it.

Choice Of The People, And Instinctive Preferences Of The American
Democracy

In the United States the most able men are rarely placed at the head of
affairs—Reason of this peculiarity—The envy which prevails in the lower
orders of France against the higher classes is not a French, but a
purely democratic sentiment—For what reason the most distinguished men
in America frequently seclude themselves from public affairs.

Many people in Europe are apt to believe without saying it, or to say
without believing it, that one of the great advantages of universal
suffrage is, that it entrusts the direction of public affairs to men
who are worthy of the public confidence. They admit that the people is
unable to govern for itself, but they aver that it is always sincerely
disposed to promote the welfare of the State, and that it instinctively
designates those persons who are animated by the same good wishes, and
who are the most fit to wield the supreme authority. I confess that the
observations I made in America by no means coincide with these
opinions. On my arrival in the United States I was surprised to find so
much distinguished talent among the subjects, and so little among the
heads of the Government. It is a well-authenticated fact, that at the
present day the most able men in the United States are very rarely
placed at the head of affairs; and it must be acknowledged that such
has been the result in proportion as democracy has outstepped all its
former limits. The race of American statesmen has evidently dwindled
most remarkably in the course of the last fifty years.

Several causes may be assigned to this phenomenon. It is impossible,
notwithstanding the most strenuous exertions, to raise the intelligence
of the people above a certain level. Whatever may be the facilities of
acquiring information, whatever may be the profusion of easy methods
and of cheap science, the human mind can never be instructed and
educated without devoting a considerable space of time to those
objects.

The greater or the lesser possibility of subsisting without labor is
therefore the necessary boundary of intellectual improvement. This
boundary is more remote in some countries and more restricted in
others; but it must exist somewhere as long as the people is
constrained to work in order to procure the means of physical
subsistence, that is to say, as long as it retains its popular
character. It is therefore quite as difficult to imagine a State in
which all the citizens should be very well informed as a State in which
they should all be wealthy; these two difficulties may be looked upon
as correlative. It may very readily be admitted that the mass of the
citizens are sincerely disposed to promote the welfare of their
country; nay more, it may even be allowed that the lower classes are
less apt to be swayed by considerations of personal interest than the
higher orders: but it is always more or less impossible for them to
discern the best means of attaining the end which they desire with
sincerity. Long and patient observation, joined to a multitude of
different notions, is required to form a just estimate of the character
of a single individual; and can it be supposed that the vulgar have the
power of succeeding in an inquiry which misleads the penetration of
genius itself? The people has neither the time nor the means which are
essential to the prosecution of an investigation of this kind: its
conclusions are hastily formed from a superficial inspection of the
more prominent features of a question. Hence it often assents to the
clamor of a mountebank who knows the secret of stimulating its tastes,
while its truest friends frequently fail in their exertions.

Moreover, the democracy is not only deficient in that soundness of
judgment which is necessary to select men really deserving of its
confidence, but it has neither the desire nor the inclination to find
them out. It cannot be denied that democratic institutions have a very
strong tendency to promote the feeling of envy in the human heart; not
so much because they afford to every one the means of rising to the
level of any of his fellow-citizens, as because those means perpetually
disappoint the persons who employ them. Democratic institutions awaken
and foster a passion for equality which they can never entirely
satisfy. This complete equality eludes the grasp of the people at the
very moment at which it thinks to hold it fast, and “flies,” as Pascal
says, “with eternal flight”; the people is excited in the pursuit of an
advantage, which is more precious because it is not sufficiently remote
to be unknown, or sufficiently near to be enjoyed. The lower orders are
agitated by the chance of success, they are irritated by its
uncertainty; and they pass from the enthusiasm of pursuit to the
exhaustion of ill-success, and lastly to the acrimony of
disappointment. Whatever transcends their own limits appears to be an
obstacle to their desires, and there is no kind of superiority, however
legitimate it may be, which is not irksome in their sight.

It has been supposed that the secret instinct which leads the lower
orders to remove their superiors as much as possible from the direction
of public affairs is peculiar to France. This, however, is an error;
the propensity to which I allude is not inherent in any particular
nation, but in democratic institutions in general; and although it may
have been heightened by peculiar political circumstances, it owes its
origin to a higher cause.

In the United States the people is not disposed to hate the superior
classes of society; but it is not very favorably inclined towards them,
and it carefully excludes them from the exercise of authority. It does
not entertain any dread of distinguished talents, but it is rarely
captivated by them; and it awards its approbation very sparingly to
such as have risen without the popular support.

Whilst the natural propensities of democracy induce the people to
reject the most distinguished citizens as its rulers, these individuals
are no less apt to retire from a political career in which it is almost
impossible to retain their independence, or to advance without
degrading themselves. This opinion has been very candidly set forth by
Chancellor Kent, who says, in speaking with great eulogiums of that
part of the Constitution which empowers the Executive to nominate the
judges: “It is indeed probable that the men who are best fitted to
discharge the duties of this high office would have too much reserve in
their manners, and too much austerity in their principles, for them to
be returned by the majority at an election where universal suffrage is
adopted.” Such were the opinions which were printed without
contradiction in America in the year 1830!

I hold it to be sufficiently demonstrated that universal suffrage is by
no means a guarantee of the wisdom of the popular choice, and that,
whatever its advantages may be, this is not one of them.

Causes Which May Partly Correct These Tendencies Of The Democracy
Contrary effects produced on peoples as well as on individuals by great
dangers—Why so many distinguished men stood at the head of affairs in
America fifty years ago—Influence which the intelligence and the
manners of the people exercise upon its choice—Example of New
England—States of the Southwest—Influence of certain laws upon the
choice of the people—Election by an elected body—Its effects upon the
composition of the Senate.

When a State is threatened by serious dangers, the people frequently
succeeds in selecting the citizens who are the most able to save it. It
has been observed that man rarely retains his customary level in
presence of very critical circumstances; he rises above or he sinks
below his usual condition, and the same thing occurs in nations at
large. Extreme perils sometimes quench the energy of a people instead
of stimulating it; they excite without directing its passions, and
instead of clearing they confuse its powers of perception. The Jews
deluged the smoking ruins of their temple with the carnage of the
remnant of their host. But it is more common, both in the case of
nations and in that of individuals, to find extraordinary virtues
arising from the very imminence of the danger. Great characters are
then thrown into relief, as edifices which are concealed by the gloom
of night are illuminated by the glare of a conflagration. At those
dangerous times genius no longer abstains from presenting itself in the
arena; and the people, alarmed by the perils of its situation, buries
its envious passions in a short oblivion. Great names may then be drawn
from the balloting-box.

I have already observed that the American statesmen of the present day
are very inferior to those who stood at the head of affairs fifty years
ago. This is as much a consequence of the circumstances as of the laws
of the country. When America was struggling in the high cause of
independence to throw off the yoke of another country, and when it was
about to usher a new nation into the world, the spirits of its
inhabitants were roused to the height which their great efforts
required. In this general excitement the most distinguished men were
ready to forestall the wants of the community, and the people clung to
them for support, and placed them at its head. But events of this
magnitude are rare, and it is from an inspection of the ordinary course
of affairs that our judgment must be formed.

If passing occurrences sometimes act as checks upon the passions of
democracy, the intelligence and the manners of the community exercise
an influence which is not less powerful and far more permanent. This is
extremely perceptible in the United States.

In New England the education and the liberties of the communities were
engendered by the moral and religious principles of their founders.
Where society has acquired a sufficient degree of stability to enable
it to hold certain maxims and to retain fixed habits, the lower orders
are accustomed to respect intellectual superiority and to submit to it
without complaint, although they set at naught all those privileges
which wealth and birth have introduced among mankind. The democracy in
New England consequently makes a more judicious choice than it does
elsewhere.

But as we descend towards the South, to those States in which the
constitution of society is more modern and less strong, where
instruction is less general, and where the principles of morality, of
religion, and of liberty are less happily combined, we perceive that
the talents and the virtues of those who are in authority become more
and more rare.

Lastly, when we arrive at the new South-western States, in which the
constitution of society dates but from yesterday, and presents an
agglomeration of adventurers and speculators, we are amazed at the
persons who are invested with public authority, and we are led to ask
by what force, independent of the legislation and of the men who direct
it, the State can be protected, and society be made to flourish.

There are certain laws of a democratic nature which contribute,
nevertheless, to correct, in some measure, the dangerous tendencies of
democracy. On entering the House of Representatives of Washington one
is struck by the vulgar demeanor of that great assembly. The eye
frequently does not discover a man of celebrity within its walls. Its
members are almost all obscure individuals whose names present no
associations to the mind: they are mostly village lawyers, men in
trade, or even persons belonging to the lower classes of society. In a
country in which education is very general, it is said that the
representatives of the people do not always know how to write
correctly.

At a few yards’ distance from this spot is the door of the Senate,
which contains within a small space a large proportion of the
celebrated men of America. Scarcely an individual is to be perceived in
it who does not recall the idea of an active and illustrious career:
the Senate is composed of eloquent advocates, distinguished generals,
wise magistrates, and statesmen of note, whose language would at all
times do honor to the most remarkable parliamentary debates of Europe.

What then is the cause of this strange contrast, and why are the most
able citizens to be found in one assembly rather than in the other? Why
is the former body remarkable for its vulgarity and its poverty of
talent, whilst the latter seems to enjoy a monopoly of intelligence and
of sound judgment? Both of these assemblies emanate from the people;
both of them are chosen by universal suffrage; and no voice has
hitherto been heard to assert in America that the Senate is hostile to
the interests of the people. From what cause, then, does so startling a
difference arise? The only reason which appears to me adequately to
account for it is, that the House of Representatives is elected by the
populace directly, and that the Senate is elected by elected bodies.
The whole body of the citizens names the legislature of each State, and
the Federal Constitution converts these legislatures into so many
electoral bodies, which return the members of the Senate. The senators
are elected by an indirect application of universal suffrage; for the
legislatures which name them are not aristocratic or privileged bodies
which exercise the electoral franchise in their own right; but they are
chosen by the totality of the citizens; they are generally elected
every year, and new members may constantly be chosen who will employ
their electoral rights in conformity with the wishes of the public. But
this transmission of the popular authority through an assembly of
chosen men operates an important change in it, by refining its
discretion and improving the forms which it adopts. Men who are chosen
in this manner accurately represent the majority of the nation which
governs them; but they represent the elevated thoughts which are
current in the community, the propensities which prompt its nobler
actions, rather than the petty passions which disturb or the vices
which disgrace it.

The time may be already anticipated at which the American Republics
will be obliged to introduce the plan of election by an elected body
more frequently into their system of representation, or they will incur
no small risk of perishing miserably amongst the shoals of democracy.

And here I have no scruple in confessing that I look upon this peculiar
system of election as the only means of bringing the exercise of
political power to the level of all classes of the people. Those
thinkers who regard this institution as the exclusive weapon of a
party, and those who fear, on the other hand, to make use of it, seem
to me to fall into as great an error in the one case as in the other.

Influence Which The American Democracy Has Exercised On The Laws
Relating To Elections

When elections are rare, they expose the State to a violent crisis—When
they are frequent, they keep up a degree of feverish excitement—The
Americans have preferred the second of these two evils—Mutability of
the laws—Opinions of Hamilton and Jefferson on this subject.

When elections recur at long intervals the State is exposed to violent
agitation every time they take place. Parties exert themselves to the
utmost in order to gain a prize which is so rarely within their reach;
and as the evil is almost irremediable for the candidates who fail, the
consequences of their disappointed ambition may prove most disastrous;
if, on the other hand, the legal struggle can be repeated within a
short space of time, the defeated parties take patience. When elections
occur frequently, their recurrence keeps society in a perpetual state
of feverish excitement, and imparts a continual instability to public
affairs.

Thus, on the one hand the State is exposed to the perils of a
revolution, on the other to perpetual mutability; the former system
threatens the very existence of the Government, the latter is an
obstacle to all steady and consistent policy. The Americans have
preferred the second of these evils to the first; but they were led to
this conclusion by their instinct much more than by their reason; for a
taste for variety is one of the characteristic passions of democracy.
An extraordinary mutability has, by this means, been introduced into
their legislation. Many of the Americans consider the instability of
their laws as a necessary consequence of a system whose general results
are beneficial. But no one in the United States affects to deny the
fact of this instability, or to contend that it is not a great evil.

Hamilton, after having demonstrated the utility of a power which might
prevent, or which might at least impede, the promulgation of bad laws,
adds: “It might perhaps be said that the power of preventing bad laws
includes that of preventing good ones, and may be used to the one
purpose as well as to the other. But this objection will have little
weight with those who can properly estimate the mischiefs of that
inconstancy and mutability in the laws which form the greatest blemish
in the character and genius of our governments.” (Federalist, No. 73.)
And again in No. 62 of the same work he observes: “The facility and
excess of law-making seem to be the diseases to which our governments
are most liable. . . . The mischievous effects of the mutability in the
public councils arising from a rapid succession of new members would
fill a volume: every new election in the States is found to change
one-half of the representatives. From this change of men must proceed a
change of opinions and of measures, which forfeits the respect and
confidence of other nations, poisons the blessings of liberty itself,
and diminishes the attachment and reverence of the people toward a
political system which betrays so many marks of infirmity.”

Jefferson himself, the greatest Democrat whom the democracy of America
has yet produced, pointed out the same evils. “The instability of our
laws,” said he in a letter to Madison, “is really a very serious
inconvenience. I think that we ought to have obviated it by deciding
that a whole year should always be allowed to elapse between the
bringing in of a bill and the final passing of it. It should afterward
be discussed and put to the vote without the possibility of making any
alteration in it; and if the circumstances of the case required a more
speedy decision, the question should not be decided by a simple
majority, but by a majority of at least two-thirds of both houses.”

Public Officers Under The Control Of The Democracy In America Simple
exterior of the American public officers—No official costume—All public
officers are remunerated—Political consequences of this system—No
public career exists in America—Result of this.

Public officers in the United States are commingled with the crowd of
citizens; they have neither palaces, nor guards, nor ceremonial
costumes. This simple exterior of the persons in authority is connected
not only with the peculiarities of the American character, but with the
fundamental principles of that society. In the estimation of the
democracy a government is not a benefit, but a necessary evil. A
certain degree of power must be granted to public officers, for they
would be of no use without it. But the ostensible semblance of
authority is by no means indispensable to the conduct of affairs, and
it is needlessly offensive to the susceptibility of the public. The
public officers themselves are well aware that they only enjoy the
superiority over their fellow-citizens which they derive from their
authority upon condition of putting themselves on a level with the
whole community by their manners. A public officer in the United States
is uniformly civil, accessible to all the world, attentive to all
requests, and obliging in his replies. I was pleased by these
characteristics of a democratic government; and I was struck by the
manly independence of the citizens, who respect the office more than
the officer, and who are less attached to the emblems of authority than
to the man who bears them.

I am inclined to believe that the influence which costumes really
exercise, in an age like that in which we live, has been a good deal
exaggerated. I never perceived that a public officer in America was the
less respected whilst he was in the discharge of his duties because his
own merit was set off by no adventitious signs. On the other hand, it
is very doubtful whether a peculiar dress contributes to the respect
which public characters ought to have for their own position, at least
when they are not otherwise inclined to respect it. When a magistrate
(and in France such instances are not rare) indulges his trivial wit at
the expense of the prisoner, or derides the predicament in which a
culprit is placed, it would be well to deprive him of his robes of
office, to see whether he would recall some portion of the natural
dignity of mankind when he is reduced to the apparel of a private
citizen.

A democracy may, however, allow a certain show of magisterial pomp, and
clothe its officers in silks and gold, without seriously compromising
its principles. Privileges of this kind are transitory; they belong to
the place, and are distinct from the individual: but if public officers
are not uniformly remunerated by the State, the public charges must be
entrusted to men of opulence and independence, who constitute the basis
of an aristocracy; and if the people still retains its right of
election, that election can only be made from a certain class of
citizens. When a democratic republic renders offices which had formerly
been remunerated gratuitous, it may safely be believed that the State
is advancing to monarchical institutions; and when a monarchy begins to
remunerate such officers as had hitherto been unpaid, it is a sure sign
that it is approaching toward a despotic or a republican form of
government. The substitution of paid for unpaid functionaries is of
itself, in my opinion, sufficient to constitute a serious revolution.

I look upon the entire absence of gratuitous functionaries in America
as one of the most prominent signs of the absolute dominion which
democracy exercises in that country. All public services, of whatsoever
nature they may be, are paid; so that every one has not merely the
right, but also the means of performing them. Although, in democratic
States, all the citizens are qualified to occupy stations in the
Government, all are not tempted to try for them. The number and the
capacities of the candidates are more apt to restrict the choice of
electors than the connections of the candidateship.

In nations in which the principle of election extends to every place in
the State no political career can, properly speaking, be said to exist.
Men are promoted as if by chance to the rank which they enjoy, and they
are by no means sure of retaining it. The consequence is that in
tranquil times public functions offer but few lures to ambition. In the
United States the persons who engage in the perplexities of political
life are individuals of very moderate pretensions. The pursuit of
wealth generally diverts men of great talents and of great passions
from the pursuit of power, and it very frequently happens that a man
does not undertake to direct the fortune of the State until he has
discovered his incompetence to conduct his own affairs. The vast number
of very ordinary men who occupy public stations is quite as
attributable to these causes as to the bad choice of the democracy. In
the United States, I am not sure that the people would return the men
of superior abilities who might solicit its support, but it is certain
that men of this description do not come forward.

Arbitrary Power Of Magistrates Under The Rule Of The American Democracy

For what reason the arbitrary power of Magistrates is greater in
absolute monarchies and in democratic republics than it is in limited
monarchies—Arbitrary power of the Magistrates in New England.

In two different kinds of government the magistrates *a exercise a
considerable degree of arbitrary power; namely, under the absolute
government of a single individual, and under that of a democracy. This
identical result proceeds from causes which are nearly analogous.

a
[ I here use the word magistrates in the widest sense in which it can
be taken; I apply it to all the officers to whom the execution of the
laws is intrusted.]


In despotic States the fortune of no citizen is secure; and public
officers are not more safe than private individuals. The sovereign, who
has under his control the lives, the property, and sometimes the honor
of the men whom he employs, does not scruple to allow them a great
latitude of action, because he is convinced that they will not use it
to his prejudice. In despotic States the sovereign is so attached to
the exercise of his power, that he dislikes the constraint even of his
own regulations; and he is well pleased that his agents should follow a
somewhat fortuitous line of conduct, provided he be certain that their
actions will never counteract his desires.

In democracies, as the majority has every year the right of depriving
the officers whom it has appointed of their power, it has no reason to
fear any abuse of their authority. As the people is always able to
signify its wishes to those who conduct the Government, it prefers
leaving them to make their own exertions to prescribing an invariable
rule of conduct which would at once fetter their activity and the
popular authority.

It may even be observed, on attentive consideration, that under the
rule of a democracy the arbitrary power of the magistrate must be still
greater than in despotic States. In the latter the sovereign has the
power of punishing all the faults with which he becomes acquainted, but
it would be vain for him to hope to become acquainted with all those
which are committed. In the former the sovereign power is not only
supreme, but it is universally present. The American functionaries are,
in point of fact, much more independent in the sphere of action which
the law traces out for them than any public officer in Europe. Very
frequently the object which they are to accomplish is simply pointed
out to them, and the choice of the means is left to their own
discretion.

In New England, for instance, the selectmen of each township are bound
to draw up the list of persons who are to serve on the jury; the only
rule which is laid down to guide them in their choice is that they are
to select citizens possessing the elective franchise and enjoying a
fair reputation. *b In France the lives and liberties of the subjects
would be thought to be in danger if a public officer of any kind was
entrusted with so formidable a right. In New England the same
magistrates are empowered to post the names of habitual drunkards in
public-houses, and to prohibit the inhabitants of a town from supplying
them with liquor. *c A censorial power of this excessive kind would be
revolting to the population of the most absolute monarchies; here,
however, it is submitted to without difficulty.

b
[ See the Act of February 27, 1813. “General Collection of the Laws of
Massachusetts,” vol. ii. p. 331. It should be added that the jurors are
afterwards drawn from these lists by lot.]


c
[ See Act of February 28, 1787. “General Collection of the Laws of
Massachusetts,” vol. i. p. 302.]


Nowhere has so much been left by the law to the arbitrary determination
of the magistrate as in democratic republics, because this arbitrary
power is unattended by any alarming consequences. It may even be
asserted that the freedom of the magistrate increases as the elective
franchise is extended, and as the duration of the time of office is
shortened. Hence arises the great difficulty which attends the
conversion of a democratic republic into a monarchy. The magistrate
ceases to be elective, but he retains the rights and the habits of an
elected officer, which lead directly to despotism.

It is only in limited monarchies that the law, which prescribes the
sphere in which public officers are to act, superintends all their
measures. The cause of this may be easily detected. In limited
monarchies the power is divided between the King and the people, both
of whom are interested in the stability of the magistrate. The King
does not venture to place the public officers under the control of the
people, lest they should be tempted to betray his interests; on the
other hand, the people fears lest the magistrates should serve to
oppress the liberties of the country, if they were entirely dependent
upon the Crown; they cannot therefore be said to depend on either one
or the other. The same cause which induces the king and the people to
render public officers independent suggests the necessity of such
securities as may prevent their independence from encroaching upon the
authority of the former and the liberties of the latter. They
consequently agree as to the necessity of restricting the functionary
to a line of conduct laid down beforehand, and they are interested in
confining him by certain regulations which he cannot evade.




 Chapter XIII: Government Of The Democracy In America—Part II

Instability Of The Administration In The United States

In America the public acts of a community frequently leave fewer traces
than the occurrences of a family—Newspapers the only historical
remains—Instability of the administration prejudicial to the art of
government.

The authority which public men possess in America is so brief, and they
are so soon commingled with the ever-changing population of the
country, that the acts of a community frequently leave fewer traces
than the occurrences of a private family. The public administration is,
so to speak, oral and traditionary. But little is committed to writing,
and that little is wafted away forever, like the leaves of the Sibyl,
by the smallest breeze.

The only historical remains in the United States are the newspapers;
but if a number be wanting, the chain of time is broken, and the
present is severed from the past. I am convinced that in fifty years it
will be more difficult to collect authentic documents concerning the
social condition of the Americans at the present day than it is to find
remains of the administration of France during the Middle Ages; and if
the United States were ever invaded by barbarians, it would be
necessary to have recourse to the history of other nations in order to
learn anything of the people which now inhabits them.

The instability of the administration has penetrated into the habits of
the people: it even appears to suit the general taste, and no one cares
for what occurred before his time. No methodical system is pursued; no
archives are formed; and no documents are brought together when it
would be very easy to do so. Where they exist, little store is set upon
them; and I have amongst my papers several original public documents
which were given to me in answer to some of my inquiries. In America
society seems to live from hand to mouth, like an army in the field.
Nevertheless, the art of administration may undoubtedly be ranked as a
science, and no sciences can be improved if the discoveries and
observations of successive generations are not connected together in
the order in which they occur. One man, in the short space of his life
remarks a fact; another conceives an idea; the former invents a means
of execution, the latter reduces a truth to a fixed proposition; and
mankind gathers the fruits of individual experience upon its way and
gradually forms the sciences. But the persons who conduct the
administration in America can seldom afford any instruction to each
other; and when they assume the direction of society, they simply
possess those attainments which are most widely disseminated in the
community, and no experience peculiar to themselves. Democracy, carried
to its furthest limits, is therefore prejudicial to the art of
government; and for this reason it is better adapted to a people
already versed in the conduct of an administration than to a nation
which is uninitiated in public affairs.

This remark, indeed, is not exclusively applicable to the science of
administration. Although a democratic government is founded upon a very
simple and natural principle, it always presupposes the existence of a
high degree of culture and enlightenment in society. *d At the first
glance it may be imagined to belong to the earliest ages of the world;
but maturer observation will convince us that it could only come last
in the succession of human history.

d
[ It is needless to observe that I speak here of the democratic form of
government as applied to a people, not merely to a tribe.]


Charges Levied By The State Under The Rule Of The American Democracy

In all communities citizens divisible into three classes—Habits of each
of these classes in the direction of public finances—Why public
expenditure must tend to increase when the people governs—What renders
the extravagance of a democracy less to be feared in America—Public
expenditure under a democracy.

Before we can affirm whether a democratic form of government is
economical or not, we must establish a suitable standard of comparison.
The question would be one of easy solution if we were to attempt to
draw a parallel between a democratic republic and an absolute monarchy.
The public expenditure would be found to be more considerable under the
former than under the latter; such is the case with all free States
compared to those which are not so. It is certain that despotism ruins
individuals by preventing them from producing wealth, much more than by
depriving them of the wealth they have produced; it dries up the source
of riches, whilst it usually respects acquired property. Freedom, on
the contrary, engenders far more benefits than it destroys; and the
nations which are favored by free institutions invariably find that
their resources increase even more rapidly than their taxes.

My present object is to compare free nations to each other, and to
point out the influence of democracy upon the finances of a State.

Communities, as well as organic bodies, are subject to certain fixed
rules in their formation which they cannot evade. They are composed of
certain elements which are common to them at all times and under all
circumstances. The people may always be mentally divided into three
distinct classes. The first of these classes consists of the wealthy;
the second, of those who are in easy circumstances; and the third is
composed of those who have little or no property, and who subsist more
especially by the work which they perform for the two superior orders.
The proportion of the individuals who are included in these three
divisions may vary according to the condition of society, but the
divisions themselves can never be obliterated.

It is evident that each of these classes will exercise an influence
peculiar to its own propensities upon the administration of the
finances of the State. If the first of the three exclusively possesses
the legislative power, it is probable that it will not be sparing of
the public funds, because the taxes which are levied on a large fortune
only tend to diminish the sum of superfluous enjoyment, and are, in
point of fact, but little felt. If the second class has the power of
making the laws, it will certainly not be lavish of taxes, because
nothing is so onerous as a large impost which is levied upon a small
income. The government of the middle classes appears to me to be the
most economical, though perhaps not the most enlightened, and certainly
not the most generous, of free governments.

But let us now suppose that the legislative authority is vested in the
lowest orders: there are two striking reasons which show that the
tendency of the expenditure will be to increase, not to diminish. As
the great majority of those who create the laws are possessed of no
property upon which taxes can be imposed, all the money which is spent
for the community appears to be spent to their advantage, at no cost of
their own; and those who are possessed of some little property readily
find means of regulating the taxes so that they are burdensome to the
wealthy and profitable to the poor, although the rich are unable to
take the same advantage when they are in possession of the Government.

In countries in which the poor *e should be exclusively invested with
the power of making the laws no great economy of public expenditure
ought to be expected: that expenditure will always be considerable;
either because the taxes do not weigh upon those who levy them, or
because they are levied in such a manner as not to weigh upon those
classes. In other words, the government of the democracy is the only
one under which the power which lays on taxes escapes the payment of
them.

e
[ The word poor is used here, and throughout the remainder of this
chapter, in a relative, not in an absolute sense. Poor men in America
would often appear rich in comparison with the poor of Europe; but they
may with propriety by styled poor in comparison with their more
affluent countrymen.]


It may be objected (but the argument has no real weight) that the true
interest of the people is indissolubly connected with that of the
wealthier portion of the community, since it cannot but suffer by the
severe measures to which it resorts. But is it not the true interest of
kings to render their subjects happy, and the true interest of nobles
to admit recruits into their order on suitable grounds? If remote
advantages had power to prevail over the passions and the exigencies of
the moment, no such thing as a tyrannical sovereign or an exclusive
aristocracy could ever exist.

Again, it may be objected that the poor are never invested with the
sole power of making the laws; but I reply, that wherever universal
suffrage has been established the majority of the community
unquestionably exercises the legislative authority; and if it be proved
that the poor always constitute the majority, it may be added, with
perfect truth, that in the countries in which they possess the elective
franchise they possess the sole power of making laws. But it is certain
that in all the nations of the world the greater number has always
consisted of those persons who hold no property, or of those whose
property is insufficient to exempt them from the necessity of working
in order to procure an easy subsistence. Universal suffrage does
therefore, in point of fact, invest the poor with the government of
society.

The disastrous influence which popular authority may sometimes exercise
upon the finances of a State was very clearly seen in some of the
democratic republics of antiquity, in which the public treasure was
exhausted in order to relieve indigent citizens, or to supply the games
and theatrical amusements of the populace. It is true that the
representative system was then very imperfectly known, and that, at the
present time, the influence of popular passion is less felt in the
conduct of public affairs; but it may be believed that the delegate
will in the end conform to the principles of his constituents, and
favor their propensities as much as their interests.

The extravagance of democracy is, however, less to be dreaded in
proportion as the people acquires a share of property, because on the
one hand the contributions of the rich are then less needed, and, on
the other, it is more difficult to lay on taxes which do not affect the
interests of the lower classes. On this account universal suffrage
would be less dangerous in France than in England, because in the
latter country the property on which taxes may be levied is vested in
fewer hands. America, where the great majority of the citizens possess
some fortune, is in a still more favorable position than France.

There are still further causes which may increase the sum of public
expenditure in democratic countries. When the aristocracy governs, the
individuals who conduct the affairs of State are exempted by their own
station in society from every kind of privation; they are contented
with their position; power and renown are the objects for which they
strive; and, as they are placed far above the obscurer throng of
citizens, they do not always distinctly perceive how the well-being of
the mass of the people ought to redound to their own honor. They are
not indeed callous to the sufferings of the poor, but they cannot feel
those miseries as acutely as if they were themselves partakers of them.
Provided that the people appear to submit to its lot, the rulers are
satisfied, and they demand nothing further from the Government. An
aristocracy is more intent upon the means of maintaining its influence
than upon the means of improving its condition.

When, on the contrary, the people is invested with the supreme
authority, the perpetual sense of their own miseries impels the rulers
of society to seek for perpetual ameliorations. A thousand different
objects are subjected to improvement; the most trivial details are
sought out as susceptible of amendment; and those changes which are
accompanied with considerable expense are more especially advocated,
since the object is to render the condition of the poor more tolerable,
who cannot pay for themselves.

Moreover, all democratic communities are agitated by an ill-defined
excitement and by a kind of feverish impatience, that engender a
multitude of innovations, almost all of which are attended with
expense.

In monarchies and aristocracies the natural taste which the rulers have
for power and for renown is stimulated by the promptings of ambition,
and they are frequently incited by these temptations to very costly
undertakings. In democracies, where the rulers labor under privations,
they can only be courted by such means as improve their well-being, and
these improvements cannot take place without a sacrifice of money. When
a people begins to reflect upon its situation, it discovers a multitude
of wants to which it had not before been subject, and to satisfy these
exigencies recourse must be had to the coffers of the State. Hence it
arises that the public charges increase in proportion as civilization
spreads, and that imposts are augmented as knowledge pervades the
community.

The last cause which frequently renders a democratic government dearer
than any other is, that a democracy does not always succeed in
moderating its expenditure, because it does not understand the art of
being economical. As the designs which it entertains are frequently
changed, and the agents of those designs are still more frequently
removed, its undertakings are often ill conducted or left unfinished:
in the former case the State spends sums out of all proportion to the
end which it proposes to accomplish; in the second, the expense itself
is unprofitable. *f

f
[ The gross receipts of the Treasury of the United States in 1832 were
about $28,000,000; in 1870 they had risen to $411,000,000. The gross
expenditure in 1832 was $30,000,000; in 1870, $309,000,000.]


Tendencies Of The American Democracy As Regards The Salaries Of Public
Officers

In the democracies those who establish high salaries have no chance of
profiting by them—Tendency of the American democracy to increase the
salaries of subordinate officers and to lower those of the more
important functionaries—Reason of this—Comparative statement of the
salaries of public officers in the United States and in France.

There is a powerful reason which usually induces democracies to
economize upon the salaries of public officers. As the number of
citizens who dispense the remuneration is extremely large in democratic
countries, so the number of persons who can hope to be benefited by the
receipt of it is comparatively small. In aristocratic countries, on the
contrary, the individuals who fix high salaries have almost always a
vague hope of profiting by them. These appointments may be looked upon
as a capital which they create for their own use, or at least as a
resource for their children.

It must, however, be allowed that a democratic State is most
parsimonious towards its principal agents. In America the secondary
officers are much better paid, and the dignitaries of the
administration much worse, than they are elsewhere.

These opposite effects result from the same cause; the people fixes the
salaries of the public officers in both cases; and the scale of
remuneration is determined by the consideration of its own wants. It is
held to be fair that the servants of the public should be placed in the
same easy circumstances as the public itself; *g but when the question
turns upon the salaries of the great officers of State, this rule
fails, and chance alone can guide the popular decision. The poor have
no adequate conception of the wants which the higher classes of society
may feel. The sum which is scanty to the rich appears enormous to the
poor man whose wants do not extend beyond the necessaries of life; and
in his estimation the Governor of a State, with his twelve or fifteen
hundred dollars a year, is a very fortunate and enviable being. *h If
you undertake to convince him that the representative of a great people
ought to be able to maintain some show of splendor in the eyes of
foreign nations, he will perhaps assent to your meaning; but when he
reflects on his own humble dwelling, and on the hard-earned produce of
his wearisome toil, he remembers all that he could do with a salary
which you say is insufficient, and he is startled or almost frightened
at the sight of such uncommon wealth. Besides, the secondary public
officer is almost on a level with the people, whilst the others are
raised above it. The former may therefore excite his interest, but the
latter begins to arouse his envy.

g
[ The easy circumstances in which secondary functionaries are placed in
the United States result also from another cause, which is independent
of the general tendencies of democracy; every kind of private business
is very lucrative, and the State would not be served at all if it did
not pay its servants. The country is in the position of a commercial
undertaking, which is obliged to sustain an expensive competition,
notwithstanding its tastes for economy.]


h
[ The State of Ohio, which contains a million of inhabitants, gives its
Governor a salary of only $1,200 a year.]


This is very clearly seen in the United States, where the salaries seem
to decrease as the authority of those who receive them augments *i

i
[ To render this assertion perfectly evident, it will suffice to
examine the scale of salaries of the agents of the Federal Government.
I have added the salaries attached to the corresponding officers in
France under the constitutional monarchy to complete the comparison.

     United States
     Treasury Department
     Messenger ............................   $700
     Clerk with lowest salary .............  1,000
     Clerk with highest salary ............  1,600
     Chief Clerk ..........................  2,000
     Secretary of State ...................  6,000
     The President ........................ 25,000

     France
     Ministere des Finances
     Hussier ........................... 1,500 fr.
     Clerk with lowest salary,  1,000 to 1,800 fr.
     Clerk with highest salary  3,200 to 8,600 fr.
     Secretaire-general ................20,000 fr.
     The Minister ......................80,000 fr.
     The King ......................12,000,000 fr.

I have perhaps done wrong in selecting France as my standard of
comparison. In France the democratic tendencies of the nation exercise
an ever-increasing influence upon the Government, and the Chambers show
a disposition to raise the low salaries and to lower the principal
ones. Thus, the Minister of Finance, who received 160,000 fr. under the
Empire, receives 80,000 fr. in 1835: the Directeurs-generaux of
Finance, who then received 50,000 fr. now receive only 20,000 fr. [This
comparison is based on the state of things existing in France and the
United States in 1831. It has since materially altered in both
countries, but not so much as to impugn the truth of the author’s
observation.]]

Under the rule of an aristocracy it frequently happens, on the
contrary, that whilst the high officers are receiving munificent
salaries, the inferior ones have not more than enough to procure the
necessaries of life. The reason of this fact is easily discoverable
from causes very analogous to those to which I have just alluded. If a
democracy is unable to conceive the pleasures of the rich or to witness
them without envy, an aristocracy is slow to understand, or, to speak
more correctly, is unacquainted with, the privations of the poor. The
poor man is not (if we use the term aright) the fellow of the rich one;
but he is a being of another species. An aristocracy is therefore apt
to care but little for the fate of its subordinate agents; and their
salaries are only raised when they refuse to perform their service for
too scanty a remuneration.

It is the parsimonious conduct of democracy towards its principal
officers which has countenanced a supposition of far more economical
propensities than any which it really possesses. It is true that it
scarcely allows the means of honorable subsistence to the individuals
who conduct its affairs; but enormous sums are lavished to meet the
exigencies or to facilitate the enjoyments of the people. *j The money
raised by taxation may be better employed, but it is not saved. In
general, democracy gives largely to the community, and very sparingly
to those who govern it. The reverse is the case in aristocratic
countries, where the money of the State is expended to the profit of
the persons who are at the head of affairs.

j
[ See the American budgets for the cost of indigent citizens and
gratuitous instruction. In 1831 $250,000 were spent in the State of New
York for the maintenance of the poor, and at least $1,000,000 were
devoted to gratuitous instruction. (William’s “New York Annual
Register,” 1832, pp. 205 and 243.) The State of New York contained only
1,900,000 inhabitants in the year 1830, which is not more than double
the amount of population in the Department du Nord in France.]


Difficulty of Distinguishing The Causes Which Contribute To The Economy
Of The American Government

We are liable to frequent errors in the research of those facts which
exercise a serious influence upon the fate of mankind, since nothing is
more difficult than to appreciate their real value. One people is
naturally inconsistent and enthusiastic; another is sober and
calculating; and these characteristics originate in their physical
constitution or in remote causes with which we are unacquainted.

These are nations which are fond of parade and the bustle of festivity,
and which do not regret the costly gaieties of an hour. Others, on the
contrary, are attached to more retiring pleasures, and seem almost
ashamed of appearing to be pleased. In some countries the highest value
is set upon the beauty of public edifices; in others the productions of
art are treated with indifference, and everything which is unproductive
is looked down upon with contempt. In some renown, in others money, is
the ruling passion.

Independently of the laws, all these causes concur to exercise a very
powerful influence upon the conduct of the finances of the State. If
the Americans never spend the money of the people in galas, it is not
only because the imposition of taxes is under the control of the
people, but because the people takes no delight in public rejoicings.
If they repudiate all ornament from their architecture, and set no
store on any but the more practical and homely advantages, it is not
only because they live under democratic institutions, but because they
are a commercial nation. The habits of private life are continued in
public; and we ought carefully to distinguish that economy which
depends upon their institutions from that which is the natural result
of their manners and customs.

Whether The Expenditure Of The United States Can Be Compared To That Of
France

Two points to be established in order to estimate the extent of the
public charges, viz., the national wealth and the rate of taxation—The
wealth and the charges of France not accurately known—Why the wealth
and charges of the Union cannot be accurately known—Researches of the
author with a view to discover the amount of taxation of
Pennsylvania—General symptoms which may serve to indicate the amount of
the public charges in a given nation—Result of this investigation for
the Union.

Many attempts have recently been made in France to compare the public
expenditure of that country with the expenditure of the United States;
all these attempts have, however, been unattended by success, and a few
words will suffice to show that they could not have had a satisfactory
result.

In order to estimate the amount of the public charges of a people two
preliminaries are indispensable: it is necessary, in the first place,
to know the wealth of that people; and in the second, to learn what
portion of that wealth is devoted to the expenditure of the State. To
show the amount of taxation without showing the resources which are
destined to meet the demand, is to undertake a futile labor; for it is
not the expenditure, but the relation of the expenditure to the
revenue, which it is desirable to know.

The same rate of taxation which may easily be supported by a wealthy
contributor will reduce a poor one to extreme misery. The wealth of
nations is composed of several distinct elements, of which population
is the first, real property the second, and personal property the
third. The first of these three elements may be discovered without
difficulty. Amongst civilized nations it is easy to obtain an accurate
census of the inhabitants; but the two others cannot be determined with
so much facility. It is difficult to take an exact account of all the
lands in a country which are under cultivation, with their natural or
their acquired value; and it is still more impossible to estimate the
entire personal property which is at the disposal of a nation, and
which eludes the strictest analysis by the diversity and the number of
shapes under which it may occur. And, indeed, we find that the most
ancient civilized nations of Europe, including even those in which the
administration is most central, have not succeeded, as yet, in
determining the exact condition of their wealth.

In America the attempt has never been made; for how would such an
investigation be possible in a country where society has not yet
settled into habits of regularity and tranquillity; where the national
Government is not assisted by a multiple of agents whose exertions it
can command and direct to one sole end; and where statistics are not
studied, because no one is able to collect the necessary documents, or
to find time to peruse them? Thus the primary elements of the
calculations which have been made in France cannot be obtained in the
Union; the relative wealth of the two countries is unknown; the
property of the former is not accurately determined, and no means exist
of computing that of the latter.

I consent, therefore, for the sake of the discussion, to abandon this
necessary term of the comparison, and I confine myself to a computation
of the actual amount of taxation, without investigating the relation
which subsists between the taxation and the revenue. But the reader
will perceive that my task has not been facilitated by the limits which
I here lay down for my researches.

It cannot be doubted that the central administration of France,
assisted by all the public officers who are at its disposal, might
determine with exactitude the amount of the direct and indirect taxes
levied upon the citizens. But this investigation, which no private
individual can undertake, has not hitherto been completed by the French
Government, or, at least, its results have not been made public. We are
acquainted with the sum total of the charges of the State; we know the
amount of the departmental expenditure; but the expenses of the
communal divisions have not been computed, and the amount of the public
expenses of France is consequently unknown.

If we now turn to America, we shall perceive that the difficulties are
multiplied and enhanced. The Union publishes an exact return of the
amount of its expenditure; the budgets of the four and twenty States
furnish similar returns of their revenues; but the expenses incident to
the affairs of the counties and the townships are unknown. *k

k
[ The Americans, as we have seen, have four separate budgets, the
Union, the States, the Counties, and the Townships having each
severally their own. During my stay in America I made every endeavor to
discover the amount of the public expenditure in the townships and
counties of the principal States of the Union, and I readily obtained
the budget of the larger townships, but I found it quite impossible to
procure that of the smaller ones. I possess, however, some documents
relating to county expenses, which, although incomplete, are still
curious. I have to thank Mr. Richards, Mayor of Philadelphia, for the
budgets of thirteen of the counties of Pennsylvania, viz., Lebanon,
Centre, Franklin, Fayette, Montgomery, Luzerne, Dauphin, Butler,
Alleghany, Columbia, Northampton, Northumberland, and Philadelphia, for
the year 1830. Their population at that time consisted of 495,207
inhabitants. On looking at the map of Pennsylvania, it will be seen
that these thirteen counties are scattered in every direction, and so
generally affected by the causes which usually influence the condition
of a country, that they may easily be supposed to furnish a correct
average of the financial state of the counties of Pennsylvania in
general; and thus, upon reckoning that the expenses of these counties
amounted in the year 1830 to about $361,650, or nearly 75 cents for
each inhabitant, and calculating that each of them contributed in the
same year about $2.55 towards the Union, and about 75 cents to the
State of Pennsylvania, it appears that they each contributed as their
share of all the public expenses (except those of the townships) the
sum of $4.05. This calculation is doubly incomplete, as it applies only
to a single year and to one part of the public charges; but it has at
least the merit of not being conjectural.]


The authority of the Federal government cannot oblige the provincial
governments to throw any light upon this point; and even if these
governments were inclined to afford their simultaneous co-operation, it
may be doubted whether they possess the means of procuring a
satisfactory answer. Independently of the natural difficulties of the
task, the political organization of the country would act as a
hindrance to the success of their efforts. The county and town
magistrates are not appointed by the authorities of the State, and they
are not subjected to their control. It is therefore very allowable to
suppose that, if the State was desirous of obtaining the returns which
we require, its design would be counteracted by the neglect of those
subordinate officers whom it would be obliged to employ. *l It is, in
point of fact, useless to inquire what the Americans might do to
forward this inquiry, since it is certain that they have hitherto done
nothing at all. There does not exist a single individual at the present
day, in America or in Europe, who can inform us what each citizen of
the Union annually contributes to the public charges of the nation. *m
[Footnote l: Those who have attempted to draw a comparison between the
expenses of France and America have at once perceived that no such
comparison could be drawn between the total expenditure of the two
countries; but they have endeavored to contrast detached portions of
this expenditure. It may readily be shown that this second system is
not at all less defective than the first. If I attempt to compare the
French budget with the budget of the Union, it must be remembered that
the latter embraces much fewer objects than then central Government of
the former country, and that the expenditure must consequently be much
smaller. If I contrast the budgets of the Departments with those of the
States which constitute the Union, it must be observed that, as the
power and control exercised by the States is much greater than that
which is exercised by the Departments, their expenditure is also more
considerable. As for the budgets of the counties, nothing of the kind
occurs in the French system of finances; and it is, again, doubtful
whether the corresponding expenses should be referred to the budget of
the State or to those of the municipal divisions. Municipal expenses
exist in both countries, but they are not always analogous. In America
the townships discharge a variety of offices which are reserved in
France to the Departments or to the State. It may, moreover, be asked
what is to be understood by the municipal expenses of America. The
organization of the municipal bodies or townships differs in the
several States. Are we to be guided by what occurs in New England or in
Georgia, in Pennsylvania or in the State of Illinois? A kind of analogy
may very readily be perceived between certain budgets in the two
countries; but as the elements of which they are composed always differ
more or less, no fair comparison can be instituted between them. [The
same difficulty exists, perhaps to a greater degree at the present
time, when the taxation of America has largely increased.—1874.]]

m
[ Even if we knew the exact pecuniary contributions of every French and
American citizen to the coffers of the State, we should only come at a
portion of the truth. Governments do not only demand supplies of money,
but they call for personal services, which may be looked upon as
equivalent to a given sum. When a State raises an army, besides the pay
of the troops, which is furnished by the entire nation, each soldier
must give up his time, the value of which depends on the use he might
make of it if he were not in the service. The same remark applies to
the militia; the citizen who is in the militia devotes a certain
portion of valuable time to the maintenance of the public peace, and he
does in reality surrender to the State those earnings which he is
prevented from gaining. Many other instances might be cited in addition
to these. The governments of France and of America both levy taxes of
this kind, which weigh upon the citizens; but who can estimate with
accuracy their relative amount in the two countries?


This, however, is not the last of the difficulties which prevent us
from comparing the expenditure of the Union with that of France. The
French Government contracts certain obligations which do not exist in
America, and vice versa. The French Government pays the clergy; in
America the voluntary principle prevails. In America there is a legal
provision for the poor; in France they are abandoned to the charity of
the public. The French public officers are paid by a fixed salary; in
America they are allowed certain perquisites. In France contributions
in kind take place on very few roads; in America upon almost all the
thoroughfares: in the former country the roads are free to all
travellers; in the latter turnpikes abound. All these differences in
the manner in which contributions are levied in the two countries
enhance the difficulty of comparing their expenditure; for there are
certain expenses which the citizens would not be subject to, or which
would at any rate be much less considerable, if the State did not take
upon itself to act in the name of the public.]

Hence we must conclude that it is no less difficult to compare the
social expenditure than it is to estimate the relative wealth of France
and America. I will even add that it would be dangerous to attempt this
comparison; for when statistics are not based upon computations which
are strictly accurate, they mislead instead of guiding aright. The mind
is easily imposed upon by the false affectation of exactness, which
prevails even in the misstatements of science, and it adopts with
confidence errors which are dressed in the forms of mathematical truth.

We abandon, therefore, our numerical investigation, with the hope of
meeting with data of another kind. In the absence of positive
documents, we may form an opinion as to the proportion which the
taxation of a people bears to its real prosperity, by observing whether
its external appearance is flourishing; whether, after having
discharged the calls of the State, the poor man retains the means of
subsistence, and the rich the means of enjoyment; and whether both
classes are contented with their position, seeking, however, to
ameliorate it by perpetual exertions, so that industry is never in want
of capital, nor capital unemployed by industry. The observer who draws
his inferences from these signs will, undoubtedly, be led to the
conclusion that the American of the United States contributes a much
smaller portion of his income to the State than the citizen of France.
Nor, indeed, can the result be otherwise.

A portion of the French debt is the consequence of two successive
invasions; and the Union has no similar calamity to fear. A nation
placed upon the continent of Europe is obliged to maintain a large
standing army; the isolated position of the Union enables it to have
only 6,000 soldiers. The French have a fleet of 300 sail; the Americans
have 52 vessels. *n How, then, can the inhabitants of the Union be
called upon to contribute as largely as the inhabitants of France? No
parallel can be drawn between the finances of two countries so
differently situated.

n
[ See the details in the Budget of the French Minister of Marine; and
for America, the National Calendar of 1833, p. 228. [But the public
debt of the United States in 1870, caused by the Civil War, amounted to
$2,480,672,427; that of France was more than doubled by the
extravagance of the Second Empire and by the war of 1870.]]


It is by examining what actually takes place in the Union, and not by
comparing the Union with France, that we may discover whether the
American Government is really economical. On casting my eyes over the
different republics which form the confederation, I perceive that their
Governments lack perseverance in their undertakings, and that they
exercise no steady control over the men whom they employ. Whence I
naturally infer that they must often spend the money of the people to
no purpose, or consume more of it than is really necessary to their
undertakings. Great efforts are made, in accordance with the democratic
origin of society, to satisfy the exigencies of the lower orders, to
open the career of power to their endeavors, and to diffuse knowledge
and comfort amongst them. The poor are maintained, immense sums are
annually devoted to public instruction, all services whatsoever are
remunerated, and the most subordinate agents are liberally paid. If
this kind of government appears to me to be useful and rational, I am
nevertheless constrained to admit that it is expensive.

Wherever the poor direct public affairs and dispose of the national
resources, it appears certain that, as they profit by the expenditure
of the State, they are apt to augment that expenditure.

I conclude, therefore, without having recourse to inaccurate
computations, and without hazarding a comparison which might prove
incorrect, that the democratic government of the Americans is not a
cheap government, as is sometimes asserted; and I have no hesitation in
predicting that, if the people of the United States is ever involved in
serious difficulties, its taxation will speedily be increased to the
rate of that which prevails in the greater part of the aristocracies
and the monarchies of Europe. *o

o
[ [That is precisely what has since occurred.]]




 Chapter XIII: Government Of The Democracy In America—Part III


Corruption And Vices Of The Rulers In A Democracy, And Consequent
Effects Upon Public Morality

In aristocracies rulers sometimes endeavor to corrupt the people—In
democracies rulers frequently show themselves to be corrupt—In the
former their vices are directly prejudicial to the morality of the
people—In the latter their indirect influence is still more pernicious.

A distinction must be made, when the aristocratic and the democratic
principles mutually inveigh against each other, as tending to
facilitate corruption. In aristocratic governments the individuals who
are placed at the head of affairs are rich men, who are solely desirous
of power. In democracies statesmen are poor, and they have their
fortunes to make. The consequence is that in aristocratic States the
rulers are rarely accessible to corruption, and have very little
craving for money; whilst the reverse is the case in democratic
nations.

But in aristocracies, as those who are desirous of arriving at the head
of affairs are possessed of considerable wealth, and as the number of
persons by whose assistance they may rise is comparatively small, the
government is, if I may use the expression, put up to a sort of
auction. In democracies, on the contrary, those who are covetous of
power are very seldom wealthy, and the number of citizens who confer
that power is extremely great. Perhaps in democracies the number of men
who might be bought is by no means smaller, but buyers are rarely to be
met with; and, besides, it would be necessary to buy so many persons at
once that the attempt is rendered nugatory.

Many of the men who have been in the administration in France during
the last forty years have been accused of making their fortunes at the
expense of the State or of its allies; a reproach which was rarely
addressed to the public characters of the ancient monarchy. But in
France the practice of bribing electors is almost unknown, whilst it is
notoriously and publicly carried on in England. In the United States I
never heard a man accused of spending his wealth in corrupting the
populace; but I have often heard the probity of public officers
questioned; still more frequently have I heard their success attributed
to low intrigues and immoral practices.

If, then, the men who conduct the government of an aristocracy
sometimes endeavor to corrupt the people, the heads of a democracy are
themselves corrupt. In the former case the morality of the people is
directly assailed; in the latter an indirect influence is exercised
upon the people which is still more to be dreaded.

As the rulers of democratic nations are almost always exposed to the
suspicion of dishonorable conduct, they in some measure lend the
authority of the Government to the base practices of which they are
accused. They thus afford an example which must prove discouraging to
the struggles of virtuous independence, and must foster the secret
calculations of a vicious ambition. If it be asserted that evil
passions are displayed in all ranks of society, that they ascend the
throne by hereditary right, and that despicable characters are to be
met with at the head of aristocratic nations as well as in the sphere
of a democracy, this objection has but little weight in my estimation.
The corruption of men who have casually risen to power has a coarse and
vulgar infection in it which renders it contagious to the multitude. On
the contrary, there is a kind of aristocratic refinement and an air of
grandeur in the depravity of the great, which frequently prevent it
from spreading abroad.

The people can never penetrate into the perplexing labyrinth of court
intrigue, and it will always have difficulty in detecting the turpitude
which lurks under elegant manners, refined tastes, and graceful
language. But to pillage the public purse, and to vend the favors of
the State, are arts which the meanest villain may comprehend, and hope
to practice in his turn.

In reality it is far less prejudicial to witness the immorality of the
great than to witness that immorality which leads to greatness. In a
democracy private citizens see a man of their own rank in life, who
rises from that obscure position, and who becomes possessed of riches
and of power in a few years; the spectacle excites their surprise and
their envy, and they are led to inquire how the person who was
yesterday their equal is to-day their ruler. To attribute his rise to
his talents or his virtues is unpleasant; for it is tacitly to
acknowledge that they are themselves less virtuous and less talented
than he was. They are therefore led (and not unfrequently their
conjecture is a correct one) to impute his success mainly to some one
of his defects; and an odious mixture is thus formed of the ideas of
turpitude and power, unworthiness and success, utility and dishonor.

Efforts Of Which A Democracy Is Capable

The Union has only had one struggle hitherto for its
existence—Enthusiasm at the commencement of the war—Indifference
towards its close—Difficulty of establishing military conscription or
impressment of seamen in America—Why a democratic people is less
capable of sustained effort than another.

I here warn the reader that I speak of a government which implicitly
follows the real desires of a people, and not of a government which
simply commands in its name. Nothing is so irresistible as a tyrannical
power commanding in the name of the people, because, whilst it
exercises that moral influence which belongs to the decision of the
majority, it acts at the same time with the promptitude and the
tenacity of a single man.

It is difficult to say what degree of exertion a democratic government
may be capable of making a crisis in the history of the nation. But no
great democratic republic has hitherto existed in the world. To style
the oligarchy which ruled over France in 1793 by that name would be to
offer an insult to the republican form of government. The United States
afford the first example of the kind.

The American Union has now subsisted for half a century, in the course
of which time its existence has only once been attacked, namely, during
the War of Independence. At the commencement of that long war, various
occurrences took place which betokened an extraordinary zeal for the
service of the country. *p But as the contest was prolonged, symptoms
of private egotism began to show themselves. No money was poured into
the public treasury; few recruits could be raised to join the army; the
people wished to acquire independence, but was very ill-disposed to
undergo the privations by which alone it could be obtained. “Tax laws,”
says Hamilton in the “Federalist” (No. 12), “have in vain been
multiplied; new methods to enforce the collection have in vain been
tried; the public expectation has been uniformly disappointed and the
treasuries of the States have remained empty. The popular system of
administration inherent in the nature of popular government, coinciding
with the real scarcity of money incident to a languid and mutilated
state of trade, has hitherto defeated every experiment for extensive
collections, and has at length taught the different legislatures the
folly of attempting them.”

p
[ One of the most singular of these occurrences was the resolution
which the Americans took of temporarily abandoning the use of tea.
Those who know that men usually cling more to their habits than to
their life will doubtless admire this great though obscure sacrifice
which was made by a whole people.]


The United States have not had any serious war to carry on ever since
that period. In order, therefore, to appreciate the sacrifices which
democratic nations may impose upon themselves, we must wait until the
American people is obliged to put half its entire income at the
disposal of the Government, as was done by the English; or until it
sends forth a twentieth part of its population to the field of battle,
as was done by France. *q

q
[ [The Civil War showed that when the necessity arose the American
people, both in the North and in the South, are capable of making the
most enormous sacrifices, both in money and in men.]]


In America the use of conscription is unknown, and men are induced to
enlist by bounties. The notions and habits of the people of the United
States are so opposed to compulsory enlistment that I do not imagine it
can ever be sanctioned by the laws. What is termed the conscription in
France is assuredly the heaviest tax upon the population of that
country; yet how could a great continental war be carried on without
it? The Americans have not adopted the British impressment of seamen,
and they have nothing which corresponds to the French system of
maritime conscription; the navy, as well as the merchant service, is
supplied by voluntary service. But it is not easy to conceive how a
people can sustain a great maritime war without having recourse to one
or the other of these two systems. Indeed, the Union, which has fought
with some honor upon the seas, has never possessed a very numerous
fleet, and the equipment of the small number of American vessels has
always been excessively expensive.

I have heard American statesmen confess that the Union will have great
difficulty in maintaining its rank on the seas without adopting the
system of impressment or of maritime conscription; but the difficulty
is to induce the people, which exercises the supreme authority, to
submit to impressment or any compulsory system.

It is incontestable that in times of danger a free people displays far
more energy than one which is not so. But I incline to believe that
this is more especially the case in those free nations in which the
democratic element preponderates. Democracy appears to me to be much
better adapted for the peaceful conduct of society, or for an
occasional effort of remarkable vigor, than for the hardy and prolonged
endurance of the storms which beset the political existence of nations.
The reason is very evident; it is enthusiasm which prompts men to
expose themselves to dangers and privations, but they will not support
them long without reflection. There is more calculation, even in the
impulses of bravery, than is generally attributed to them; and although
the first efforts are suggested by passion, perseverance is maintained
by a distinct regard of the purpose in view. A portion of what we value
is exposed, in order to save the remainder.

But it is this distinct perception of the future, founded upon a sound
judgment and an enlightened experience, which is most frequently
wanting in democracies. The populace is more apt to feel than to
reason; and if its present sufferings are great, it is to be feared
that the still greater sufferings attendant upon defeat will be
forgotten.

Another cause tends to render the efforts of a democratic government
less persevering than those of an aristocracy. Not only are the lower
classes less awakened than the higher orders to the good or evil
chances of the future, but they are liable to suffer far more acutely
from present privations. The noble exposes his life, indeed, but the
chance of glory is equal to the chance of harm. If he sacrifices a
large portion of his income to the State, he deprives himself for a
time of the pleasures of affluence; but to the poor man death is
embellished by no pomp or renown, and the imposts which are irksome to
the rich are fatal to him.

This relative impotence of democratic republics is, perhaps, the
greatest obstacle to the foundation of a republic of this kind in
Europe. In order that such a State should subsist in one country of the
Old World, it would be necessary that similar institutions should be
introduced into all the other nations.

I am of opinion that a democratic government tends in the end to
increase the real strength of society; but it can never combine, upon a
single point and at a given time, so much power as an aristocracy or a
monarchy. If a democratic country remained during a whole century
subject to a republican government, it would probably at the end of
that period be more populous and more prosperous than the neighboring
despotic States. But it would have incurred the risk of being conquered
much oftener than they would in that lapse of years.

Self-Control Of The American Democracy

The American people acquiesces slowly, or frequently does not
acquiesce, in what is beneficial to its interests—The faults of the
American democracy are for the most part reparable.

The difficulty which a democracy has in conquering the passions and in
subduing the exigencies of the moment, with a view to the future, is
conspicuous in the most trivial occurrences of the United States. The
people, which is surrounded by flatterers, has great difficulty in
surmounting its inclinations, and whenever it is solicited to undergo a
privation or any kind of inconvenience, even to attain an end which is
sanctioned by its own rational conviction, it almost always refuses to
comply at first. The deference of the Americans to the laws has been
very justly applauded; but it must be added that in America the
legislation is made by the people and for the people. Consequently, in
the United States the law favors those classes which are most
interested in evading it elsewhere. It may therefore be supposed that
an offensive law, which should not be acknowledged to be one of
immediate utility, would either not be enacted or would not be obeyed.

In America there is no law against fraudulent bankruptcies; not because
they are few, but because there are a great number of bankruptcies. The
dread of being prosecuted as a bankrupt acts with more intensity upon
the mind of the majority of the people than the fear of being involved
in losses or ruin by the failure of other parties, and a sort of guilty
tolerance is extended by the public conscience to an offence which
everyone condemns in his individual capacity. In the new States of the
Southwest the citizens generally take justice into their own hands, and
murders are of very frequent occurrence. This arises from the rude
manners and the ignorance of the inhabitants of those deserts, who do
not perceive the utility of investing the law with adequate force, and
who prefer duels to prosecutions.

Someone observed to me one day, in Philadelphia, that almost all crimes
in America are caused by the abuse of intoxicating liquors, which the
lower classes can procure in great abundance, from their excessive
cheapness. “How comes it,” said I, “that you do not put a duty upon
brandy?” “Our legislators,” rejoined my informant, “have frequently
thought of this expedient; but the task of putting it in operation is a
difficult one; a revolt might be apprehended, and the members who
should vote for a law of this kind would be sure of losing their
seats.” “Whence I am to infer,” replied I, “that the drinking
population constitutes the majority in your country, and that
temperance is somewhat unpopular.”

When these things are pointed out to the American statesmen, they
content themselves with assuring you that time will operate the
necessary change, and that the experience of evil will teach the people
its true interests. This is frequently true, although a democracy is
more liable to error than a monarch or a body of nobles; the chances of
its regaining the right path when once it has acknowledged its mistake,
are greater also; because it is rarely embarrassed by internal
interests, which conflict with those of the majority, and resist the
authority of reason. But a democracy can only obtain truth as the
result of experience, and many nations may forfeit their existence
whilst they are awaiting the consequences of their errors.

The great privilege of the Americans does not simply consist in their
being more enlightened than other nations, but in their being able to
repair the faults they may commit. To which it must be added, that a
democracy cannot derive substantial benefit from past experience,
unless it be arrived at a certain pitch of knowledge and civilization.
There are tribes and peoples whose education has been so vicious, and
whose character presents so strange a mixture of passion, of ignorance,
and of erroneous notions upon all subjects, that they are unable to
discern the causes of their own wretchedness, and they fall a sacrifice
to ills with which they are unacquainted.

I have crossed vast tracts of country that were formerly inhabited by
powerful Indian nations which are now extinct; I have myself passed
some time in the midst of mutilated tribes, which witness the daily
decline of their numerical strength and of the glory of their
independence; and I have heard these Indians themselves anticipate the
impending doom of their race. Every European can perceive means which
would rescue these unfortunate beings from inevitable destruction. They
alone are insensible to the expedient; they feel the woe which year
after year heaps upon their heads, but they will perish to a man
without accepting the remedy. It would be necessary to employ force to
induce them to submit to the protection and the constraint of
civilization.

The incessant revolutions which have convulsed the South American
provinces for the last quarter of a century have frequently been
adverted to with astonishment, and expectations have been expressed
that those nations would speedily return to their natural state. But
can it be affirmed that the turmoil of revolution is not actually the
most natural state of the South American Spaniards at the present time?
In that country society is plunged into difficulties from which all its
efforts are insufficient to rescue it. The inhabitants of that fair
portion of the Western Hemisphere seem obstinately bent on pursuing the
work of inward havoc. If they fall into a momentary repose from the
effects of exhaustion, that repose prepares them for a fresh state of
frenzy. When I consider their condition, which alternates between
misery and crime, I should be inclined to believe that despotism itself
would be a benefit to them, if it were possible that the words
despotism and benefit could ever be united in my mind.

Conduct Of Foreign Affairs By The American Democracy

Direction given to the foreign policy of the United States by
Washington and Jefferson—Almost all the defects inherent in democratic
institutions are brought to light in the conduct of foreign
affairs—Their advantages are less perceptible.

We have seen that the Federal Constitution entrusts the permanent
direction of the external interests of the nation to the President and
the Senate, *r which tends in some degree to detach the general foreign
policy of the Union from the control of the people. It cannot therefore
be asserted with truth that the external affairs of State are conducted
by the democracy.

r
[ “The President,” says the Constitution, Art. II, sect. 2, Section 2,
“shall have power, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to
make treaties, provided two-thirds of the senators present concur.” The
reader is reminded that the senators are returned for a term of six
years, and that they are chosen by the legislature of each State.]


The policy of America owes its rise to Washington, and after him to
Jefferson, who established those principles which it observes at the
present day. Washington said in the admirable letter which he addressed
to his fellow-citizens, and which may be looked upon as his political
bequest to the country: “The great rule of conduct for us in regard to
foreign nations is, in extending our commercial relations, to have with
them as little political connection as possible. So far as we have
already formed engagements, let them be fulfilled with perfect good
faith. Here let us stop. Europe has a set of primary interests which to
us have none, or a very remote relation. Hence, she must be engaged in
frequent controversies, the causes of which are essentially foreign to
our concerns. Hence, therefore, it must be unwise in us to implicate
ourselves, by artificial ties, in the ordinary vicissitudes of her
politics, or the ordinary combinations and collisions of her
friendships or enmities. Our detached and distant situation invites and
enables us to pursue a different course. If we remain one people, under
an efficient government, the period is not far off when we may defy
material injury from external annoyance; when we may take such an
attitude as will cause the neutrality we may at any time resolve upon
to be scrupulously respected; when belligerent nations, under the
impossibility of making acquisitions upon us, will not lightly hazard
the giving us provocation; when we may choose peace or war, as our
interest, guided by justice, shall counsel. Why forego the advantages
of so peculiar a situation? Why quit our own to stand upon foreign
ground? Why, by interweaving our destiny with that of any part of
Europe, entangle our peace and prosperity in the toils of European
ambition, rivalship, interest, humor, or caprice? It is our true policy
to steer clear of permanent alliances with any portion of the foreign
world; so far, I mean, as we are now at liberty to do it; for let me
not be understood as capable of patronizing infidelity to existing
engagements. I hold the maxim no less applicable to public than to
private affairs, that honesty is always the best policy. I repeat it;
therefore, let those engagements be observed in their genuine sense;
but in my opinion it is unnecessary, and would be unwise, to extend
them. Taking care always to keep ourselves, by suitable establishments,
in a respectable defensive posture, we may safely trust to temporary
alliances for extraordinary emergencies.” In a previous part of the
same letter Washington makes the following admirable and just remark:
“The nation which indulges towards another an habitual hatred or an
habitual fondness is in some degree a slave. It is a slave to its
animosity or to its affection, either of which is sufficient to lead it
astray from its duty and its interest.”

The political conduct of Washington was always guided by these maxims.
He succeeded in maintaining his country in a state of peace whilst all
the other nations of the globe were at war; and he laid it down as a
fundamental doctrine, that the true interest of the Americans consisted
in a perfect neutrality with regard to the internal dissensions of the
European Powers.

Jefferson went still further, and he introduced a maxim into the policy
of the Union, which affirms that “the Americans ought never to solicit
any privileges from foreign nations, in order not to be obliged to
grant similar privileges themselves.”

These two principles, which were so plain and so just as to be adapted
to the capacity of the populace, have greatly simplified the foreign
policy of the United States. As the Union takes no part in the affairs
of Europe, it has, properly speaking, no foreign interests to discuss,
since it has at present no powerful neighbors on the American
continent. The country is as much removed from the passions of the Old
World by its position as by the line of policy which it has chosen, and
it is neither called upon to repudiate nor to espouse the conflicting
interests of Europe; whilst the dissensions of the New World are still
concealed within the bosom of the future.

The Union is free from all pre-existing obligations, and it is
consequently enabled to profit by the experience of the old nations of
Europe, without being obliged, as they are, to make the best of the
past, and to adapt it to their present circumstances; or to accept that
immense inheritance which they derive from their forefathers—an
inheritance of glory mingled with calamities, and of alliances
conflicting with national antipathies. The foreign policy of the United
States is reduced by its very nature to await the chances of the future
history of the nation, and for the present it consists more in
abstaining from interference than in exerting its activity.

It is therefore very difficult to ascertain, at present, what degree of
sagacity the American democracy will display in the conduct of the
foreign policy of the country; and upon this point its adversaries, as
well as its advocates, must suspend their judgment. As for myself I
have no hesitation in avowing my conviction, that it is most especially
in the conduct of foreign relations that democratic governments appear
to me to be decidedly inferior to governments carried on upon different
principles. Experience, instruction, and habit may almost always
succeed in creating a species of practical discretion in democracies,
and that science of the daily occurrences of life which is called good
sense. Good sense may suffice to direct the ordinary course of society;
and amongst a people whose education has been provided for, the
advantages of democratic liberty in the internal affairs of the country
may more than compensate for the evils inherent in a democratic
government. But such is not always the case in the mutual relations of
foreign nations.

Foreign politics demand scarcely any of those qualities which a
democracy possesses; and they require, on the contrary, the perfect use
of almost all those faculties in which it is deficient. Democracy is
favorable to the increase of the internal resources of the State; it
tends to diffuse a moderate independence; it promotes the growth of
public spirit, and fortifies the respect which is entertained for law
in all classes of society; and these are advantages which only exercise
an indirect influence over the relations which one people bears to
another. But a democracy is unable to regulate the details of an
important undertaking, to persevere in a design, and to work out its
execution in the presence of serious obstacles. It cannot combine its
measures with secrecy, and it will not await their consequences with
patience. These are qualities which more especially belong to an
individual or to an aristocracy; and they are precisely the means by
which an individual people attains to a predominant position.

If, on the contrary, we observe the natural defects of aristocracy, we
shall find that their influence is comparatively innoxious in the
direction of the external affairs of a State. The capital fault of
which aristocratic bodies may be accused is that they are more apt to
contrive their own advantage than that of the mass of the people. In
foreign politics it is rare for the interest of the aristocracy to be
in any way distinct from that of the people.

The propensity which democracies have to obey the impulse of passion
rather than the suggestions of prudence, and to abandon a mature design
for the gratification of a momentary caprice, was very clearly seen in
America on the breaking out of the French Revolution. It was then as
evident to the simplest capacity as it is at the present time that the
interest of the Americans forbade them to take any part in the contest
which was about to deluge Europe with blood, but which could by no
means injure the welfare of their own country. Nevertheless the
sympathies of the people declared themselves with so much violence in
behalf of France that nothing but the inflexible character of
Washington, and the immense popularity which he enjoyed, could have
prevented the Americans from declaring war against England. And even
then, the exertions which the austere reason of that great man made to
repress the generous but imprudent passions of his fellow-citizens,
very nearly deprived him of the sole recompense which he had ever
claimed—that of his country’s love. The majority then reprobated the
line of policy which he adopted, and which has since been unanimously
approved by the nation. *s If the Constitution and the favor of the
public had not entrusted the direction of the foreign affairs of the
country to Washington, it is certain that the American nation would at
that time have taken the very measures which it now condemns.

s
[ See the fifth volume of Marshall’s “Life of Washington.” In a
government constituted like that of the United States, he says, “it is
impossible for the chief magistrate, however firm he may be, to oppose
for any length of time the torrent of popular opinion; and the
prevalent opinion of that day seemed to incline to war. In fact, in the
session of Congress held at the time, it was frequently seen that
Washington had lost the majority in the House of Representatives.” The
violence of the language used against him in public was extreme, and in
a political meeting they did not scruple to compare him indirectly to
the treacherous Arnold. “By the opposition,” says Marshall, “the
friends of the administration were declared to be an aristocratic and
corrupt faction, who, from a desire to introduce monarchy, were hostile
to France and under the influence of Britain; that they were a paper
nobility, whose extreme sensibility at every measure which threatened
the funds, induced a tame submission to injuries and insults, which the
interests and honor of the nation required them to resist.”]


Almost all the nations which have ever exercised a powerful influence
upon the destinies of the world by conceiving, following up, and
executing vast designs—from the Romans to the English—have been
governed by aristocratic institutions. Nor will this be a subject of
wonder when we recollect that nothing in the world has so absolute a
fixity of purpose as an aristocracy. The mass of the people may be led
astray by ignorance or passion; the mind of a king may be biased, and
his perseverance in his designs may be shaken—besides which a king is
not immortal—but an aristocratic body is too numerous to be led astray
by the blandishments of intrigue, and yet not numerous enough to yield
readily to the intoxicating influence of unreflecting passion: it has
the energy of a firm and enlightened individual, added to the power
which it derives from perpetuity.




 Chapter XIV: Advantages American Society Derive From Democracy—Part I


What The Real Advantages Are Which American Society Derives From The
Government Of The Democracy

Before I enter upon the subject of the present chapter I am induced to
remind the reader of what I have more than once adverted to in the
course of this book. The political institutions of the United States
appear to me to be one of the forms of government which a democracy may
adopt; but I do not regard the American Constitution as the best, or as
the only one, which a democratic people may establish. In showing the
advantages which the Americans derive from the government of democracy,
I am therefore very far from meaning, or from believing, that similar
advantages can only be obtained from the same laws.

General Tendency Of The Laws Under The Rule Of The American Democracy,
And Habits Of Those Who Apply Them

Defects of a democratic government easy to be discovered—Its advantages
only to be discerned by long observation—Democracy in America often
inexpert, but the general tendency of the laws advantageous—In the
American democracy public officers have no permanent interests distinct
from those of the majority—Result of this state of things.

The defects and the weaknesses of a democratic government may very
readily be discovered; they are demonstrated by the most flagrant
instances, whilst its beneficial influence is less perceptibly
exercised. A single glance suffices to detect its evil consequences,
but its good qualities can only be discerned by long observation. The
laws of the American democracy are frequently defective or incomplete;
they sometimes attack vested rights, or give a sanction to others which
are dangerous to the community; but even if they were good, the
frequent changes which they undergo would be an evil. How comes it,
then, that the American republics prosper and maintain their position?

In the consideration of laws a distinction must be carefully observed
between the end at which they aim and the means by which they are
directed to that end, between their absolute and their relative
excellence. If it be the intention of the legislator to favor the
interests of the minority at the expense of the majority, and if the
measures he takes are so combined as to accomplish the object he has in
view with the least possible expense of time and exertion, the law may
be well drawn up, although its purpose be bad; and the more efficacious
it is, the greater is the mischief which it causes.

Democratic laws generally tend to promote the welfare of the greatest
possible number; for they emanate from the majority of the citizens,
who are subject to error, but who cannot have an interest opposed to
their own advantage. The laws of an aristocracy tend, on the contrary,
to concentrate wealth and power in the hands of the minority, because
an aristocracy, by its very nature, constitutes a minority. It may
therefore be asserted, as a general proposition, that the purpose of a
democracy in the conduct of its legislation is useful to a greater
number of citizens than that of an aristocracy. This is, however, the
sum total of its advantages.

Aristocracies are infinitely more expert in the science of legislation
than democracies ever can be. They are possessed of a self-control
which protects them from the errors of temporary excitement, and they
form lasting designs which they mature with the assistance of favorable
opportunities. Aristocratic government proceeds with the dexterity of
art; it understands how to make the collective force of all its laws
converge at the same time to a given point. Such is not the case with
democracies, whose laws are almost always ineffective or inopportune.
The means of democracy are therefore more imperfect than those of
aristocracy, and the measures which it unwittingly adopts are
frequently opposed to its own cause; but the object it has in view is
more useful.

Let us now imagine a community so organized by nature, or by its
constitution, that it can support the transitory action of bad laws,
and that it can await, without destruction, the general tendency of the
legislation: we shall then be able to conceive that a democratic
government, notwithstanding its defects, will be most fitted to conduce
to the prosperity of this community. This is precisely what has
occurred in the United States; and I repeat, what I have before
remarked, that the great advantage of the Americans consists in their
being able to commit faults which they may afterward repair.

An analogous observation may be made respecting public officers. It is
easy to perceive that the American democracy frequently errs in the
choice of the individuals to whom it entrusts the power of the
administration; but it is more difficult to say why the State prospers
under their rule. In the first place it is to be remarked, that if in a
democratic State the governors have less honesty and less capacity than
elsewhere, the governed, on the other hand, are more enlightened and
more attentive to their interests. As the people in democracies is more
incessantly vigilant in its affairs and more jealous of its rights, it
prevents its representatives from abandoning that general line of
conduct which its own interest prescribes. In the second place, it must
be remembered that if the democratic magistrate is more apt to misuse
his power, he possesses it for a shorter period of time. But there is
yet another reason which is still more general and conclusive. It is no
doubt of importance to the welfare of nations that they should be
governed by men of talents and virtue; but it is perhaps still more
important that the interests of those men should not differ from the
interests of the community at large; for, if such were the case,
virtues of a high order might become useless, and talents might be
turned to a bad account. I say that it is important that the interests
of the persons in authority should not conflict with or oppose the
interests of the community at large; but I do not insist upon their
having the same interests as the whole population, because I am not
aware that such a state of things ever existed in any country.

No political form has hitherto been discovered which is equally
favorable to the prosperity and the development of all the classes into
which society is divided. These classes continue to form, as it were, a
certain number of distinct nations in the same nation; and experience
has shown that it is no less dangerous to place the fate of these
classes exclusively in the hands of any one of them than it is to make
one people the arbiter of the destiny of another. When the rich alone
govern, the interest of the poor is always endangered; and when the
poor make the laws, that of the rich incurs very serious risks. The
advantage of democracy does not consist, therefore, as has sometimes
been asserted, in favoring the prosperity of all, but simply in
contributing to the well-being of the greatest possible number.

The men who are entrusted with the direction of public affairs in the
United States are frequently inferior, both in point of capacity and of
morality, to those whom aristocratic institutions would raise to power.
But their interest is identified and confounded with that of the
majority of their fellow-citizens. They may frequently be faithless and
frequently mistaken, but they will never systematically adopt a line of
conduct opposed to the will of the majority; and it is impossible that
they should give a dangerous or an exclusive tendency to the
government.

The mal-administration of a democratic magistrate is a mere isolated
fact, which only occurs during the short period for which he is
elected. Corruption and incapacity do not act as common interests,
which may connect men permanently with one another. A corrupt or an
incapable magistrate will not concert his measures with another
magistrate, simply because that individual is as corrupt and as
incapable as himself; and these two men will never unite their
endeavors to promote the corruption and inaptitude of their remote
posterity. The ambition and the manoeuvres of the one will serve, on
the contrary, to unmask the other. The vices of a magistrate, in
democratic states, are usually peculiar to his own person.

But under aristocratic governments public men are swayed by the
interest of their order, which, if it is sometimes confounded with the
interests of the majority, is very frequently distinct from them. This
interest is the common and lasting bond which unites them together; it
induces them to coalesce, and to combine their efforts in order to
attain an end which does not always ensure the greatest happiness of
the greatest number; and it serves not only to connect the persons in
authority, but to unite them to a considerable portion of the
community, since a numerous body of citizens belongs to the
aristocracy, without being invested with official functions. The
aristocratic magistrate is therefore constantly supported by a portion
of the community, as well as by the Government of which he is a member.

The common purpose which connects the interest of the magistrates in
aristocracies with that of a portion of their contemporaries identifies
it with that of future generations; their influence belongs to the
future as much as to the present. The aristocratic magistrate is urged
at the same time toward the same point by the passions of the
community, by his own, and I may almost add by those of his posterity.
Is it, then, wonderful that he does not resist such repeated impulses?
And indeed aristocracies are often carried away by the spirit of their
order without being corrupted by it; and they unconsciously fashion
society to their own ends, and prepare it for their own descendants.

The English aristocracy is perhaps the most liberal which ever existed,
and no body of men has ever, uninterruptedly, furnished so many
honorable and enlightened individuals to the government of a country.
It cannot, however, escape observation that in the legislation of
England the good of the poor has been sacrificed to the advantage of
the rich, and the rights of the majority to the privileges of the few.
The consequence is, that England, at the present day, combines the
extremes of fortune in the bosom of her society, and her perils and
calamities are almost equal to her power and her renown. *a

a
[ [The legislation of England for the forty years is certainly not
fairly open to this criticism, which was written before the Reform Bill
of 1832, and accordingly Great Britain has thus far escaped and
surmounted the perils and calamities to which she seemed to be
exposed.]]


In the United States, where the public officers have no interests to
promote connected with their caste, the general and constant influence
of the Government is beneficial, although the individuals who conduct
it are frequently unskilful and sometimes contemptible. There is indeed
a secret tendency in democratic institutions to render the exertions of
the citizens subservient to the prosperity of the community,
notwithstanding their private vices and mistakes; whilst in
aristocratic institutions there is a secret propensity which,
notwithstanding the talents and the virtues of those who conduct the
government, leads them to contribute to the evils which oppress their
fellow-creatures. In aristocratic governments public men may frequently
do injuries which they do not intend, and in democratic states they
produce advantages which they never thought of.

Public Spirit In The United States

Patriotism of instinct—Patriotism of reflection—Their different
characteristics—Nations ought to strive to acquire the second when the
first has disappeared—Efforts of the Americans to it—Interest of the
individual intimately connected with that of the country.

There is one sort of patriotic attachment which principally arises from
that instinctive, disinterested, and undefinable feeling which connects
the affections of man with his birthplace. This natural fondness is
united to a taste for ancient customs, and to a reverence for ancestral
traditions of the past; those who cherish it love their country as they
love the mansions of their fathers. They enjoy the tranquillity which
it affords them; they cling to the peaceful habits which they have
contracted within its bosom; they are attached to the reminiscences
which it awakens, and they are even pleased by the state of obedience
in which they are placed. This patriotism is sometimes stimulated by
religious enthusiasm, and then it is capable of making the most
prodigious efforts. It is in itself a kind of religion; it does not
reason, but it acts from the impulse of faith and of sentiment. By some
nations the monarch has been regarded as a personification of the
country; and the fervor of patriotism being converted into the fervor
of loyalty, they took a sympathetic pride in his conquests, and gloried
in his power. At one time, under the ancient monarchy, the French felt
a sort of satisfaction in the sense of their dependence upon the
arbitrary pleasure of their king, and they were wont to say with pride,
“We are the subjects of the most powerful king in the world.”

But, like all instinctive passions, this kind of patriotism is more apt
to prompt transient exertion than to supply the motives of continuous
endeavor. It may save the State in critical circumstances, but it will
not unfrequently allow the nation to decline in the midst of peace.
Whilst the manners of a people are simple and its faith unshaken,
whilst society is steadily based upon traditional institutions whose
legitimacy has never been contested, this instinctive patriotism is
wont to endure.

But there is another species of attachment to a country which is more
rational than the one we have been describing. It is perhaps less
generous and less ardent, but it is more fruitful and more lasting; it
is coeval with the spread of knowledge, it is nurtured by the laws, it
grows by the exercise of civil rights, and, in the end, it is
confounded with the personal interest of the citizen. A man comprehends
the influence which the prosperity of his country has upon his own
welfare; he is aware that the laws authorize him to contribute his
assistance to that prosperity, and he labors to promote it as a portion
of his interest in the first place, and as a portion of his right in
the second.

But epochs sometimes occur, in the course of the existence of a nation,
at which the ancient customs of a people are changed, public morality
destroyed, religious belief disturbed, and the spell of tradition
broken, whilst the diffusion of knowledge is yet imperfect, and the
civil rights of the community are ill secured, or confined within very
narrow limits. The country then assumes a dim and dubious shape in the
eyes of the citizens; they no longer behold it in the soil which they
inhabit, for that soil is to them a dull inanimate clod; nor in the
usages of their forefathers, which they have been taught to look upon
as a debasing yoke; nor in religion, for of that they doubt; nor in the
laws, which do not originate in their own authority; nor in the
legislator, whom they fear and despise. The country is lost to their
senses, they can neither discover it under its own nor under borrowed
features, and they entrench themselves within the dull precincts of a
narrow egotism. They are emancipated from prejudice without having
acknowledged the empire of reason; they are neither animated by the
instinctive patriotism of monarchical subjects nor by the thinking
patriotism of republican citizens; but they have stopped halfway
between the two, in the midst of confusion and of distress.

In this predicament, to retreat is impossible; for a people cannot
restore the vivacity of its earlier times, any more than a man can
return to the innocence and the bloom of childhood; such things may be
regretted, but they cannot be renewed. The only thing, then, which
remains to be done is to proceed, and to accelerate the union of
private with public interests, since the period of disinterested
patriotism is gone by forever.

I am certainly very far from averring that, in order to obtain this
result, the exercise of political rights should be immediately granted
to all the members of the community. But I maintain that the most
powerful, and perhaps the only, means of interesting men in the welfare
of their country which we still possess is to make them partakers in
the Government. At the present time civic zeal seems to me to be
inseparable from the exercise of political rights; and I hold that the
number of citizens will be found to augment or to decrease in Europe in
proportion as those rights are extended.

In the United States the inhabitants were thrown but as yesterday upon
the soil which they now occupy, and they brought neither customs nor
traditions with them there; they meet each other for the first time
with no previous acquaintance; in short, the instinctive love of their
country can scarcely exist in their minds; but everyone takes as
zealous an interest in the affairs of his township, his county, and of
the whole State, as if they were his own, because everyone, in his
sphere, takes an active part in the government of society.

The lower orders in the United States are alive to the perception of
the influence exercised by the general prosperity upon their own
welfare; and simple as this observation is, it is one which is but too
rarely made by the people. But in America the people regards this
prosperity as the result of its own exertions; the citizen looks upon
the fortune of the public as his private interest, and he co-operates
in its success, not so much from a sense of pride or of duty, as from
what I shall venture to term cupidity.

It is unnecessary to study the institutions and the history of the
Americans in order to discover the truth of this remark, for their
manners render it sufficiently evident. As the American participates in
all that is done in his country, he thinks himself obliged to defend
whatever may be censured; for it is not only his country which is
attacked upon these occasions, but it is himself. The consequence is,
that his national pride resorts to a thousand artifices, and to all the
petty tricks of individual vanity.

Nothing is more embarrassing in the ordinary intercourse of life than
this irritable patriotism of the Americans. A stranger may be very well
inclined to praise many of the institutions of their country, but he
begs permission to blame some of the peculiarities which he observes—a
permission which is, however, inexorably refused. America is therefore
a free country, in which, lest anybody should be hurt by your remarks,
you are not allowed to speak freely of private individuals, or of the
State, of the citizens or of the authorities, of public or of private
undertakings, or, in short, of anything at all, except it be of the
climate and the soil; and even then Americans will be found ready to
defend either the one or the other, as if they had been contrived by
the inhabitants of the country.

In our times option must be made between the patriotism of all and the
government of a few; for the force and activity which the first confers
are irreconcilable with the guarantees of tranquillity which the second
furnishes.

Notion Of Rights In The United States

No great people without a notion of rights—How the notion of rights can
be given to people—Respect of rights in the United States—Whence it
arises.

After the idea of virtue, I know no higher principle than that of
right; or, to speak more accurately, these two ideas are commingled in
one. The idea of right is simply that of virtue introduced into the
political world. It is the idea of right which enabled men to define
anarchy and tyranny; and which taught them to remain independent
without arrogance, as well as to obey without servility. The man who
submits to violence is debased by his compliance; but when he obeys the
mandate of one who possesses that right of authority which he
acknowledges in a fellow-creature, he rises in some measure above the
person who delivers the command. There are no great men without virtue,
and there are no great nations—it may almost be added that there would
be no society—without the notion of rights; for what is the condition
of a mass of rational and intelligent beings who are only united
together by the bond of force?

I am persuaded that the only means which we possess at the present time
of inculcating the notion of rights, and of rendering it, as it were,
palpable to the senses, is to invest all the members of the community
with the peaceful exercise of certain rights: this is very clearly seen
in children, who are men without the strength and the experience of
manhood. When a child begins to move in the midst of the objects which
surround him, he is instinctively led to turn everything which he can
lay his hands upon to his own purposes; he has no notion of the
property of others; but as he gradually learns the value of things, and
begins to perceive that he may in his turn be deprived of his
possessions, he becomes more circumspect, and he observes those rights
in others which he wishes to have respected in himself. The principle
which the child derives from the possession of his toys is taught to
the man by the objects which he may call his own. In America those
complaints against property in general which are so frequent in Europe
are never heard, because in America there are no paupers; and as
everyone has property of his own to defend, everyone recognizes the
principle upon which he holds it.

The same thing occurs in the political world. In America the lowest
classes have conceived a very high notion of political rights, because
they exercise those rights; and they refrain from attacking those of
other people, in order to ensure their own from attack. Whilst in
Europe the same classes sometimes recalcitrate even against the supreme
power, the American submits without a murmur to the authority of the
pettiest magistrate.

This truth is exemplified by the most trivial details of national
peculiarities. In France very few pleasures are exclusively reserved
for the higher classes; the poor are admitted wherever the rich are
received, and they consequently behave with propriety, and respect
whatever contributes to the enjoyments in which they themselves
participate. In England, where wealth has a monopoly of amusement as
well as of power, complaints are made that whenever the poor happen to
steal into the enclosures which are reserved for the pleasures of the
rich, they commit acts of wanton mischief: can this be wondered at,
since care has been taken that they should have nothing to lose? *b

b
[ [This, too, has been amended by much larger provisions for the
amusements of the people in public parks, gardens, museums, etc.; and
the conduct of the people in these places of amusement has improved in
the same proportion.]]


The government of democracy brings the notion of political rights to
the level of the humblest citizens, just as the dissemination of wealth
brings the notion of property within the reach of all the members of
the community; and I confess that, to my mind, this is one of its
greatest advantages. I do not assert that it is easy to teach men to
exercise political rights; but I maintain that, when it is possible,
the effects which result from it are highly important; and I add that,
if there ever was a time at which such an attempt ought to be made,
that time is our own. It is clear that the influence of religious
belief is shaken, and that the notion of divine rights is declining; it
is evident that public morality is vitiated, and the notion of moral
rights is also disappearing: these are general symptoms of the
substitution of argument for faith, and of calculation for the impulses
of sentiment. If, in the midst of this general disruption, you do not
succeed in connecting the notion of rights with that of personal
interest, which is the only immutable point in the human heart, what
means will you have of governing the world except by fear? When I am
told that, since the laws are weak and the populace is wild, since
passions are excited and the authority of virtue is paralyzed, no
measures must be taken to increase the rights of the democracy, I
reply, that it is for these very reasons that some measures of the kind
must be taken; and I am persuaded that governments are still more
interested in taking them than society at large, because governments
are liable to be destroyed and society cannot perish.

I am not, however, inclined to exaggerate the example which America
furnishes. In those States the people are invested with political
rights at a time when they could scarcely be abused, for the citizens
were few in number and simple in their manners. As they have increased,
the Americans have not augmented the power of the democracy, but they
have, if I may use the expression, extended its dominions. It cannot be
doubted that the moment at which political rights are granted to a
people that had before been without them is a very critical, though it
be a necessary one. A child may kill before he is aware of the value of
life; and he may deprive another person of his property before he is
aware that his own may be taken away from him. The lower orders, when
first they are invested with political rights, stand, in relation to
those rights, in the same position as the child does to the whole of
nature, and the celebrated adage may then be applied to them, Homo puer
robustus. This truth may even be perceived in America. The States in
which the citizens have enjoyed their rights longest are those in which
they make the best use of them.

It cannot be repeated too often that nothing is more fertile in
prodigies than the art of being free; but there is nothing more arduous
than the apprenticeship of liberty. Such is not the case with despotic
institutions: despotism often promises to make amends for a thousand
previous ills; it supports the right, it protects the oppressed, and it
maintains public order. The nation is lulled by the temporary
prosperity which accrues to it, until it is roused to a sense of its
own misery. Liberty, on the contrary, is generally established in the
midst of agitation, it is perfected by civil discord, and its benefits
cannot be appreciated until it is already old.




 Chapter XIV: Advantages American Society Derive From Democracy—Part II

Respect For The Law In The United States

Respect of the Americans for the law—Parental affection which they
entertain for it—Personal interest of everyone to increase the
authority of the law.

It is not always feasible to consult the whole people, either directly
or indirectly, in the formation of the law; but it cannot be denied
that, when such a measure is possible the authority of the law is very
much augmented. This popular origin, which impairs the excellence and
the wisdom of legislation, contributes prodigiously to increase its
power. There is an amazing strength in the expression of the
determination of a whole people, and when it declares itself the
imagination of those who are most inclined to contest it is overawed by
its authority. The truth of this fact is very well known by parties,
and they consequently strive to make out a majority whenever they can.
If they have not the greater number of voters on their side, they
assert that the true majority abstained from voting; and if they are
foiled even there, they have recourse to the body of those persons who
had no votes to give.

In the United States, except slaves, servants, and paupers in the
receipt of relief from the townships, there is no class of persons who
do not exercise the elective franchise, and who do not indirectly
contribute to make the laws. Those who design to attack the laws must
consequently either modify the opinion of the nation or trample upon
its decision.

A second reason, which is still more weighty, may be further adduced;
in the United States everyone is personally interested in enforcing the
obedience of the whole community to the law; for as the minority may
shortly rally the majority to its principles, it is interested in
professing that respect for the decrees of the legislator which it may
soon have occasion to claim for its own. However irksome an enactment
may be, the citizen of the United States complies with it, not only
because it is the work of the majority, but because it originates in
his own authority, and he regards it as a contract to which he is
himself a party.

In the United States, then, that numerous and turbulent multitude does
not exist which always looks upon the law as its natural enemy, and
accordingly surveys it with fear and with fear and with distrust. It is
impossible, on the other hand, not to perceive that all classes display
the utmost reliance upon the legislation of their country, and that
they are attached to it by a kind of parental affection.

I am wrong, however, in saying all classes; for as in America the
European scale of authority is inverted, the wealthy are there placed
in a position analogous to that of the poor in the Old World, and it is
the opulent classes which frequently look upon the law with suspicion.
I have already observed that the advantage of democracy is not, as has
been sometimes asserted, that it protects the interests of the whole
community, but simply that it protects those of the majority. In the
United States, where the poor rule, the rich have always some reason to
dread the abuses of their power. This natural anxiety of the rich may
produce a sullen dissatisfaction, but society is not disturbed by it;
for the same reason which induces the rich to withhold their confidence
in the legislative authority makes them obey its mandates; their
wealth, which prevents them from making the law, prevents them from
withstanding it. Amongst civilized nations revolts are rarely excited,
except by such persons as have nothing to lose by them; and if the laws
of a democracy are not always worthy of respect, at least they always
obtain it; for those who usually infringe the laws have no excuse for
not complying with the enactments they have themselves made, and by
which they are themselves benefited, whilst the citizens whose
interests might be promoted by the infraction of them are induced, by
their character and their stations, to submit to the decisions of the
legislature, whatever they may be. Besides which, the people in America
obeys the law not only because it emanates from the popular authority,
but because that authority may modify it in any points which may prove
vexatory; a law is observed because it is a self-imposed evil in the
first place, and an evil of transient duration in the second.

Activity Which Pervades All The Branches Of The Body Politic In The
United States; Influence Which It Exercises Upon Society

More difficult to conceive the political activity which pervades the
United States than the freedom and equality which reign there—The great
activity which perpetually agitates the legislative bodies is only an
episode to the general activity—Difficult for an American to confine
himself to his own business—Political agitation extends to all social
intercourse—Commercial activity of the Americans partly attributable to
this cause—Indirect advantages which society derives from a democratic
government.

On passing from a country in which free institutions are established to
one where they do not exist, the traveller is struck by the change; in
the former all is bustle and activity, in the latter everything is calm
and motionless. In the one, amelioration and progress are the general
topics of inquiry; in the other, it seems as if the community only
aspired to repose in the enjoyment of the advantages which it has
acquired. Nevertheless, the country which exerts itself so strenuously
to promote its welfare is generally more wealthy and more prosperous
than that which appears to be so contented with its lot; and when we
compare them together, we can scarcely conceive how so many new wants
are daily felt in the former, whilst so few seem to occur in the
latter.

If this remark is applicable to those free countries in which
monarchical and aristocratic institutions subsist, it is still more
striking with regard to democratic republics. In these States it is not
only a portion of the people which is busied with the amelioration of
its social condition, but the whole community is engaged in the task;
and it is not the exigencies and the convenience of a single class for
which a provision is to be made, but the exigencies and the convenience
of all ranks of life.

It is not impossible to conceive the surpassing liberty which the
Americans enjoy; some idea may likewise be formed of the extreme
equality which subsists amongst them, but the political activity which
pervades the United States must be seen in order to be understood. No
sooner do you set foot upon the American soil than you are stunned by a
kind of tumult; a confused clamor is heard on every side; and a
thousand simultaneous voices demand the immediate satisfaction of their
social wants. Everything is in motion around you; here, the people of
one quarter of a town are met to decide upon the building of a church;
there, the election of a representative is going on; a little further
the delegates of a district are posting to the town in order to consult
upon some local improvements; or in another place the laborers of a
village quit their ploughs to deliberate upon the project of a road or
a public school. Meetings are called for the sole purpose of declaring
their disapprobation of the line of conduct pursued by the Government;
whilst in other assemblies the citizens salute the authorities of the
day as the fathers of their country. Societies are formed which regard
drunkenness as the principal cause of the evils under which the State
labors, and which solemnly bind themselves to give a constant example
of temperance. *c

c
[ At the time of my stay in the United States the temperance societies
already consisted of more than 270,000 members, and their effect had
been to diminish the consumption of fermented liquors by 500,000
gallons per annum in the State of Pennsylvania alone.]


The great political agitation of the American legislative bodies, which
is the only kind of excitement that attracts the attention of foreign
countries, is a mere episode or a sort of continuation of that
universal movement which originates in the lowest classes of the people
and extends successively to all the ranks of society. It is impossible
to spend more efforts in the pursuit of enjoyment.

The cares of political life engross a most prominent place in the
occupation of a citizen in the United States, and almost the only
pleasure of which an American has any idea is to take a part in the
Government, and to discuss the part he has taken. This feeling pervades
the most trifling habits of life; even the women frequently attend
public meetings and listen to political harangues as a recreation after
their household labors. Debating clubs are to a certain extent a
substitute for theatrical entertainments: an American cannot converse,
but he can discuss; and when he attempts to talk he falls into a
dissertation. He speaks to you as if he was addressing a meeting; and
if he should chance to warm in the course of the discussion, he will
infallibly say, “Gentlemen,” to the person with whom he is conversing.

In some countries the inhabitants display a certain repugnance to avail
themselves of the political privileges with which the law invests them;
it would seem that they set too high a value upon their time to spend
it on the interests of the community; and they prefer to withdraw
within the exact limits of a wholesome egotism, marked out by four sunk
fences and a quickset hedge. But if an American were condemned to
confine his activity to his own affairs, he would be robbed of one half
of his existence; he would feel an immense void in the life which he is
accustomed to lead, and his wretchedness would be unbearable. *d I am
persuaded that, if ever a despotic government is established in
America, it will find it more difficult to surmount the habits which
free institutions have engendered than to conquer the attachment of the
citizens to freedom.

d
[ The same remark was made at Rome under the first Caesars. Montesquieu
somewhere alludes to the excessive despondency of certain Roman
citizens who, after the excitement of political life, were all at once
flung back into the stagnation of private life.]


This ceaseless agitation which democratic government has introduced
into the political world influences all social intercourse. I am not
sure that upon the whole this is not the greatest advantage of
democracy. And I am much less inclined to applaud it for what it does
than for what it causes to be done. It is incontestable that the people
frequently conducts public business very ill; but it is impossible that
the lower orders should take a part in public business without
extending the circle of their ideas, and without quitting the ordinary
routine of their mental acquirements. The humblest individual who is
called upon to co-operate in the government of society acquires a
certain degree of self-respect; and as he possesses authority, he can
command the services of minds much more enlightened than his own. He is
canvassed by a multitude of applicants, who seek to deceive him in a
thousand different ways, but who instruct him by their deceit. He takes
a part in political undertakings which did not originate in his own
conception, but which give him a taste for undertakings of the kind.
New ameliorations are daily pointed out in the property which he holds
in common with others, and this gives him the desire of improving that
property which is more peculiarly his own. He is perhaps neither
happier nor better than those who came before him, but he is better
informed and more active. I have no doubt that the democratic
institutions of the United States, joined to the physical constitution
of the country, are the cause (not the direct, as is so often asserted,
but the indirect cause) of the prodigious commercial activity of the
inhabitants. It is not engendered by the laws, but the people learns
how to promote it by the experience derived from legislation.

When the opponents of democracy assert that a single individual
performs the duties which he undertakes much better than the government
of the community, it appears to me that they are perfectly right. The
government of an individual, supposing an equality of instruction on
either side, is more consistent, more persevering, and more accurate
than that of a multitude, and it is much better qualified judiciously
to discriminate the characters of the men it employs. If any deny what
I advance, they have certainly never seen a democratic government, or
have formed their opinion upon very partial evidence. It is true that
even when local circumstances and the disposition of the people allow
democratic institutions to subsist, they never display a regular and
methodical system of government. Democratic liberty is far from
accomplishing all the projects it undertakes, with the skill of an
adroit despotism. It frequently abandons them before they have borne
their fruits, or risks them when the consequences may prove dangerous;
but in the end it produces more than any absolute government, and if it
do fewer things well, it does a greater number of things. Under its
sway the transactions of the public administration are not nearly so
important as what is done by private exertion. Democracy does not
confer the most skilful kind of government upon the people, but it
produces that which the most skilful governments are frequently unable
to awaken, namely, an all-pervading and restless activity, a
superabundant force, and an energy which is inseparable from it, and
which may, under favorable circumstances, beget the most amazing
benefits. These are the true advantages of democracy.

In the present age, when the destinies of Christendom seem to be in
suspense, some hasten to assail democracy as its foe whilst it is yet
in its early growth; and others are ready with their vows of adoration
for this new deity which is springing forth from chaos: but both
parties are very imperfectly acquainted with the object of their hatred
or of their desires; they strike in the dark, and distribute their
blows by mere chance.

We must first understand what the purport of society and the aim of
government is held to be. If it be your intention to confer a certain
elevation upon the human mind, and to teach it to regard the things of
this world with generous feelings, to inspire men with a scorn of mere
temporal advantage, to give birth to living convictions, and to keep
alive the spirit of honorable devotedness; if you hold it to be a good
thing to refine the habits, to embellish the manners, to cultivate the
arts of a nation, and to promote the love of poetry, of beauty, and of
renown; if you would constitute a people not unfitted to act with power
upon all other nations, nor unprepared for those high enterprises
which, whatever be the result of its efforts, will leave a name forever
famous in time—if you believe such to be the principal object of
society, you must avoid the government of democracy, which would be a
very uncertain guide to the end you have in view.

But if you hold it to be expedient to divert the moral and intellectual
activity of man to the production of comfort, and to the acquirement of
the necessaries of life; if a clear understanding be more profitable to
man than genius; if your object be not to stimulate the virtues of
heroism, but to create habits of peace; if you had rather witness vices
than crimes and are content to meet with fewer noble deeds, provided
offences be diminished in the same proportion; if, instead of living in
the midst of a brilliant state of society, you are contented to have
prosperity around you; if, in short, you are of opinion that the
principal object of a Government is not to confer the greatest possible
share of power and of glory upon the body of the nation, but to ensure
the greatest degree of enjoyment and the least degree of misery to each
of the individuals who compose it—if such be your desires, you can have
no surer means of satisfying them than by equalizing the conditions of
men, and establishing democratic institutions.

But if the time be passed at which such a choice was possible, and if
some superhuman power impel us towards one or the other of these two
governments without consulting our wishes, let us at least endeavor to
make the best of that which is allotted to us; and let us so inquire
into its good and its evil propensities as to be able to foster the
former and repress the latter to the utmost.




 Chapter XV: Unlimited Power Of Majority, And Its Consequences—Part I




 Chapter Summary


Natural strength of the majority in democracies—Most of the American
Constitutions have increased this strength by artificial means—How this
has been done—Pledged delegates—Moral power of the majority—Opinion as
to its infallibility—Respect for its rights, how augmented in the
United States.

Unlimited Power Of The Majority In The United States, And Its
Consequences

The very essence of democratic government consists in the absolute
sovereignty of the majority; for there is nothing in democratic States
which is capable of resisting it. Most of the American Constitutions
have sought to increase this natural strength of the majority by
artificial means. *a

a
[ We observed, in examining the Federal Constitution, that the efforts
of the legislators of the Union had been diametrically opposed to the
present tendency. The consequence has been that the Federal Government
is more independent in its sphere than that of the States. But the
Federal Government scarcely ever interferes in any but external
affairs; and the governments of the State are in the governments of the
States are in reality the authorities which direct society in America.]


The legislature is, of all political institutions, the one which is
most easily swayed by the wishes of the majority. The Americans
determined that the members of the legislature should be elected by the
people immediately, and for a very brief term, in order to subject
them, not only to the general convictions, but even to the daily
passion, of their constituents. The members of both houses are taken
from the same class in society, and are nominated in the same manner;
so that the modifications of the legislative bodies are almost as rapid
and quite as irresistible as those of a single assembly. It is to a
legislature thus constituted that almost all the authority of the
government has been entrusted.

But whilst the law increased the strength of those authorities which of
themselves were strong, it enfeebled more and more those which were
naturally weak. It deprived the representatives of the executive of all
stability and independence, and by subjecting them completely to the
caprices of the legislature, it robbed them of the slender influence
which the nature of a democratic government might have allowed them to
retain. In several States the judicial power was also submitted to the
elective discretion of the majority, and in all of them its existence
was made to depend on the pleasure of the legislative authority, since
the representatives were empowered annually to regulate the stipend of
the judges.

Custom, however, has done even more than law. A proceeding which will
in the end set all the guarantees of representative government at
naught is becoming more and more general in the United States; it
frequently happens that the electors, who choose a delegate, point out
a certain line of conduct to him, and impose upon him a certain number
of positive obligations which he is pledged to fulfil. With the
exception of the tumult, this comes to the same thing as if the
majority of the populace held its deliberations in the market-place.

Several other circumstances concur in rendering the power of the
majority in America not only preponderant, but irresistible. The moral
authority of the majority is partly based upon the notion that there is
more intelligence and more wisdom in a great number of men collected
together than in a single individual, and that the quantity of
legislators is more important than their quality. The theory of
equality is in fact applied to the intellect of man: and human pride is
thus assailed in its last retreat by a doctrine which the minority
hesitate to admit, and in which they very slowly concur. Like all other
powers, and perhaps more than all other powers, the authority of the
many requires the sanction of time; at first it enforces obedience by
constraint, but its laws are not respected until they have long been
maintained.

The right of governing society, which the majority supposes itself to
derive from its superior intelligence, was introduced into the United
States by the first settlers, and this idea, which would be sufficient
of itself to create a free nation, has now been amalgamated with the
manners of the people and the minor incidents of social intercourse.

The French, under the old monarchy, held it for a maxim (which is still
a fundamental principle of the English Constitution) that the King
could do no wrong; and if he did do wrong, the blame was imputed to his
advisers. This notion was highly favorable to habits of obedience, and
it enabled the subject to complain of the law without ceasing to love
and honor the lawgiver. The Americans entertain the same opinion with
respect to the majority.

The moral power of the majority is founded upon yet another principle,
which is, that the interests of the many are to be preferred to those
of the few. It will readily be perceived that the respect here
professed for the rights of the majority must naturally increase or
diminish according to the state of parties. When a nation is divided
into several irreconcilable factions, the privilege of the majority is
often overlooked, because it is intolerable to comply with its demands.

If there existed in America a class of citizens whom the legislating
majority sought to deprive of exclusive privileges which they had
possessed for ages, and to bring down from an elevated station to the
level of the ranks of the multitude, it is probable that the minority
would be less ready to comply with its laws. But as the United States
were colonized by men holding equal rank amongst themselves, there is
as yet no natural or permanent source of dissension between the
interests of its different inhabitants.

There are certain communities in which the persons who constitute the
minority can never hope to draw over the majority to their side,
because they must then give up the very point which is at issue between
them. Thus, an aristocracy can never become a majority whilst it
retains its exclusive privileges, and it cannot cede its privileges
without ceasing to be an aristocracy.

In the United States political questions cannot be taken up in so
general and absolute a manner, and all parties are willing to recognize
the right of the majority, because they all hope to turn those rights
to their own advantage at some future time. The majority therefore in
that country exercises a prodigious actual authority, and a moral
influence which is scarcely less preponderant; no obstacles exist which
can impede or so much as retard its progress, or which can induce it to
heed the complaints of those whom it crushes upon its path. This state
of things is fatal in itself and dangerous for the future.

How The Unlimited Power Of The Majority Increases In America The
Instability Of Legislation And Administration Inherent In Democracy The
Americans increase the mutability of the laws which is inherent in
democracy by changing the legislature every year, and by investing it
with unbounded authority—The same effect is produced upon the
administration—In America social amelioration is conducted more
energetically but less perseveringly than in Europe.

I have already spoken of the natural defects of democratic
institutions, and they all of them increase at the exact ratio of the
power of the majority. To begin with the most evident of them all; the
mutability of the laws is an evil inherent in democratic government,
because it is natural to democracies to raise men to power in very
rapid succession. But this evil is more or less sensible in proportion
to the authority and the means of action which the legislature
possesses.

In America the authority exercised by the legislative bodies is
supreme; nothing prevents them from accomplishing their wishes with
celerity, and with irresistible power, whilst they are supplied by new
representatives every year. That is to say, the circumstances which
contribute most powerfully to democratic instability, and which admit
of the free application of caprice to every object in the State, are
here in full operation. In conformity with this principle, America is,
at the present day, the country in the world where laws last the
shortest time. Almost all the American constitutions have been amended
within the course of thirty years: there is therefore not a single
American State which has not modified the principles of its legislation
in that lapse of time. As for the laws themselves, a single glance upon
the archives of the different States of the Union suffices to convince
one that in America the activity of the legislator never slackens. Not
that the American democracy is naturally less stable than any other,
but that it is allowed to follow its capricious propensities in the
formation of the laws. *b

b
[ The legislative acts promulgated by the State of Massachusetts alone,
from the year 1780 to the present time, already fill three stout
volumes; and it must not be forgotten that the collection to which I
allude was published in 1823, when many old laws which had fallen into
disuse were omitted. The State of Massachusetts, which is not more
populous than a department of France, may be considered as the most
stable, the most consistent, and the most sagacious in its undertakings
of the whole Union.]


The omnipotence of the majority, and the rapid as well as absolute
manner in which its decisions are executed in the United States, has
not only the effect of rendering the law unstable, but it exercises the
same influence upon the execution of the law and the conduct of the
public administration. As the majority is the only power which it is
important to court, all its projects are taken up with the greatest
ardor, but no sooner is its attention distracted than all this ardor
ceases; whilst in the free States of Europe the administration is at
once independent and secure, so that the projects of the legislature
are put into execution, although its immediate attention may be
directed to other objects.

In America certain ameliorations are undertaken with much more zeal and
activity than elsewhere; in Europe the same ends are promoted by much
less social effort, more continuously applied.

Some years ago several pious individuals undertook to ameliorate the
condition of the prisons. The public was excited by the statements
which they put forward, and the regeneration of criminals became a very
popular undertaking. New prisons were built, and for the first time the
idea of reforming as well as of punishing the delinquent formed a part
of prison discipline. But this happy alteration, in which the public
had taken so hearty an interest, and which the exertions of the
citizens had irresistibly accelerated, could not be completed in a
moment. Whilst the new penitentiaries were being erected (and it was
the pleasure of the majority that they should be terminated with all
possible celerity), the old prisons existed, which still contained a
great number of offenders. These jails became more unwholesome and more
corrupt in proportion as the new establishments were beautified and
improved, forming a contrast which may readily be understood. The
majority was so eagerly employed in founding the new prisons that those
which already existed were forgotten; and as the general attention was
diverted to a novel object, the care which had hitherto been bestowed
upon the others ceased. The salutary regulations of discipline were
first relaxed, and afterwards broken; so that in the immediate
neighborhood of a prison which bore witness to the mild and enlightened
spirit of our time, dungeons might be met with which reminded the
visitor of the barbarity of the Middle Ages.




 Chapter XV: Unlimited Power Of Majority, And Its Consequences—Part II

Tyranny Of The Majority

How the principle of the sovereignty of the people is to be
understood—Impossibility of conceiving a mixed government—The sovereign
power must centre somewhere—Precautions to be taken to control its
action—These precautions have not been taken in the United
States—Consequences.

I hold it to be an impious and an execrable maxim that, politically
speaking, a people has a right to do whatsoever it pleases, and yet I
have asserted that all authority originates in the will of the
majority. Am I then, in contradiction with myself?

A general law—which bears the name of Justice—has been made and
sanctioned, not only by a majority of this or that people, but by a
majority of mankind. The rights of every people are consequently
confined within the limits of what is just. A nation may be considered
in the light of a jury which is empowered to represent society at
large, and to apply the great and general law of justice. Ought such a
jury, which represents society, to have more power than the society in
which the laws it applies originate?

When I refuse to obey an unjust law, I do not contest the right which
the majority has of commanding, but I simply appeal from the
sovereignty of the people to the sovereignty of mankind. It has been
asserted that a people can never entirely outstep the boundaries of
justice and of reason in those affairs which are more peculiarly its
own, and that consequently, full power may fearlessly be given to the
majority by which it is represented. But this language is that of a
slave.

A majority taken collectively may be regarded as a being whose
opinions, and most frequently whose interests, are opposed to those of
another being, which is styled a minority. If it be admitted that a
man, possessing absolute power, may misuse that power by wronging his
adversaries, why should a majority not be liable to the same reproach?
Men are not apt to change their characters by agglomeration; nor does
their patience in the presence of obstacles increase with the
consciousness of their strength. *c And for these reasons I can never
willingly invest any number of my fellow-creatures with that unlimited
authority which I should refuse to any one of them.

c
[ No one will assert that a people cannot forcibly wrong another
people; but parties may be looked upon as lesser nations within a
greater one, and they are aliens to each other: if, therefore, it be
admitted that a nation can act tyrannically towards another nation, it
cannot be denied that a party may do the same towards another party.]


I do not think that it is possible to combine several principles in the
same government, so as at the same time to maintain freedom, and really
to oppose them to one another. The form of government which is usually
termed mixed has always appeared to me to be a mere chimera. Accurately
speaking there is no such thing as a mixed government (with the meaning
usually given to that word), because in all communities some one
principle of action may be discovered which preponderates over the
others. England in the last century, which has been more especially
cited as an example of this form of Government, was in point of fact an
essentially aristocratic State, although it comprised very powerful
elements of democracy; for the laws and customs of the country were
such that the aristocracy could not but preponderate in the end, and
subject the direction of public affairs to its own will. The error
arose from too much attention being paid to the actual struggle which
was going on between the nobles and the people, without considering the
probable issue of the contest, which was in reality the important
point. When a community really has a mixed government, that is to say,
when it is equally divided between two adverse principles, it must
either pass through a revolution or fall into complete dissolution.

I am therefore of opinion that some one social power must always be
made to predominate over the others; but I think that liberty is
endangered when this power is checked by no obstacles which may retard
its course, and force it to moderate its own vehemence.

Unlimited power is in itself a bad and dangerous thing; human beings
are not competent to exercise it with discretion, and God alone can be
omnipotent, because His wisdom and His justice are always equal to His
power. But no power upon earth is so worthy of honor for itself, or of
reverential obedience to the rights which it represents, that I would
consent to admit its uncontrolled and all-predominant authority. When I
see that the right and the means of absolute command are conferred on a
people or upon a king, upon an aristocracy or a democracy, a monarchy
or a republic, I recognize the germ of tyranny, and I journey onward to
a land of more hopeful institutions.

In my opinion the main evil of the present democratic institutions of
the United States does not arise, as is often asserted in Europe, from
their weakness, but from their overpowering strength; and I am not so
much alarmed at the excessive liberty which reigns in that country as
at the very inadequate securities which exist against tyranny.

When an individual or a party is wronged in the United States, to whom
can he apply for redress? If to public opinion, public opinion
constitutes the majority; if to the legislature, it represents the
majority, and implicitly obeys its injunctions; if to the executive
power, it is appointed by the majority, and remains a passive tool in
its hands; the public troops consist of the majority under arms; the
jury is the majority invested with the right of hearing judicial cases;
and in certain States even the judges are elected by the majority.
However iniquitous or absurd the evil of which you complain may be, you
must submit to it as well as you can. *d

d
[ A striking instance of the excesses which may be occasioned by the
despotism of the majority occurred at Baltimore in the year 1812. At
that time the war was very popular in Baltimore. A journal which had
taken the other side of the question excited the indignation of the
inhabitants by its opposition. The populace assembled, broke the
printing-presses, and attacked the houses of the newspaper editors. The
militia was called out, but no one obeyed the call; and the only means
of saving the poor wretches who were threatened by the frenzy of the
mob was to throw them into prison as common malefactors. But even this
precaution was ineffectual; the mob collected again during the night,
the magistrates again made a vain attempt to call out the militia, the
prison was forced, one of the newspaper editors was killed upon the
spot, and the others were left for dead; the guilty parties were
acquitted by the jury when they were brought to trial.


I said one day to an inhabitant of Pennsylvania, “Be so good as to
explain to me how it happens that in a State founded by Quakers, and
celebrated for its toleration, freed blacks are not allowed to exercise
civil rights. They pay the taxes; is it not fair that they should have
a vote?”

“You insult us,” replied my informant, “if you imagine that our
legislators could have committed so gross an act of injustice and
intolerance.”

“What! then the blacks possess the right of voting in this county?”

“Without the smallest doubt.”

“How comes it, then, that at the polling-booth this morning I did not
perceive a single negro in the whole meeting?”

“This is not the fault of the law: the negroes have an undisputed right
of voting, but they voluntarily abstain from making their appearance.”

“A very pretty piece of modesty on their parts!” rejoined I.

“Why, the truth is, that they are not disinclined to vote, but they are
afraid of being maltreated; in this country the law is sometimes unable
to maintain its authority without the support of the majority. But in
this case the majority entertains very strong prejudices against the
blacks, and the magistrates are unable to protect them in the exercise
of their legal privileges.”

“What! then the majority claims the right not only of making the laws,
but of breaking the laws it has made?”]

If, on the other hand, a legislative power could be so constituted as
to represent the majority without necessarily being the slave of its
passions; an executive, so as to retain a certain degree of
uncontrolled authority; and a judiciary, so as to remain independent of
the two other powers; a government would be formed which would still be
democratic without incurring any risk of tyrannical abuse.

I do not say that tyrannical abuses frequently occur in America at the
present day, but I maintain that no sure barrier is established against
them, and that the causes which mitigate the government are to be found
in the circumstances and the manners of the country more than in its
laws.

Effects Of The Unlimited Power Of The Majority Upon The Arbitrary
Authority Of The American Public Officers

Liberty left by the American laws to public officers within a certain
sphere—Their power.

A distinction must be drawn between tyranny and arbitrary power.
Tyranny may be exercised by means of the law, and in that case it is
not arbitrary; arbitrary power may be exercised for the good of the
community at large, in which case it is not tyrannical. Tyranny usually
employs arbitrary means, but, if necessary, it can rule without them.

In the United States the unbounded power of the majority, which is
favorable to the legal despotism of the legislature, is likewise
favorable to the arbitrary authority of the magistrate. The majority
has an entire control over the law when it is made and when it is
executed; and as it possesses an equal authority over those who are in
power and the community at large, it considers public officers as its
passive agents, and readily confides the task of serving its designs to
their vigilance. The details of their office and the privileges which
they are to enjoy are rarely defined beforehand; but the majority
treats them as a master does his servants when they are always at work
in his sight, and he has the power of directing or reprimanding them at
every instant.

In general the American functionaries are far more independent than the
French civil officers within the sphere which is prescribed to them.
Sometimes, even, they are allowed by the popular authority to exceed
those bounds; and as they are protected by the opinion, and backed by
the co-operation, of the majority, they venture upon such
manifestations of their power as astonish a European. By this means
habits are formed in the heart of a free country which may some day
prove fatal to its liberties.

Power Exercised By The Majority In America Upon Opinion

In America, when the majority has once irrevocably decided a question,
all discussion ceases—Reason of this—Moral power exercised by the
majority upon opinion—Democratic republics have deprived despotism of
its physical instruments—Their despotism sways the minds of men.

It is in the examination of the display of public opinion in the United
States that we clearly perceive how far the power of the majority
surpasses all the powers with which we are acquainted in Europe.
Intellectual principles exercise an influence which is so invisible,
and often so inappreciable, that they baffle the toils of oppression.
At the present time the most absolute monarchs in Europe are unable to
prevent certain notions, which are opposed to their authority, from
circulating in secret throughout their dominions, and even in their
courts. Such is not the case in America; as long as the majority is
still undecided, discussion is carried on; but as soon as its decision
is irrevocably pronounced, a submissive silence is observed, and the
friends, as well as the opponents, of the measure unite in assenting to
its propriety. The reason of this is perfectly clear: no monarch is so
absolute as to combine all the powers of society in his own hands, and
to conquer all opposition with the energy of a majority which is
invested with the right of making and of executing the laws.

The authority of a king is purely physical, and it controls the actions
of the subject without subduing his private will; but the majority
possesses a power which is physical and moral at the same time; it acts
upon the will as well as upon the actions of men, and it represses not
only all contest, but all controversy. I know no country in which there
is so little true independence of mind and freedom of discussion as in
America. In any constitutional state in Europe every sort of religious
and political theory may be advocated and propagated abroad; for there
is no country in Europe so subdued by any single authority as not to
contain citizens who are ready to protect the man who raises his voice
in the cause of truth from the consequences of his hardihood. If he is
unfortunate enough to live under an absolute government, the people is
upon his side; if he inhabits a free country, he may find a shelter
behind the authority of the throne, if he require one. The aristocratic
part of society supports him in some countries, and the democracy in
others. But in a nation where democratic institutions exist, organized
like those of the United States, there is but one sole authority, one
single element of strength and of success, with nothing beyond it.

In America the majority raises very formidable barriers to the liberty
of opinion: within these barriers an author may write whatever he
pleases, but he will repent it if he ever step beyond them. Not that he
is exposed to the terrors of an auto-da-fe, but he is tormented by the
slights and persecutions of daily obloquy. His political career is
closed forever, since he has offended the only authority which is able
to promote his success. Every sort of compensation, even that of
celebrity, is refused to him. Before he published his opinions he
imagined that he held them in common with many others; but no sooner
has he declared them openly than he is loudly censured by his
overbearing opponents, whilst those who think without having the
courage to speak, like him, abandon him in silence. He yields at
length, oppressed by the daily efforts he has been making, and he
subsides into silence, as if he was tormented by remorse for having
spoken the truth.

Fetters and headsmen were the coarse instruments which tyranny formerly
employed; but the civilization of our age has refined the arts of
despotism which seemed, however, to have been sufficiently perfected
before. The excesses of monarchical power had devised a variety of
physical means of oppression: the democratic republics of the present
day have rendered it as entirely an affair of the mind as that will
which it is intended to coerce. Under the absolute sway of an
individual despot the body was attacked in order to subdue the soul,
and the soul escaped the blows which were directed against it and rose
superior to the attempt; but such is not the course adopted by tyranny
in democratic republics; there the body is left free, and the soul is
enslaved. The sovereign can no longer say, “You shall think as I do on
pain of death;” but he says, “You are free to think differently from
me, and to retain your life, your property, and all that you possess;
but if such be your determination, you are henceforth an alien among
your people. You may retain your civil rights, but they will be useless
to you, for you will never be chosen by your fellow-citizens if you
solicit their suffrages, and they will affect to scorn you if you
solicit their esteem. You will remain among men, but you will be
deprived of the rights of mankind. Your fellow-creatures will shun you
like an impure being, and those who are most persuaded of your
innocence will abandon you too, lest they should be shunned in their
turn. Go in peace! I have given you your life, but it is an existence
in comparably worse than death.”

Monarchical institutions have thrown an odium upon despotism; let us
beware lest democratic republics should restore oppression, and should
render it less odious and less degrading in the eyes of the many, by
making it still more onerous to the few.

Works have been published in the proudest nations of the Old World
expressly intended to censure the vices and deride the follies of the
times; Labruyere inhabited the palace of Louis XIV when he composed his
chapter upon the Great, and Moliere criticised the courtiers in the
very pieces which were acted before the Court. But the ruling power in
the United States is not to be made game of; the smallest reproach
irritates its sensibility, and the slightest joke which has any
foundation in truth renders it indignant; from the style of its
language to the more solid virtues of its character, everything must be
made the subject of encomium. No writer, whatever be his eminence, can
escape from this tribute of adulation to his fellow-citizens. The
majority lives in the perpetual practice of self-applause, and there
are certain truths which the Americans can only learn from strangers or
from experience.

If great writers have not at present existed in America, the reason is
very simply given in these facts; there can be no literary genius
without freedom of opinion, and freedom of opinion does not exist in
America. The Inquisition has never been able to prevent a vast number
of anti-religious books from circulating in Spain. The empire of the
majority succeeds much better in the United States, since it actually
removes the wish of publishing them. Unbelievers are to be met with in
America, but, to say the truth, there is no public organ of infidelity.
Attempts have been made by some governments to protect the morality of
nations by prohibiting licentious books. In the United States no one is
punished for this sort of works, but no one is induced to write them;
not because all the citizens are immaculate in their manners, but
because the majority of the community is decent and orderly.

In these cases the advantages derived from the exercise of this power
are unquestionable, and I am simply discussing the nature of the power
itself. This irresistible authority is a constant fact, and its
judicious exercise is an accidental occurrence.

Effects Of The Tyranny Of The Majority Upon The National Character Of
The Americans

Effects of the tyranny of the majority more sensibly felt hitherto in
the manners than in the conduct of society—They check the development
of leading characters—Democratic republics organized like the United
States bring the practice of courting favor within the reach of the
many—Proofs of this spirit in the United States—Why there is more
patriotism in the people than in those who govern in its name.

The tendencies which I have just alluded to are as yet very slightly
perceptible in political society, but they already begin to exercise an
unfavorable influence upon the national character of the Americans. I
am inclined to attribute the singular paucity of distinguished
political characters to the ever-increasing activity of the despotism
of the majority in the United States. When the American Revolution
broke out they arose in great numbers, for public opinion then served,
not to tyrannize over, but to direct the exertions of individuals.
Those celebrated men took a full part in the general agitation of mind
common at that period, and they attained a high degree of personal
fame, which was reflected back upon the nation, but which was by no
means borrowed from it.

In absolute governments the great nobles who are nearest to the throne
flatter the passions of the sovereign, and voluntarily truckle to his
caprices. But the mass of the nation does not degrade itself by
servitude: it often submits from weakness, from habit, or from
ignorance, and sometimes from loyalty. Some nations have been known to
sacrifice their own desires to those of the sovereign with pleasure and
with pride, thus exhibiting a sort of independence in the very act of
submission. These peoples are miserable, but they are not degraded.
There is a great difference between doing what one does not approve and
feigning to approve what one does; the one is the necessary case of a
weak person, the other befits the temper of a lackey.

In free countries, where everyone is more or less called upon to give
his opinion in the affairs of state; in democratic republics, where
public life is incessantly commingled with domestic affairs, where the
sovereign authority is accessible on every side, and where its
attention can almost always be attracted by vociferation, more persons
are to be met with who speculate upon its foibles and live at the cost
of its passions than in absolute monarchies. Not because men are
naturally worse in these States than elsewhere, but the temptation is
stronger, and of easier access at the same time. The result is a far
more extensive debasement of the characters of citizens.

Democratic republics extend the practice of currying favor with the
many, and they introduce it into a greater number of classes at once:
this is one of the most serious reproaches that can be addressed to
them. In democratic States organized on the principles of the American
republics, this is more especially the case, where the authority of the
majority is so absolute and so irresistible that a man must give up his
rights as a citizen, and almost abjure his quality as a human being, if
te intends to stray from the track which it lays down.

In that immense crowd which throngs the avenues to power in the United
States I found very few men who displayed any of that manly candor and
that masculine independence of opinion which frequently distinguished
the Americans in former times, and which constitutes the leading
feature in distinguished characters, wheresoever they may be found. It
seems, at first sight, as if all the minds of the Americans were formed
upon one model, so accurately do they correspond in their manner of
judging. A stranger does, indeed, sometimes meet with Americans who
dissent from these rigorous formularies; with men who deplore the
defects of the laws, the mutability and the ignorance of democracy; who
even go so far as to observe the evil tendencies which impair the
national character, and to point out such remedies as it might be
possible to apply; but no one is there to hear these things besides
yourself, and you, to whom these secret reflections are confided, are a
stranger and a bird of passage. They are very ready to communicate
truths which are useless to you, but they continue to hold a different
language in public.

If ever these lines are read in America, I am well assured of two
things: in the first place, that all who peruse them will raise their
voices to condemn me; and in the second place, that very many of them
will acquit me at the bottom of their conscience.

I have heard of patriotism in the United States, and it is a virtue
which may be found among the people, but never among the leaders of the
people. This may be explained by analogy; despotism debases the
oppressed much more than the oppressor: in absolute monarchies the king
has often great virtues, but the courtiers are invariably servile. It
is true that the American courtiers do not say “Sire,” or “Your
Majesty”—a distinction without a difference. They are forever talking
of the natural intelligence of the populace they serve; they do not
debate the question as to which of the virtues of their master is
pre-eminently worthy of admiration, for they assure him that he
possesses all the virtues under heaven without having acquired them, or
without caring to acquire them; they do not give him their daughters
and their wives to be raised at his pleasure to the rank of his
concubines, but, by sacrificing their opinions, they prostitute
themselves. Moralists and philosophers in America are not obliged to
conceal their opinions under the veil of allegory; but, before they
venture upon a harsh truth, they say, “We are aware that the people
which we are addressing is too superior to all the weaknesses of human
nature to lose the command of its temper for an instant; and we should
not hold this language if we were not speaking to men whom their
virtues and their intelligence render more worthy of freedom than all
the rest of the world.” It would have been impossible for the
sycophants of Louis XIV to flatter more dexterously. For my part, I am
persuaded that in all governments, whatever their nature may be,
servility will cower to force, and adulation will cling to power. The
only means of preventing men from degrading themselves is to invest no
one with that unlimited authority which is the surest method of
debasing them.

The Greatest Dangers Of The American Republics Proceed From The
Unlimited Power Of The Majority

Democratic republics liable to perish from a misuse of their power, and
not by impotence—The Governments of the American republics are more
centralized and more energetic than those of the monarchies of
Europe—Dangers resulting from this—Opinions of Hamilton and Jefferson
upon this point.

Governments usually fall a sacrifice to impotence or to tyranny. In the
former case their power escapes from them; it is wrested from their
grasp in the latter. Many observers, who have witnessed the anarchy of
democratic States, have imagined that the government of those States
was naturally weak and impotent. The truth is, that when once
hostilities are begun between parties, the government loses its control
over society. But I do not think that a democratic power is naturally
without force or without resources: say, rather, that it is almost
always by the abuse of its force and the misemployment of its resources
that a democratic government fails. Anarchy is almost always produced
by its tyranny or its mistakes, but not by its want of strength.

It is important not to confound stability with force, or the greatness
of a thing with its duration. In democratic republics, the power which
directs *e society is not stable; for it often changes hands and
assumes a new direction. But whichever way it turns, its force is
almost irresistible. The Governments of the American republics appear
to me to be as much centralized as those of the absolute monarchies of
Europe, and more energetic than they are. I do not, therefore, imagine
that they will perish from weakness. *f

e
[ This power may be centred in an assembly, in which case it will be
strong without being stable; or it may be centred in an individual, in
which case it will be less strong, but more stable.]


f
[ I presume that it is scarcely necessary to remind the reader here, as
well as throughout the remainder of this chapter, that I am speaking,
not of the Federal Government, but of the several governments of each
State, which the majority controls at its pleasure.]


If ever the free institutions of America are destroyed, that event may
be attributed to the unlimited authority of the majority, which may at
some future time urge the minorities to desperation, and oblige them to
have recourse to physical force. Anarchy will then be the result, but
it will have been brought about by despotism.

Mr. Hamilton expresses the same opinion in the “Federalist,” No. 51.
“It is of great importance in a republic not only to guard the society
against the oppression of its rulers, but to guard one part of the
society against the injustice of the other part. Justice is the end of
government. It is the end of civil society. It ever has been, and ever
will be, pursued until it be obtained, or until liberty be lost in the
pursuit. In a society, under the forms of which the stronger faction
can readily unite and oppress the weaker, anarchy may as truly be said
to reign as in a state of nature, where the weaker individual is not
secured against the violence of the stronger: and as in the latter
state even the stronger individuals are prompted by the uncertainty of
their condition to submit to a government which may protect the weak as
well as themselves, so in the former state will the more powerful
factions be gradually induced by a like motive to wish for a government
which will protect all parties, the weaker as well as the more
powerful. It can be little doubted that, if the State of Rhode Island
was separated from the Confederacy and left to itself, the insecurity
of right under the popular form of government within such narrow limits
would be displayed by such reiterated oppressions of the factious
majorities, that some power altogether independent of the people would
soon be called for by the voice of the very factions whose misrule had
proved the necessity of it.”

Jefferson has also thus expressed himself in a letter to Madison: *g
“The executive power in our Government is not the only, perhaps not
even the principal, object of my solicitude. The tyranny of the
Legislature is really the danger most to be feared, and will continue
to be so for many years to come. The tyranny of the executive power
will come in its turn, but at a more distant period.” I am glad to cite
the opinion of Jefferson upon this subject rather than that of another,
because I consider him to be the most powerful advocate democracy has
ever sent forth.

g
[ March 15, 1789.]




 Chapter XVI: Causes Mitigating Tyranny In The United States—Part I




 Chapter Summary


The national majority does not pretend to conduct all business—Is
obliged to employ the town and county magistrates to execute its
supreme decisions.

I have already pointed out the distinction which is to be made between
a centralized government and a centralized administration. The former
exists in America, but the latter is nearly unknown there. If the
directing power of the American communities had both these instruments
of government at its disposal, and united the habit of executing its
own commands to the right of commanding; if, after having established
the general principles of government, it descended to the details of
public business; and if, having regulated the great interests of the
country, it could penetrate into the privacy of individual interests,
freedom would soon be banished from the New World.

But in the United States the majority, which so frequently displays the
tastes and the propensities of a despot, is still destitute of the more
perfect instruments of tyranny. In the American republics the activity
of the central Government has never as yet been extended beyond a
limited number of objects sufficiently prominent to call forth its
attention. The secondary affairs of society have never been regulated
by its authority, and nothing has hitherto betrayed its desire of
interfering in them. The majority is become more and more absolute, but
it has not increased the prerogatives of the central government; those
great prerogatives have been confined to a certain sphere; and although
the despotism of the majority may be galling upon one point, it cannot
be said to extend to all. However the predominant party in the nation
may be carried away by its passions, however ardent it may be in the
pursuit of its projects, it cannot oblige all the citizens to comply
with its desires in the same manner and at the same time throughout the
country. When the central Government which represents that majority has
issued a decree, it must entrust the execution of its will to agents,
over whom it frequently has no control, and whom it cannot perpetually
direct. The townships, municipal bodies, and counties may therefore be
looked upon as concealed break-waters, which check or part the tide of
popular excitement. If an oppressive law were passed, the liberties of
the people would still be protected by the means by which that law
would be put in execution: the majority cannot descend to the details
and (as I will venture to style them) the puerilities of administrative
tyranny. Nor does the people entertain that full consciousness of its
authority which would prompt it to interfere in these matters; it knows
the extent of its natural powers, but it is unacquainted with the
increased resources which the art of government might furnish.

This point deserves attention, for if a democratic republic similar to
that of the United States were ever founded in a country where the
power of a single individual had previously subsisted, and the effects
of a centralized administration had sunk deep into the habits and the
laws of the people, I do not hesitate to assert, that in that country a
more insufferable despotism would prevail than any which now exists in
the monarchical States of Europe, or indeed than any which could be
found on this side of the confines of Asia.

The Profession Of The Law In The United States Serves To Counterpoise
The Democracy

Utility of discriminating the natural propensities of the members of
the legal profession—These men called upon to act a prominent part in
future society—In what manner the peculiar pursuits of lawyers give an
aristocratic turn to their ideas—Accidental causes which may check this
tendency—Ease with which the aristocracy coalesces with legal men—Use
of lawyers to a despot—The profession of the law constitutes the only
aristocratic element with which the natural elements of democracy will
combine—Peculiar causes which tend to give an aristocratic turn of mind
to the English and American lawyers—The aristocracy of America is on
the bench and at the bar—Influence of lawyers upon American
society—Their peculiar magisterial habits affect the legislature, the
administration, and even the people.

In visiting the Americans and in studying their laws we perceive that
the authority they have entrusted to members of the legal profession,
and the influence which these individuals exercise in the Government,
is the most powerful existing security against the excesses of
democracy. This effect seems to me to result from a general cause which
it is useful to investigate, since it may produce analogous
consequences elsewhere.

The members of the legal profession have taken an important part in all
the vicissitudes of political society in Europe during the last five
hundred years. At one time they have been the instruments of those who
were invested with political authority, and at another they have
succeeded in converting political authorities into their instrument. In
the Middle Ages they afforded a powerful support to the Crown, and
since that period they have exerted themselves to the utmost to limit
the royal prerogative. In England they have contracted a close alliance
with the aristocracy; in France they have proved to be the most
dangerous enemies of that class. It is my object to inquire whether,
under all these circumstances, the members of the legal profession have
been swayed by sudden and momentary impulses; or whether they have been
impelled by principles which are inherent in their pursuits, and which
will always recur in history. I am incited to this investigation by
reflecting that this particular class of men will most likely play a
prominent part in that order of things to which the events of our time
are giving birth.

Men who have more especially devoted themselves to legal pursuits
derive from those occupations certain habits of order, a taste for
formalities, and a kind of instinctive regard for the regular
connection of ideas, which naturally render them very hostile to the
revolutionary spirit and the unreflecting passions of the multitude.

The special information which lawyers derive from their studies ensures
them a separate station in society, and they constitute a sort of
privileged body in the scale of intelligence. This notion of their
superiority perpetually recurs to them in the practice of their
profession: they are the masters of a science which is necessary, but
which is not very generally known; they serve as arbiters between the
citizens; and the habit of directing the blind passions of parties in
litigation to their purpose inspires them with a certain contempt for
the judgment of the multitude. To this it may be added that they
naturally constitute a body, not by any previous understanding, or by
an agreement which directs them to a common end; but the analogy of
their studies and the uniformity of their proceedings connect their
minds together, as much as a common interest could combine their
endeavors.

A portion of the tastes and of the habits of the aristocracy may
consequently be discovered in the characters of men in the profession
of the law. They participate in the same instinctive love of order and
of formalities; and they entertain the same repugnance to the actions
of the multitude, and the same secret contempt of the government of the
people. I do not mean to say that the natural propensities of lawyers
are sufficiently strong to sway them irresistibly; for they, like most
other men, are governed by their private interests and the advantages
of the moment.

In a state of society in which the members of the legal profession are
prevented from holding that rank in the political world which they
enjoy in private life, we may rest assured that they will be the
foremost agents of revolution. But it must then be inquired whether the
cause which induces them to innovate and to destroy is accidental, or
whether it belongs to some lasting purpose which they entertain. It is
true that lawyers mainly contributed to the overthrow of the French
monarchy in 1789; but it remains to be seen whether they acted thus
because they had studied the laws, or because they were prohibited from
co-operating in the work of legislation.

Five hundred years ago the English nobles headed the people, and spoke
in its name; at the present time the aristocracy supports the throne,
and defends the royal prerogative. But aristocracy has, notwithstanding
this, its peculiar instincts and propensities. We must be careful not
to confound isolated members of a body with the body itself. In all
free governments, of whatsoever form they may be, members of the legal
profession will be found at the head of all parties. The same remark is
also applicable to the aristocracy; for almost all the democratic
convulsions which have agitated the world have been directed by nobles.

A privileged body can never satisfy the ambition of all its members; it
has always more talents and more passions to content and to employ than
it can find places; so that a considerable number of individuals are
usually to be met with who are inclined to attack those very privileges
which they find it impossible to turn to their own account.

I do not, then, assert that all the members of the legal profession are
at all times the friends of order and the opponents of innovation, but
merely that most of them usually are so. In a community in which
lawyers are allowed to occupy, without opposition, that high station
which naturally belongs to them, their general spirit will be eminently
conservative and anti-democratic. When an aristocracy excludes the
leaders of that profession from its ranks, it excites enemies which are
the more formidable to its security as they are independent of the
nobility by their industrious pursuits; and they feel themselves to be
its equal in point of intelligence, although they enjoy less opulence
and less power. But whenever an aristocracy consents to impart some of
its privileges to these same individuals, the two classes coalesce very
readily, and assume, as it were, the consistency of a single order of
family interests.

I am, in like manner, inclined to believe that a monarch will always be
able to convert legal practitioners into the most serviceable
instruments of his authority. There is a far greater affinity between
this class of individuals and the executive power than there is between
them and the people; just as there is a greater natural affinity
between the nobles and the monarch than between the nobles and the
people, although the higher orders of society have occasionally
resisted the prerogative of the Crown in concert with the lower
classes.

Lawyers are attached to public order beyond every other consideration,
and the best security of public order is authority. It must not be
forgotten that, if they prize the free institutions of their country
much, they nevertheless value the legality of those institutions far
more: they are less afraid of tyranny than of arbitrary power; and
provided that the legislature take upon itself to deprive men of their
independence, they are not dissatisfied.

I am therefore convinced that the prince who, in presence of an
encroaching democracy, should endeavor to impair the judicial authority
in his dominions, and to diminish the political influence of lawyers,
would commit a great mistake. He would let slip the substance of
authority to grasp at the shadow. He would act more wisely in
introducing men connected with the law into the government; and if he
entrusted them with the conduct of a despotic power, bearing some marks
of violence, that power would most likely assume the external features
of justice and of legality in their hands.

The government of democracy is favorable to the political power of
lawyers; for when the wealthy, the noble, and the prince are excluded
from the government, they are sure to occupy the highest stations, in
their own right, as it were, since they are the only men of information
and sagacity, beyond the sphere of the people, who can be the object of
the popular choice. If, then, they are led by their tastes to combine
with the aristocracy and to support the Crown, they are naturally
brought into contact with the people by their interests. They like the
government of democracy, without participating in its propensities and
without imitating its weaknesses; whence they derive a twofold
authority, from it and over it. The people in democratic states does
not mistrust the members of the legal profession, because it is well
known that they are interested in serving the popular cause; and it
listens to them without irritation, because it does not attribute to
them any sinister designs. The object of lawyers is not, indeed, to
overthrow the institutions of democracy, but they constantly endeavor
to give it an impulse which diverts it from its real tendency, by means
which are foreign to its nature. Lawyers belong to the people by birth
and interest, to the aristocracy by habit and by taste, and they may be
looked upon as the natural bond and connecting link of the two great
classes of society.

The profession of the law is the only aristocratic element which can be
amalgamated without violence with the natural elements of democracy,
and which can be advantageously and permanently combined with them. I
am not unacquainted with the defects which are inherent in the
character of that body of men; but without this admixture of
lawyer-like sobriety with the democratic principle, I question whether
democratic institutions could long be maintained, and I cannot believe
that a republic could subsist at the present time if the influence of
lawyers in public business did not increase in proportion to the power
of the people.

This aristocratic character, which I hold to be common to the legal
profession, is much more distinctly marked in the United States and in
England than in any other country. This proceeds not only from the
legal studies of the English and American lawyers, but from the nature
of the legislation, and the position which those persons occupy in the
two countries. The English and the Americans have retained the law of
precedents; that is to say, they continue to found their legal opinions
and the decisions of their courts upon the opinions and the decisions
of their forefathers. In the mind of an English or American lawyer a
taste and a reverence for what is old is almost always united to a love
of regular and lawful proceedings.

This predisposition has another effect upon the character of the legal
profession and upon the general course of society. The English and
American lawyers investigate what has been done; the French advocate
inquires what should have been done; the former produce precedents, the
latter reasons. A French observer is surprised to hear how often an
English or an American lawyer quotes the opinions of others, and how
little he alludes to his own; whilst the reverse occurs in France.
There the most trifling litigation is never conducted without the
introduction of an entire system of ideas peculiar to the counsel
employed; and the fundamental principles of law are discussed in order
to obtain a perch of land by the decision of the court. This abnegation
of his own opinion, and this implicit deference to the opinion of his
forefathers, which are common to the English and American lawyer, this
subjection of thought which he is obliged to profess, necessarily give
him more timid habits and more sluggish inclinations in England and
America than in France.

The French codes are often difficult of comprehension, but they can be
read by every one; nothing, on the other hand, can be more impenetrable
to the uninitiated than a legislation founded upon precedents. The
indispensable want of legal assistance which is felt in England and in
the United States, and the high opinion which is generally entertained
of the ability of the legal profession, tend to separate it more and
more from the people, and to place it in a distinct class. The French
lawyer is simply a man extensively acquainted with the statutes of his
country; but the English or American lawyer resembles the hierophants
of Egypt, for, like them, he is the sole interpreter of an occult
science.

The station which lawyers occupy in England and America exercises no
less an influence upon their habits and their opinions. The English
aristocracy, which has taken care to attract to its sphere whatever is
at all analogous to itself, has conferred a high degree of importance
and of authority upon the members of the legal profession. In English
society lawyers do not occupy the first rank, but they are contented
with the station assigned to them; they constitute, as it were, the
younger branch of the English aristocracy, and they are attached to
their elder brothers, although they do not enjoy all their privileges.
The English lawyers consequently mingle the taste and the ideas of the
aristocratic circles in which they move with the aristocratic interests
of their profession.

And indeed the lawyer-like character which I am endeavoring to depict
is most distinctly to be met with in England: there laws are esteemed
not so much because they are good as because they are old; and if it be
necessary to modify them in any respect, or to adapt them the changes
which time operates in society, recourse is had to the most
inconceivable contrivances in order to uphold the traditionary fabric,
and to maintain that nothing has been done which does not square with
the intentions and complete the labors of former generations. The very
individuals who conduct these changes disclaim all intention of
innovation, and they had rather resort to absurd expedients than plead
guilty to so great a crime. This spirit appertains more especially to
the English lawyers; they seem indifferent to the real meaning of what
they treat, and they direct all their attention to the letter, seeming
inclined to infringe the rules of common sense and of humanity rather
than to swerve one title from the law. The English legislation may be
compared to the stock of an old tree, upon which lawyers have engrafted
the most various shoots, with the hope that, although their fruits may
differ, their foliage at least will be confounded with the venerable
trunk which supports them all.

In America there are no nobles or men of letters, and the people is apt
to mistrust the wealthy; lawyers consequently form the highest
political class, and the most cultivated circle of society. They have
therefore nothing to gain by innovation, which adds a conservative
interest to their natural taste for public order. If I were asked where
I place the American aristocracy, I should reply without hesitation
that it is not composed of the rich, who are united together by no
common tie, but that it occupies the judicial bench and the bar.

The more we reflect upon all that occurs in the United States the more
shall we be persuaded that the lawyers as a body form the most
powerful, if not the only, counterpoise to the democratic element. In
that country we perceive how eminently the legal profession is
qualified by its powers, and even by its defects, to neutralize the
vices which are inherent in popular government. When the American
people is intoxicated by passion, or carried away by the impetuosity of
its ideas, it is checked and stopped by the almost invisible influence
of its legal counsellors, who secretly oppose their aristocratic
propensities to its democratic instincts, their superstitious
attachment to what is antique to its love of novelty, their narrow
views to its immense designs, and their habitual procrastination to its
ardent impatience.

The courts of justice are the most visible organs by which the legal
profession is enabled to control the democracy. The judge is a lawyer,
who, independently of the taste for regularity and order which he has
contracted in the study of legislation, derives an additional love of
stability from his own inalienable functions. His legal attainments
have already raised him to a distinguished rank amongst his
fellow-citizens; his political power completes the distinction of his
station, and gives him the inclinations natural to privileged classes.

Armed with the power of declaring the laws to be unconstitutional, *a
the American magistrate perpetually interferes in political affairs. He
cannot force the people to make laws, but at least he can oblige it not
to disobey its own enactments; or to act inconsistently with its own
principles. I am aware that a secret tendency to diminish the judicial
power exists in the United States, and by most of the constitutions of
the several States the Government can, upon the demand of the two
houses of the legislature, remove the judges from their station. By
some other constitutions the members of the tribunals are elected, and
they are even subjected to frequent re-elections. I venture to predict
that these innovations will sooner or later be attended with fatal
consequences, and that it will be found out at some future period that
the attack which is made upon the judicial power has affected the
democratic republic itself.

a
[ See chapter VI. on the “Judicial Power in the United States.”]


It must not, however, be supposed that the legal spirit of which I have
been speaking has been confined, in the United States, to the courts of
justice; it extends far beyond them. As the lawyers constitute the only
enlightened class which the people does not mistrust, they are
naturally called upon to occupy most of the public stations. They fill
the legislative assemblies, and they conduct the administration; they
consequently exercise a powerful influence upon the formation of the
law, and upon its execution. The lawyers are, however, obliged to yield
to the current of public opinion, which is too strong for them to
resist it, but it is easy to find indications of what their conduct
would be if they were free to act as they chose. The Americans, who
have made such copious innovations in their political legislation, have
introduced very sparing alterations in their civil laws, and that with
great difficulty, although those laws are frequently repugnant to their
social condition. The reason of this is, that in matters of civil law
the majority is obliged to defer to the authority of the legal
profession, and that the American lawyers are disinclined to innovate
when they are left to their own choice.

It is curious for a Frenchman, accustomed to a very different state of
things, to hear the perpetual complaints which are made in the United
States against the stationary propensities of legal men, and their
prejudices in favor of existing institutions.

The influence of the legal habits which are common in America extends
beyond the limits I have just pointed out. Scarcely any question arises
in the United States which does not become, sooner or later, a subject
of judicial debate; hence all parties are obliged to borrow the ideas,
and even the language, usual in judicial proceedings in their daily
controversies. As most public men are, or have been, legal
practitioners, they introduce the customs and technicalities of their
profession into the affairs of the country. The jury extends this
habitude to all classes. The language of the law thus becomes, in some
measure, a vulgar tongue; the spirit of the law, which is produced in
the schools and courts of justice, gradually penetrates beyond their
walls into the bosom of society, where it descends to the lowest
classes, so that the whole people contracts the habits and the tastes
of the magistrate. The lawyers of the United States form a party which
is but little feared and scarcely perceived, which has no badge
peculiar to itself, which adapts itself with great flexibility to the
exigencies of the time, and accommodates itself to all the movements of
the social body; but this party extends over the whole community, and
it penetrates into all classes of society; it acts upon the country
imperceptibly, but it finally fashions it to suit its purposes.




 Chapter XVI: Causes Mitigating Tyranny In The United States—Part II

Trial By Jury In The United States Considered As A Political
Institution

Trial by jury, which is one of the instruments of the sovereignty of
the people, deserves to be compared with the other laws which establish
that sovereignty—Composition of the jury in the United States—Effect of
trial by jury upon the national character—It educates the people—It
tends to establish the authority of the magistrates and to extend a
knowledge of law among the people.

Since I have been led by my subject to recur to the administration of
justice in the United States, I will not pass over this point without
adverting to the institution of the jury. Trial by jury may be
considered in two separate points of view, as a judicial and as a
political institution. If it entered into my present purpose to inquire
how far trial by jury (more especially in civil cases) contributes to
insure the best administration of justice, I admit that its utility
might be contested. As the jury was first introduced at a time when
society was in an uncivilized state, and when courts of justice were
merely called upon to decide on the evidence of facts, it is not an
easy task to adapt it to the wants of a highly civilized community when
the mutual relations of men are multiplied to a surprising extent, and
have assumed the enlightened and intellectual character of the age. *b

b
[ The investigation of trial by jury as a judicial institution, and the
appreciation of its effects in the United States, together with the
advantages the Americans have derived from it, would suffice to form a
book, and a book upon a very useful and curious subject. The State of
Louisiana would in particular afford the curious phenomenon of a French
and English legislation, as well as a French and English population,
which are gradually combining with each other. See the “Digeste des
Lois de la Louisiane,” in two volumes; and the “Traite sur les Regles
des Actions civiles,” printed in French and English at New Orleans in
1830.]


My present object is to consider the jury as a political institution,
and any other course would divert me from my subject. Of trial by jury,
considered as a judicial institution, I shall here say but very few
words. When the English adopted trial by jury they were a
semi-barbarous people; they are become, in course of time, one of the
most enlightened nations of the earth; and their attachment to this
institution seems to have increased with their increasing cultivation.
They soon spread beyond their insular boundaries to every corner of the
habitable globe; some have formed colonies, others independent states;
the mother-country has maintained its monarchical constitution; many of
its offspring have founded powerful republics; but wherever the English
have been they have boasted of the privilege of trial by jury. *c They
have established it, or hastened to re-establish it, in all their
settlements. A judicial institution which obtains the suffrages of a
great people for so long a series of ages, which is zealously renewed
at every epoch of civilization, in all the climates of the earth and
under every form of human government, cannot be contrary to the spirit
of justice. *d

c
[ All the English and American jurists are unanimous upon this head.
Mr. Story, judge of the Supreme Court of the United States, speaks, in
his “Treatise on the Federal Constitution,” of the advantages of trial
by jury in civil cases:—“The inestimable privilege of a trial by jury
in civil cases—a privilege scarcely inferior to that in criminal cases,
which is counted by all persons to be essential to political and civil
liberty. . . .” (Story, book iii., chap. xxxviii.)]


d
[ If it were our province to point out the utility of the jury as a
judicial institution in this place, much might be said, and the
following arguments might be brought forward amongst others:—

By introducing the jury into the business of the courts you are enabled
to diminish the number of judges, which is a very great advantage. When
judges are very numerous, death is perpetually thinning the ranks of
the judicial functionaries, and laying places vacant for newcomers. The
ambition of the magistrates is therefore continually excited, and they
are naturally made dependent upon the will of the majority, or the
individual who fills up the vacant appointments; the officers of the
court then rise like the officers of an army. This state of things is
entirely contrary to the sound administration of justice, and to the
intentions of the legislator. The office of a judge is made inalienable
in order that he may remain independent: but of what advantage is it
that his independence should be protected if he be tempted to sacrifice
it of his own accord? When judges are very numerous many of them must
necessarily be incapable of performing their important duties, for a
great magistrate is a man of no common powers; and I am inclined to
believe that a half-enlightened tribunal is the worst of all
instruments for attaining those objects which it is the purpose of
courts of justice to accomplish. For my own part, I had rather submit
the decision of a case to ignorant jurors directed by a skilful judge
than to judges a majority of whom are imperfectly acquainted with
jurisprudence and with the laws.]

I turn, however, from this part of the subject. To look upon the jury
as a mere judicial institution is to confine our attention to a very
narrow view of it; for however great its influence may be upon the
decisions of the law courts, that influence is very subordinate to the
powerful effects which it produces on the destinies of the community at
large. The jury is above all a political institution, and it must be
regarded in this light in order to be duly appreciated.

By the jury I mean a certain number of citizens chosen
indiscriminately, and invested with a temporary right of judging. Trial
by jury, as applied to the repression of crime, appears to me to
introduce an eminently republican element into the government upon the
following grounds:—

The institution of the jury may be aristocratic or democratic,
according to the class of society from which the jurors are selected;
but it always preserves its republican character, inasmuch as it places
the real direction of society in the hands of the governed, or of a
portion of the governed, instead of leaving it under the authority of
the Government. Force is never more than a transient element of
success; and after force comes the notion of right. A government which
should only be able to crush its enemies upon a field of battle would
very soon be destroyed. The true sanction of political laws is to be
found in penal legislation, and if that sanction be wanting the law
will sooner or later lose its cogency. He who punishes infractions of
the law is therefore the real master of society. Now the institution of
the jury raises the people itself, or at least a class of citizens, to
the bench of judicial authority. The institution of the jury
consequently invests the people, or that class of citizens, with the
direction of society. *e

e
[ An important remark must, however, be made. Trial by jury does
unquestionably invest the people with a general control over the
actions of citizens, but it does not furnish means of exercising this
control in all cases, or with an absolute authority. When an absolute
monarch has the right of trying offences by his representatives, the
fate of the prisoner is, as it were, decided beforehand. But even if
the people were predisposed to convict, the composition and the
non-responsibility of the jury would still afford some chances
favorable to the protection of innocence.]


In England the jury is returned from the aristocratic portion of the
nation; *f the aristocracy makes the laws, applies the laws, and
punishes all infractions of the laws; everything is established upon a
consistent footing, and England may with truth be said to constitute an
aristocratic republic. In the United States the same system is applied
to the whole people. Every American citizen is qualified to be an
elector, a juror, and is eligible to office. *g The system of the jury,
as it is understood in America, appears to me to be as direct and as
extreme a consequence of the sovereignty of the people as universal
suffrage. These institutions are two instruments of equal power, which
contribute to the supremacy of the majority. All the sovereigns who
have chosen to govern by their own authority, and to direct society
instead of obeying its directions, have destroyed or enfeebled the
institution of the jury. The monarchs of the House of Tudor sent to
prison jurors who refused to convict, and Napoleon caused them to be
returned by his agents.

f
[ [This may be true to some extent of special juries, but not of common
juries. The author seems not to have been aware that the qualifications
of jurors in England vary exceedingly.]]


g
[ See Appendix, Q.]


However clear most of these truths may seem to be, they do not command
universal assent, and in France, at least, the institution of trial by
jury is still very imperfectly understood. If the question arises as to
the proper qualification of jurors, it is confined to a discussion of
the intelligence and knowledge of the citizens who may be returned, as
if the jury was merely a judicial institution. This appears to me to be
the least part of the subject. The jury is pre-eminently a political
institution; it must be regarded as one form of the sovereignty of the
people; when that sovereignty is repudiated, it must be rejected, or it
must be adapted to the laws by which that sovereignty is established.
The jury is that portion of the nation to which the execution of the
laws is entrusted, as the Houses of Parliament constitute that part of
the nation which makes the laws; and in order that society may be
governed with consistency and uniformity, the list of citizens
qualified to serve on juries must increase and diminish with the list
of electors. This I hold to be the point of view most worthy of the
attention of the legislator, and all that remains is merely accessory.

I am so entirely convinced that the jury is pre-eminently a political
institution that I still consider it in this light when it is applied
in civil causes. Laws are always unstable unless they are founded upon
the manners of a nation; manners are the only durable and resisting
power in a people. When the jury is reserved for criminal offences, the
people only witnesses its occasional action in certain particular
cases; the ordinary course of life goes on without its interference,
and it is considered as an instrument, but not as the only instrument,
of obtaining justice. This is true a fortiori when the jury is only
applied to certain criminal causes.

When, on the contrary, the influence of the jury is extended to civil
causes, its application is constantly palpable; it affects all the
interests of the community; everyone co-operates in its work: it thus
penetrates into all the usages of life, it fashions the human mind to
its peculiar forms, and is gradually associated with the idea of
justice itself.

The institution of the jury, if confined to criminal causes, is always
in danger, but when once it is introduced into civil proceedings it
defies the aggressions of time and of man. If it had been as easy to
remove the jury from the manners as from the laws of England, it would
have perished under Henry VIII, and Elizabeth, and the civil jury did
in reality, at that period, save the liberties of the country. In
whatever manner the jury be applied, it cannot fail to exercise a
powerful influence upon the national character; but this influence is
prodigiously increased when it is introduced into civil causes. The
jury, and more especially the jury in civil cases, serves to
communicate the spirit of the judges to the minds of all the citizens;
and this spirit, with the habits which attend it, is the soundest
preparation for free institutions. It imbues all classes with a respect
for the thing judged, and with the notion of right. If these two
elements be removed, the love of independence is reduced to a mere
destructive passion. It teaches men to practice equity, every man
learns to judge his neighbor as he would himself be judged; and this is
especially true of the jury in civil causes, for, whilst the number of
persons who have reason to apprehend a criminal prosecution is small,
every one is liable to have a civil action brought against him. The
jury teaches every man not to recoil before the responsibility of his
own actions, and impresses him with that manly confidence without which
political virtue cannot exist. It invests each citizen with a kind of
magistracy, it makes them all feel the duties which they are bound to
discharge towards society, and the part which they take in the
Government. By obliging men to turn their attention to affairs which
are not exclusively their own, it rubs off that individual egotism
which is the rust of society.

The jury contributes most powerfully to form the judgement and to
increase the natural intelligence of a people, and this is, in my
opinion, its greatest advantage. It may be regarded as a gratuitous
public school ever open, in which every juror learns to exercise his
rights, enters into daily communication with the most learned and
enlightened members of the upper classes, and becomes practically
acquainted with the laws of his country, which are brought within the
reach of his capacity by the efforts of the bar, the advice of the
judge, and even by the passions of the parties. I think that the
practical intelligence and political good sense of the Americans are
mainly attributable to the long use which they have made of the jury in
civil causes. I do not know whether the jury is useful to those who are
in litigation; but I am certain it is highly beneficial to those who
decide the litigation; and I look upon it as one of the most
efficacious means for the education of the people which society can
employ.

What I have hitherto said applies to all nations, but the remark I am
now about to make is peculiar to the Americans and to democratic
peoples. I have already observed that in democracies the members of the
legal profession and the magistrates constitute the only aristocratic
body which can check the irregularities of the people. This aristocracy
is invested with no physical power, but it exercises its conservative
influence upon the minds of men, and the most abundant source of its
authority is the institution of the civil jury. In criminal causes,
when society is armed against a single individual, the jury is apt to
look upon the judge as the passive instrument of social power, and to
mistrust his advice. Moreover, criminal causes are entirely founded
upon the evidence of facts which common sense can readily appreciate;
upon this ground the judge and the jury are equal. Such, however, is
not the case in civil causes; then the judge appears as a disinterested
arbiter between the conflicting passions of the parties. The jurors
look up to him with confidence and listen to him with respect, for in
this instance their intelligence is completely under the control of his
learning. It is the judge who sums up the various arguments with which
their memory has been wearied out, and who guides them through the
devious course of the proceedings; he points their attention to the
exact question of fact which they are called upon to solve, and he puts
the answer to the question of law into their mouths. His influence upon
their verdict is almost unlimited.

If I am called upon to explain why I am but little moved by the
arguments derived from the ignorance of jurors in civil causes, I
reply, that in these proceedings, whenever the question to be solved is
not a mere question of fact, the jury has only the semblance of a
judicial body. The jury sanctions the decision of the judge, they by
the authority of society which they represent, and he by that of reason
and of law. *h

h
[ See Appendix, R.]


In England and in America the judges exercise an influence upon
criminal trials which the French judges have never possessed. The
reason of this difference may easily be discovered; the English and
American magistrates establish their authority in civil causes, and
only transfer it afterwards to tribunals of another kind, where that
authority was not acquired. In some cases (and they are frequently the
most important ones) the American judges have the right of deciding
causes alone. *i Upon these occasions they are accidentally placed in
the position which the French judges habitually occupy, but they are
invested with far more power than the latter; they are still surrounded
by the reminiscence of the jury, and their judgment has almost as much
authority as the voice of the community at large, represented by that
institution. Their influence extends beyond the limits of the courts;
in the recreations of private life as well as in the turmoil of public
business, abroad and in the legislative assemblies, the American judge
is constantly surrounded by men who are accustomed to regard his
intelligence as superior to their own, and after having exercised his
power in the decision of causes, he continues to influence the habits
of thought and the characters of the individuals who took a part in his
judgment.

i
[ The Federal judges decide upon their own authority almost all the
questions most important to the country.]


The jury, then, which seems to restrict the rights of magistracy, does
in reality consolidate its power, and in no country are the judges so
powerful as there, where the people partakes their privileges. It is
more especially by means of the jury in civil causes that the American
magistrates imbue all classes of society with the spirit of their
profession. Thus the jury, which is the most energetic means of making
the people rule, is also the most efficacious means of teaching it to
rule well.




 Chapter XVII: Principal Causes Maintaining The Democratic
 Republic—Part I


Principal Causes Which Tend To Maintain The Democratic Republic In The
United States

A democratic republic subsists in the United States, and the principal
object of this book has been to account for the fact of its existence.
Several of the causes which contribute to maintain the institutions of
America have been involuntarily passed by or only hinted at as I was
borne along by my subject. Others I have been unable to discuss, and
those on which I have dwelt most are, as it were, buried in the details
of the former parts of this work. I think, therefore, that before I
proceed to speak of the future, I cannot do better than collect within
a small compass the reasons which best explain the present. In this
retrospective chapter I shall be succinct, for I shall take care to
remind the reader very summarily of what he already knows; and I shall
only select the most prominent of those facts which I have not yet
pointed out.

All the causes which contribute to the maintenance of the democratic
republic in the United States are reducible to three heads:—

I. The peculiar and accidental situation in which Providence has placed
the Americans.

II. The laws.

III. The manners and customs of the people.

Accidental Or Providential Causes Which Contribute To The Maintenance
Of The Democratic Republic In The United States The Union has no
neighbors—No metropolis—The Americans have had the chances of birth in
their favor—America an empty country—How this circumstance contributes
powerfully to the maintenance of the democratic republic in America—How
the American wilds are peopled—Avidity of the Anglo-Americans in taking
possession of the solitudes of the New World—Influence of physical
prosperity upon the political opinions of the Americans.

A thousand circumstances, independent of the will of man, concur to
facilitate the maintenance of a democratic republic in the United
States. Some of these peculiarities are known, the others may easily be
pointed out; but I shall confine myself to the most prominent amongst
them.

The Americans have no neighbors, and consequently they have no great
wars, or financial crises, or inroads, or conquest to dread; they
require neither great taxes, nor great armies, nor great generals; and
they have nothing to fear from a scourge which is more formidable to
republics than all these evils combined, namely, military glory. It is
impossible to deny the inconceivable influence which military glory
exercises upon the spirit of a nation. General Jackson, whom the
Americans have twice elected to the head of their Government, is a man
of a violent temper and mediocre talents; no one circumstance in the
whole course of his career ever proved that he is qualified to govern a
free people, and indeed the majority of the enlightened classes of the
Union has always been opposed to him. But he was raised to the
Presidency, and has been maintained in that lofty station, solely by
the recollection of a victory which he gained twenty years ago under
the walls of New Orleans, a victory which was, however, a very ordinary
achievement, and which could only be remembered in a country where
battles are rare. Now the people which is thus carried away by the
illusions of glory is unquestionably the most cold and calculating, the
most unmilitary (if I may use the expression), and the most prosaic of
all the peoples of the earth.

America has no great capital *a city, whose influence is directly or
indirectly felt over the whole extent of the country, which I hold to
be one of the first causes of the maintenance of republican
institutions in the United States. In cities men cannot be prevented
from concerting together, and from awakening a mutual excitement which
prompts sudden and passionate resolutions. Cities may be looked upon as
large assemblies, of which all the inhabitants are members; their
populace exercises a prodigious influence upon the magistrates, and
frequently executes its own wishes without their intervention.

a
[ The United States have no metropolis, but they already contain
several very large cities. Philadelphia reckoned 161,000 inhabitants
and New York 202,000 in the year 1830. The lower orders which inhabit
these cities constitute a rabble even more formidable than the populace
of European towns. They consist of freed blacks in the first place, who
are condemned by the laws and by public opinion to a hereditary state
of misery and degradation. They also contain a multitude of Europeans
who have been driven to the shores of the New World by their
misfortunes or their misconduct; and these men inoculate the United
States with all our vices, without bringing with them any of those
interests which counteract their baneful influence. As inhabitants of a
country where they have no civil rights, they are ready to turn all the
passions which agitate the community to their own advantage; thus,
within the last few months serious riots have broken out in
Philadelphia and in New York. Disturbances of this kind are unknown in
the rest of the country, which is nowise alarmed by them, because the
population of the cities has hitherto exercised neither power nor
influence over the rural districts. Nevertheless, I look upon the size
of certain American cities, and especially on the nature of their
population, as a real danger which threatens the future security of the
democratic republics of the New World; and I venture to predict that
they will perish from this circumstance unless the government succeeds
in creating an armed force, which, whilst it remains under the control
of the majority of the nation, will be independent of the town
population, and able to repress its excesses.


[The population of the city of New York had risen, in 1870, to 942,292,
and that of Philadelphia to 674,022. Brooklyn, which may be said to
form part of New York city, has a population of 396,099, in addition to
that of New York. The frequent disturbances in the great cities of
America, and the excessive corruption of their local governments—over
which there is no effectual control—are amongst the greatest evils and
dangers of the country.]]

To subject the provinces to the metropolis is therefore not only to
place the destiny of the empire in the hands of a portion of the
community, which may be reprobated as unjust, but to place it in the
hands of a populace acting under its own impulses, which must be
avoided as dangerous. The preponderance of capital cities is therefore
a serious blow upon the representative system, and it exposes modern
republics to the same defect as the republics of antiquity, which all
perished from not having been acquainted with that form of government.

It would be easy for me to adduce a great number of secondary causes
which have contributed to establish, and which concur to maintain, the
democratic republic of the United States. But I discern two principal
circumstances amongst these favorable elements, which I hasten to point
out. I have already observed that the origin of the American
settlements may be looked upon as the first and most efficacious cause
to which the present prosperity of the United States may be attributed.
The Americans had the chances of birth in their favor, and their
forefathers imported that equality of conditions into the country
whence the democratic republic has very naturally taken its rise. Nor
was this all they did; for besides this republican condition of
society, the early settler bequeathed to their descendants those
customs, manners, and opinions which contribute most to the success of
a republican form of government. When I reflect upon the consequences
of this primary circumstance, methinks I see the destiny of America
embodied in the first Puritan who landed on those shores, just as the
human race was represented by the first man.

The chief circumstance which has favored the establishment and the
maintenance of a democratic republic in the United States is the nature
of the territory which the American inhabit. Their ancestors gave them
the love of equality and of freedom, but God himself gave them the
means of remaining equal and free, by placing them upon a boundless
continent, which is open to their exertions. General prosperity is
favorable to the stability of all governments, but more particularly of
a democratic constitution, which depends upon the dispositions of the
majority, and more particularly of that portion of the community which
is most exposed to feel the pressure of want. When the people rules, it
must be rendered happy, or it will overturn the State, and misery is
apt to stimulate it to those excesses to which ambition rouses kings.
The physical causes, independent of the laws, which contribute to
promote general prosperity, are more numerous in America than they have
ever been in any other country in the world, at any other period of
history. In the United States not only is legislation democratic, but
nature herself favors the cause of the people.

In what part of human tradition can be found anything at all similar to
that which is occurring under our eyes in North America? The celebrated
communities of antiquity were all founded in the midst of hostile
nations, which they were obliged to subjugate before they could
flourish in their place. Even the moderns have found, in some parts of
South America, vast regions inhabited by a people of inferior
civilization, but which occupied and cultivated the soil. To found
their new states it was necessary to extirpate or to subdue a numerous
population, until civilization has been made to blush for their
success. But North America was only inhabited by wandering tribes, who
took no thought of the natural riches of the soil, and that vast
country was still, properly speaking, an empty continent, a desert land
awaiting its inhabitants.

Everything is extraordinary in America, the social condition of the
inhabitants, as well as the laws; but the soil upon which these
institutions are founded is more extraordinary than all the rest. When
man was first placed upon the earth by the Creator, the earth was
inexhaustible in its youth, but man was weak and ignorant; and when he
had learned to explore the treasures which it contained, hosts of his
fellow creatures covered its surface, and he was obliged to earn an
asylum for repose and for freedom by the sword. At that same period
North America was discovered, as if it had been kept in reserve by the
Deity, and had just risen from beneath the waters of the deluge.

That continent still presents, as it did in the primeval time, rivers
which rise from never-failing sources, green and moist solitudes, and
fields which the ploughshare of the husbandman has never turned. In
this state it is offered to man, not in the barbarous and isolated
condition of the early ages, but to a being who is already in
possession of the most potent secrets of the natural world, who is
united to his fellow-men, and instructed by the experience of fifty
centuries. At this very time thirteen millions of civilized Europeans
are peaceably spreading over those fertile plains, with whose resources
and whose extent they are not yet themselves accurately acquainted.
Three or four thousand soldiers drive the wandering races of the
aborigines before them; these are followed by the pioneers, who pierce
the woods, scare off the beasts of prey, explore the courses of the
inland streams, and make ready the triumphal procession of civilization
across the waste.

The favorable influence of the temporal prosperity of America upon the
institutions of that country has been so often described by others, and
adverted to by myself, that I shall not enlarge upon it beyond the
addition of a few facts. An erroneous notion is generally entertained
that the deserts of America are peopled by European emigrants, who
annually disembark upon the coasts of the New World, whilst the
American population increases and multiplies upon the soil which its
forefathers tilled. The European settler, however, usually arrives in
the United States without friends, and sometimes without resources; in
order to subsist he is obliged to work for hire, and he rarely proceeds
beyond that belt of industrious population which adjoins the ocean. The
desert cannot be explored without capital or credit; and the body must
be accustomed to the rigors of a new climate before it can be exposed
to the chances of forest life. It is the Americans themselves who daily
quit the spots which gave them birth to acquire extensive domains in a
remote country. Thus the European leaves his cottage for the
trans-Atlantic shores; and the American, who is born on that very
coast, plunges in his turn into the wilds of Central America. This
double emigration is incessant; it begins in the remotest parts of
Europe, it crosses the Atlantic Ocean, and it advances over the
solitudes of the New World. Millions of men are marching at once
towards the same horizon; their language, their religion, their manners
differ, their object is the same. The gifts of fortune are promised in
the West, and to the West they bend their course. *b

b
[ [The number of foreign immigrants into the United States in the last
fifty years (from 1820 to 1871) is stated to be 7,556,007. Of these,
4,104,553 spoke English—that is, they came from Great Britain, Ireland,
or the British colonies; 2,643,069 came from Germany or northern
Europe; and about half a million from the south of Europe.]]


No event can be compared with this continuous removal of the human
race, except perhaps those irruptions which preceded the fall of the
Roman Empire. Then, as well as now, generations of men were impelled
forwards in the same direction to meet and struggle on the same spot;
but the designs of Providence were not the same; then, every newcomer
was the harbinger of destruction and of death; now, every adventurer
brings with him the elements of prosperity and of life. The future
still conceals from us the ulterior consequences of this emigration of
the Americans towards the West; but we can readily apprehend its more
immediate results. As a portion of the inhabitants annually leave the
States in which they were born, the population of these States
increases very slowly, although they have long been established: thus
in Connecticut, which only contains fifty-nine inhabitants to the
square mile, the population has not increased by more than one-quarter
in forty years, whilst that of England has been augmented by one-third
in the lapse of the same period. The European emigrant always lands,
therefore, in a country which is but half full, and where hands are in
request: he becomes a workman in easy circumstances; his son goes to
seek his fortune in unpeopled regions, and he becomes a rich landowner.
The former amasses the capital which the latter invests, and the
stranger as well as the native is unacquainted with want.

The laws of the United States are extremely favorable to the division
of property; but a cause which is more powerful than the laws prevents
property from being divided to excess. *c This is very perceptible in
the States which are beginning to be thickly peopled; Massachusetts is
the most populous part of the Union, but it contains only eighty
inhabitants to the square mile, which is must less than in France,
where 162 are reckoned to the same extent of country. But in
Massachusetts estates are very rarely divided; the eldest son takes the
land, and the others go to seek their fortune in the desert. The law
has abolished the rights of primogeniture, but circumstances have
concurred to re-establish it under a form of which none can complain,
and by which no just rights are impaired.

c
[ In New England the estates are exceedingly small, but they are rarely
subjected to further division.]


A single fact will suffice to show the prodigious number of individuals
who leave New England, in this manner, to settle themselves in the
wilds. We were assured in 1830 that thirty-six of the members of
Congress were born in the little State of Connecticut. The population
of Connecticut, which constitutes only one forty-third part of that of
the United States, thus furnished one-eighth of the whole body of
representatives. The States of Connecticut, however, only sends five
delegates to Congress; and the thirty-one others sit for the new
Western States. If these thirty-one individuals had remained in
Connecticut, it is probable that instead of becoming rich landowners
they would have remained humble laborers, that they would have lived in
obscurity without being able to rise into public life, and that, far
from becoming useful members of the legislature, they might have been
unruly citizens.

These reflections do not escape the observation of the Americans any
more than of ourselves. “It cannot be doubted,” says Chancellor Kent in
his “Treatise on American Law,” “that the division of landed estates
must produce great evils when it is carried to such excess as that each
parcel of land is insufficient to support a family; but these
disadvantages have never been felt in the United States, and many
generations must elapse before they can be felt. The extent of our
inhabited territory, the abundance of adjacent land, and the continual
stream of emigration flowing from the shores of the Atlantic towards
the interior of the country, suffice as yet, and will long suffice, to
prevent the parcelling out of estates.”

It is difficult to describe the rapacity with which the American rushes
forward to secure the immense booty which fortune proffers to him. In
the pursuit he fearlessly braves the arrow of the Indian and the
distempers of the forest; he is unimpressed by the silence of the
woods; the approach of beasts of prey does not disturb him; for he is
goaded onwards by a passion more intense than the love of life. Before
him lies a boundless continent, and he urges onwards as if time
pressed, and he was afraid of finding no room for his exertions. I have
spoken of the emigration from the older States, but how shall I
describe that which takes place from the more recent ones? Fifty years
have scarcely elapsed since that of Ohio was founded; the greater part
of its inhabitants were not born within its confines; its capital has
only been built thirty years, and its territory is still covered by an
immense extent of uncultivated fields; nevertheless the population of
Ohio is already proceeding westward, and most of the settlers who
descend to the fertile savannahs of Illinois are citizens of Ohio.
These men left their first country to improve their condition; they
quit their resting-place to ameliorate it still more; fortune awaits
them everywhere, but happiness they cannot attain. The desire of
prosperity is become an ardent and restless passion in their minds
which grows by what it gains. They early broke the ties which bound
them to their natal earth, and they have contracted no fresh ones on
their way. Emigration was at first necessary to them as a means of
subsistence; and it soon becomes a sort of game of chance, which they
pursue for the emotions it excites as much as for the gain it procures.

Sometimes the progress of man is so rapid that the desert reappears
behind him. The woods stoop to give him a passage, and spring up again
when he has passed. It is not uncommon in crossing the new States of
the West to meet with deserted dwellings in the midst of the wilds; the
traveller frequently discovers the vestiges of a log house in the most
solitary retreats, which bear witness to the power, and no less to the
inconstancy of man. In these abandoned fields, and over these ruins of
a day, the primeval forest soon scatters a fresh vegetation, the beasts
resume the haunts which were once their own, and Nature covers the
traces of man’s path with branches and with flowers, which obliterate
his evanescent track.

I remember that, in crossing one of the woodland districts which still
cover the State of New York, I reached the shores of a lake embosomed
in forests coeval with the world. A small island, covered with woods
whose thick foliage concealed its banks, rose from the centre of the
waters. Upon the shores of the lake no object attested the presence of
man except a column of smoke which might be seen on the horizon rising
from the tops of the trees to the clouds, and seeming to hang from
heaven rather than to be mounting to the sky. An Indian shallop was
hauled up on the sand, which tempted me to visit the islet that had
first attracted my attention, and in a few minutes I set foot upon its
banks. The whole island formed one of those delicious solitudes of the
New World which almost lead civilized man to regret the haunts of the
savage. A luxuriant vegetation bore witness to the incomparable
fruitfulness of the soil. The deep silence which is common to the wilds
of North America was only broken by the hoarse cooing of the
wood-pigeon, and the tapping of the woodpecker upon the bark of trees.
I was far from supposing that this spot had ever been inhabited, so
completely did Nature seem to be left to her own caprices; but when I
reached the centre of the isle I thought that I discovered some traces
of man. I then proceeded to examine the surrounding objects with care,
and I soon perceived that a European had undoubtedly been led to seek a
refuge in this retreat. Yet what changes had taken place in the scene
of his labors! The logs which he had hastily hewn to build himself a
shed had sprouted afresh; the very props were intertwined with living
verdure, and his cabin was transformed into a bower. In the midst of
these shrubs a few stones were to be seen, blackened with fire and
sprinkled with thin ashes; here the hearth had no doubt been, and the
chimney in falling had covered it with rubbish. I stood for some time
in silent admiration of the exuberance of Nature and the littleness of
man: and when I was obliged to leave that enchanting solitude, I
exclaimed with melancholy, “Are ruins, then, already here?”

In Europe we are wont to look upon a restless disposition, an unbounded
desire of riches, and an excessive love of independence, as
propensities very formidable to society. Yet these are the very
elements which ensure a long and peaceful duration to the republics of
America. Without these unquiet passions the population would collect in
certain spots, and would soon be subject to wants like those of the Old
World, which it is difficult to satisfy; for such is the present good
fortune of the New World, that the vices of its inhabitants are
scarcely less favorable to society than their virtues. These
circumstances exercise a great influence on the estimation in which
human actions are held in the two hemispheres. The Americans frequently
term what we should call cupidity a laudable industry; and they blame
as faint-heartedness what we consider to be the virtue of moderate
desires.

In France, simple tastes, orderly manners, domestic affections, and the
attachments which men feel to the place of their birth, are looked upon
as great guarantees of the tranquillity and happiness of the State. But
in America nothing seems to be more prejudicial to society than these
virtues. The French Canadians, who have faithfully preserved the
traditions of their pristine manners, are already embarrassed for room
upon their small territory; and this little community, which has so
recently begun to exist, will shortly be a prey to the calamities
incident to old nations. In Canada, the most enlightened, patriotic,
and humane inhabitants make extraordinary efforts to render the people
dissatisfied with those simple enjoyments which still content it.
There, the seductions of wealth are vaunted with as much zeal as the
charms of an honest but limited income in the Old World, and more
exertions are made to excite the passions of the citizens there than to
calm them elsewhere. If we listen to their eulogies, we shall hear that
nothing is more praiseworthy than to exchange the pure and homely
pleasures which even the poor man tastes in his own country for the
dull delights of prosperity under a foreign sky; to leave the
patrimonial hearth and the turf beneath which his forefathers sleep; in
short, to abandon the living and the dead in quest of fortune.

At the present time America presents a field for human effort far more
extensive than any sum of labor which can be applied to work it. In
America too much knowledge cannot be diffused; for all knowledge,
whilst it may serve him who possesses it, turns also to the advantage
of those who are without it. New wants are not to be feared, since they
can be satisfied without difficulty; the growth of human passions need
not be dreaded, since all passions may find an easy and a legitimate
object; nor can men be put in possession of too much freedom, since
they are scarcely ever tempted to misuse their liberties.

The American republics of the present day are like companies of
adventurers formed to explore in common the waste lands of the New
World, and busied in a flourishing trade. The passions which agitate
the Americans most deeply are not their political but their commercial
passions; or, to speak more correctly, they introduce the habits they
contract in business into their political life. They love order,
without which affairs do not prosper; and they set an especial value
upon a regular conduct, which is the foundation of a solid business;
they prefer the good sense which amasses large fortunes to that
enterprising spirit which frequently dissipates them; general ideas
alarm their minds, which are accustomed to positive calculations, and
they hold practice in more honor than theory.

It is in America that one learns to understand the influence which
physical prosperity exercises over political actions, and even over
opinions which ought to acknowledge no sway but that of reason; and it
is more especially amongst strangers that this truth is perceptible.
Most of the European emigrants to the New World carry with them that
wild love of independence and of change which our calamities are so apt
to engender. I sometimes met with Europeans in the United States who
had been obliged to leave their own country on account of their
political opinions. They all astonished me by the language they held,
but one of them surprised me more than all the rest. As I was crossing
one of the most remote districts of Pennsylvania I was benighted, and
obliged to beg for hospitality at the gate of a wealthy planter, who
was a Frenchman by birth. He bade me sit down beside his fire, and we
began to talk with that freedom which befits persons who meet in the
backwoods, two thousand leagues from their native country. I was aware
that my host had been a great leveller and an ardent demagogue forty
years ago, and that his name was not unknown to fame. I was, therefore,
not a little surprised to hear him discuss the rights of property as an
economist or a landowner might have done: he spoke of the necessary
gradations which fortune establishes among men, of obedience to
established laws, of the influence of good morals in commonwealths, and
of the support which religious opinions give to order and to freedom;
he even went to far as to quote an evangelical authority in
corroboration of one of his political tenets.

I listened, and marvelled at the feebleness of human reason. A
proposition is true or false, but no art can prove it to be one or the
other, in the midst of the uncertainties of science and the conflicting
lessons of experience, until a new incident disperses the clouds of
doubt; I was poor, I become rich, and I am not to expect that
prosperity will act upon my conduct, and leave my judgment free; my
opinions change with my fortune, and the happy circumstances which I
turn to my advantage furnish me with that decisive argument which was
before wanting. The influence of prosperity acts still more freely upon
the American than upon strangers. The American has always seen the
connection of public order and public prosperity, intimately united as
they are, go on before his eyes; he does not conceive that one can
subsist without the other; he has therefore nothing to forget; nor has
he, like so many Europeans, to unlearn the lessons of his early
education.




 Chapter XVII: Principal Causes Maintaining The Democratic
 Republic—Part II


Influence Of The Laws Upon The Maintenance Of The Democratic Republic
In The United States

Three principal causes of the maintenance of the democratic
republic—Federal Constitutions—Municipal institutions—Judicial power.

The principal aim of this book has been to make known the laws of the
United States; if this purpose has been accomplished, the reader is
already enabled to judge for himself which are the laws that really
tend to maintain the democratic republic, and which endanger its
existence. If I have not succeeded in explaining this in the whole
course of my work, I cannot hope to do so within the limits of a single
chapter. It is not my intention to retrace the path I have already
pursued, and a very few lines will suffice to recapitulate what I have
previously explained.

Three circumstances seem to me to contribute most powerfully to the
maintenance of the democratic republic in the United States.

The first is that Federal form of Government which the Americans have
adopted, and which enables the Union to combine the power of a great
empire with the security of a small State.

The second consists in those municipal institutions which limit the
despotism of the majority, and at the same time impart a taste for
freedom and a knowledge of the art of being free to the people.

The third is to be met with in the constitution of the judicial power.
I have shown in what manner the courts of justice serve to repress the
excesses of democracy, and how they check and direct the impulses of
the majority without stopping its activity.

Influence Of Manners Upon The Maintenance Of The Democratic Republic In
The United States

I have previously remarked that the manners of the people may be
considered as one of the general causes to which the maintenance of a
democratic republic in the United States is attributable. I here used
the word manners with the meaning which the ancients attached to the
word mores, for I apply it not only to manners in their proper sense of
what constitutes the character of social intercourse, but I extend it
to the various notions and opinions current among men, and to the mass
of those ideas which constitute their character of mind. I comprise,
therefore, under this term the whole moral and intellectual condition
of a people. My intention is not to draw a picture of American manners,
but simply to point out such features of them as are favorable to the
maintenance of political institutions.

Religion Considered As A Political Institution, Which Powerfully
Contributes To The Maintenance Of The Democratic Republic Amongst The
Americans

North America peopled by men who professed a democratic and republican
Christianity—Arrival of the Catholics—For what reason the Catholics
form the most democratic and the most republican class at the present
time.

Every religion is to be found in juxtaposition to a political opinion
which is connected with it by affinity. If the human mind be left to
follow its own bent, it will regulate the temporal and spiritual
institutions of society upon one uniform principle; and man will
endeavor, if I may use the expression, to harmonize the state in which
he lives upon earth with the state which he believes to await him in
heaven. The greatest part of British America was peopled by men who,
after having shaken off the authority of the Pope, acknowledged no
other religious supremacy; they brought with them into the New World a
form of Christianity which I cannot better describe than by styling it
a democratic and republican religion. This sect contributed powerfully
to the establishment of a democracy and a republic, and from the
earliest settlement of the emigrants politics and religion contracted
an alliance which has never been dissolved.

About fifty years ago Ireland began to pour a Catholic population into
the United States; on the other hand, the Catholics of America made
proselytes, and at the present moment more than a million of Christians
professing the truths of the Church of Rome are to be met with in the
Union. *d The Catholics are faithful to the observances of their
religion; they are fervent and zealous in the support and belief of
their doctrines. Nevertheless they constitute the most republican and
the most democratic class of citizens which exists in the United
States; and although this fact may surprise the observer at first, the
causes by which it is occasioned may easily be discovered upon
reflection.

d
[ [It is difficult to ascertain with accuracy the amount of the Roman
Catholic population of the United States, but in 1868 an able writer in
the “Edinburgh Review” (vol. cxxvii. p. 521) affirmed that the whole
Catholic population of the United States was then about 4,000,000,
divided into 43 dioceses, with 3,795 churches, under the care of 45
bishops and 2,317 clergymen. But this rapid increase is mainly
supported by immigration from the Catholic countries of Europe.]]


I think that the Catholic religion has erroneously been looked upon as
the natural enemy of democracy. Amongst the various sects of
Christians, Catholicism seems to me, on the contrary, to be one of
those which are most favorable to the equality of conditions. In the
Catholic Church, the religious community is composed of only two
elements, the priest and the people. The priest alone rises above the
rank of his flock, and all below him are equal.

On doctrinal points the Catholic faith places all human capacities upon
the same level; it subjects the wise and ignorant, the man of genius
and the vulgar crowd, to the details of the same creed; it imposes the
same observances upon the rich and needy, it inflicts the same
austerities upon the strong and the weak, it listens to no compromise
with mortal man, but, reducing all the human race to the same standard,
it confounds all the distinctions of society at the foot of the same
altar, even as they are confounded in the sight of God. If Catholicism
predisposes the faithful to obedience, it certainly does not prepare
them for inequality; but the contrary may be said of Protestantism,
which generally tends to make men independent, more than to render them
equal.

Catholicism is like an absolute monarchy; if the sovereign be removed,
all the other classes of society are more equal than they are in
republics. It has not unfrequently occurred that the Catholic priest
has left the service of the altar to mix with the governing powers of
society, and to take his place amongst the civil gradations of men.
This religious influence has sometimes been used to secure the
interests of that political state of things to which he belonged. At
other times Catholics have taken the side of aristocracy from a spirit
of religion.

But no sooner is the priesthood entirely separated from the government,
as is the case in the United States, than is found that no class of men
are more naturally disposed than the Catholics to transfuse the
doctrine of the equality of conditions into the political world. If,
then, the Catholic citizens of the United States are not forcibly led
by the nature of their tenets to adopt democratic and republican
principles, at least they are not necessarily opposed to them; and
their social position, as well as their limited number, obliges them to
adopt these opinions. Most of the Catholics are poor, and they have no
chance of taking a part in the government unless it be open to all the
citizens. They constitute a minority, and all rights must be respected
in order to insure to them the free exercise of their own privileges.
These two causes induce them, unconsciously, to adopt political
doctrines, which they would perhaps support with less zeal if they were
rich and preponderant.

The Catholic clergy of the United States has never attempted to oppose
this political tendency, but it seeks rather to justify its results.
The priests in America have divided the intellectual world into two
parts: in the one they place the doctrines of revealed religion, which
command their assent; in the other they leave those truths which they
believe to have been freely left open to the researches of political
inquiry. Thus the Catholics of the United States are at the same time
the most faithful believers and the most zealous citizens.

It may be asserted that in the United States no religious doctrine
displays the slightest hostility to democratic and republican
institutions. The clergy of all the different sects hold the same
language, their opinions are consonant to the laws, and the human
intellect flows onwards in one sole current.

I happened to be staying in one of the largest towns in the Union, when
I was invited to attend a public meeting which had been called for the
purpose of assisting the Poles, and of sending them supplies of arms
and money. I found two or three thousand persons collected in a vast
hall which had been prepared to receive them. In a short time a priest
in his ecclesiastical robes advanced to the front of the hustings: the
spectators rose, and stood uncovered, whilst he spoke in the following
terms:—

“Almighty God! the God of Armies! Thou who didst strengthen the hearts
and guide the arms of our fathers when they were fighting for the
sacred rights of national independence; Thou who didst make them
triumph over a hateful oppression, and hast granted to our people the
benefits of liberty and peace; Turn, O Lord, a favorable eye upon the
other hemisphere; pitifully look down upon that heroic nation which is
even now struggling as we did in the former time, and for the same
rights which we defended with our blood. Thou, who didst create Man in
the likeness of the same image, let not tyranny mar Thy work, and
establish inequality upon the earth. Almighty God! do Thou watch over
the destiny of the Poles, and render them worthy to be free. May Thy
wisdom direct their councils, and may Thy strength sustain their arms!
Shed forth Thy terror over their enemies, scatter the powers which take
counsel against them; and vouchsafe that the injustice which the world
has witnessed for fifty years, be not consummated in our time. O Lord,
who holdest alike the hearts of nations and of men in Thy powerful
hand; raise up allies to the sacred cause of right; arouse the French
nation from the apathy in which its rulers retain it, that it go forth
again to fight for the liberties of the world.

“Lord, turn not Thou Thy face from us, and grant that we may always be
the most religious as well as the freest people of the earth. Almighty
God, hear our supplications this day. Save the Poles, we beseech Thee,
in the name of Thy well-beloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, who died
upon the cross for the salvation of men. Amen.”

The whole meeting responded “Amen!” with devotion.

Indirect Influence Of Religious Opinions Upon Political Society In The
United States

Christian morality common to all sects—Influence of religion upon the
manners of the Americans—Respect for the marriage tie—In what manner
religion confines the imagination of the Americans within certain
limits, and checks the passion of innovation—Opinion of the Americans
on the political utility of religion—Their exertions to extend and
secure its predominance.

I have just shown what the direct influence of religion upon politics
is in the United States, but its indirect influence appears to me to be
still more considerable, and it never instructs the Americans more
fully in the art of being free than when it says nothing of freedom.

The sects which exist in the United States are innumerable. They all
differ in respect to the worship which is due from man to his Creator,
but they all agree in respect to the duties which are due from man to
man. Each sect adores the Deity in its own peculiar manner, but all the
sects preach the same moral law in the name of God. If it be of the
highest importance to man, as an individual, that his religion should
be true, the case of society is not the same. Society has no future
life to hope for or to fear; and provided the citizens profess a
religion, the peculiar tenets of that religion are of very little
importance to its interests. Moreover, almost all the sects of the
United States are comprised within the great unity of Christianity, and
Christian morality is everywhere the same.

It may be believed without unfairness that a certain number of
Americans pursue a peculiar form of worship, from habit more than from
conviction. In the United States the sovereign authority is religious,
and consequently hypocrisy must be common; but there is no country in
the whole world in which the Christian religion retains a greater
influence over the souls of men than in America; and there can be no
greater proof of its utility, and of its conformity to human nature,
than that its influence is most powerfully felt over the most
enlightened and free nation of the earth.

I have remarked that the members of the American clergy in general,
without even excepting those who do not admit religious liberty, are
all in favor of civil freedom; but they do not support any particular
political system. They keep aloof from parties and from public affairs.
In the United States religion exercises but little influence upon the
laws and upon the details of public opinion, but it directs the manners
of the community, and by regulating domestic life it regulates the
State.

I do not question that the great austerity of manners which is
observable in the United States, arises, in the first instance, from
religious faith. Religion is often unable to restrain man from the
numberless temptations of fortune; nor can it check that passion for
gain which every incident of his life contributes to arouse, but its
influence over the mind of woman is supreme, and women are the
protectors of morals. There is certainly no country in the world where
the tie of marriage is so much respected as in America, or where
conjugal happiness is more highly or worthily appreciated. In Europe
almost all the disturbances of society arise from the irregularities of
domestic life. To despise the natural bonds and legitimate pleasures of
home, is to contract a taste for excesses, a restlessness of heart, and
the evil of fluctuating desires. Agitated by the tumultuous passions
which frequently disturb his dwelling, the European is galled by the
obedience which the legislative powers of the State exact. But when the
American retires from the turmoil of public life to the bosom of his
family, he finds in it the image of order and of peace. There his
pleasures are simple and natural, his joys are innocent and calm; and
as he finds that an orderly life is the surest path to happiness, he
accustoms himself without difficulty to moderate his opinions as well
as his tastes. Whilst the European endeavors to forget his domestic
troubles by agitating society, the American derives from his own home
that love of order which he afterwards carries with him into public
affairs.

In the United States the influence of religion is not confined to the
manners, but it extends to the intelligence of the people. Amongst the
Anglo-Americans, there are some who profess the doctrines of
Christianity from a sincere belief in them, and others who do the same
because they are afraid to be suspected of unbelief. Christianity,
therefore, reigns without any obstacle, by universal consent; the
consequence is, as I have before observed, that every principle of the
moral world is fixed and determinate, although the political world is
abandoned to the debates and the experiments of men. Thus the human
mind is never left to wander across a boundless field; and, whatever
may be its pretensions, it is checked from time to time by barriers
which it cannot surmount. Before it can perpetrate innovation, certain
primal and immutable principles are laid down, and the boldest
conceptions of human device are subjected to certain forms which retard
and stop their completion.

The imagination of the Americans, even in its greatest flights, is
circumspect and undecided; its impulses are checked, and its works
unfinished. These habits of restraint recur in political society, and
are singularly favorable both to the tranquillity of the people and to
the durability of the institutions it has established. Nature and
circumstances concurred to make the inhabitants of the United States
bold men, as is sufficiently attested by the enterprising spirit with
which they seek for fortune. If the mind of the Americans were free
from all trammels, they would very shortly become the most daring
innovators and the most implacable disputants in the world. But the
revolutionists of America are obliged to profess an ostensible respect
for Christian morality and equity, which does not easily permit them to
violate the laws that oppose their designs; nor would they find it easy
to surmount the scruples of their partisans, even if they were able to
get over their own. Hitherto no one in the United States has dared to
advance the maxim, that everything is permissible with a view to the
interests of society; an impious adage which seems to have been
invented in an age of freedom to shelter all the tyrants of future
ages. Thus whilst the law permits the Americans to do what they please,
religion prevents them from conceiving, and forbids them to commit,
what is rash or unjust.

Religion in America takes no direct part in the government of society,
but it must nevertheless be regarded as the foremost of the political
institutions of that country; for if it does not impart a taste for
freedom, it facilitates the use of free institutions. Indeed, it is in
this same point of view that the inhabitants of the United States
themselves look upon religious belief. I do not know whether all the
Americans have a sincere faith in their religion, for who can search
the human heart? but I am certain that they hold it to be indispensable
to the maintenance of republican institutions. This opinion is not
peculiar to a class of citizens or to a party, but it belongs to the
whole nation, and to every rank of society.

In the United States, if a political character attacks a sect, this may
not prevent even the partisans of that very sect from supporting him;
but if he attacks all the sects together, everyone abandons him, and he
remains alone.

Whilst I was in America, a witness, who happened to be called at the
assizes of the county of Chester (State of New York), declared that he
did not believe in the existence of God, or in the immortality of the
soul. The judge refused to admit his evidence, on the ground that the
witness had destroyed beforehand all the confidence of the Court in
what he was about to say. *e The newspapers related the fact without
any further comment.

e
[ The New York “Spectator” of August 23, 1831, relates the fact in the
following terms:—“The Court of Common Pleas of Chester county (New
York) a few days since rejected a witness who declared his disbelief in
the existence of God. The presiding judge remarked that he had not
before been aware that there was a man living who did not believe in
the existence of God; that this belief constituted the sanction of all
testimony in a court of justice, and that he knew of no cause in a
Christian country where a witness had been permitted to testify without
such belief.”]


The Americans combine the notions of Christianity and of liberty so
intimately in their minds, that it is impossible to make them conceive
the one without the other; and with them this conviction does not
spring from that barren traditionary faith which seems to vegetate in
the soul rather than to live.

I have known of societies formed by the Americans to send out ministers
of the Gospel into the new Western States to found schools and churches
there, lest religion should be suffered to die away in those remote
settlements, and the rising States be less fitted to enjoy free
institutions than the people from which they emanated. I met with
wealthy New Englanders who abandoned the country in which they were
born in order to lay the foundations of Christianity and of freedom on
the banks of the Missouri, or in the prairies of Illinois. Thus
religious zeal is perpetually stimulated in the United States by the
duties of patriotism. These men do not act from an exclusive
consideration of the promises of a future life; eternity is only one
motive of their devotion to the cause; and if you converse with these
missionaries of Christian civilization, you will be surprised to find
how much value they set upon the goods of this world, and that you meet
with a politician where you expected to find a priest. They will tell
you that “all the American republics are collectively involved with
each other; if the republics of the West were to fall into anarchy, or
to be mastered by a despot, the republican institutions which now
flourish upon the shores of the Atlantic Ocean would be in great peril.
It is, therefore, our interest that the new States should be religious,
in order to maintain our liberties.”

Such are the opinions of the Americans, and if any hold that the
religious spirit which I admire is the very thing most amiss in
America, and that the only element wanting to the freedom and happiness
of the human race is to believe in some blind cosmogony, or to assert
with Cabanis the secretion of thought by the brain, I can only reply
that those who hold this language have never been in America, and that
they have never seen a religious or a free nation. When they return
from their expedition, we shall hear what they have to say.

There are persons in France who look upon republican institutions as a
temporary means of power, of wealth, and distinction; men who are the
condottieri of liberty, and who fight for their own advantage, whatever
be the colors they wear: it is not to these that I address myself. But
there are others who look forward to the republican form of government
as a tranquil and lasting state, towards which modern society is daily
impelled by the ideas and manners of the time, and who sincerely desire
to prepare men to be free. When these men attack religious opinions,
they obey the dictates of their passions to the prejudice of their
interests. Despotism may govern without faith, but liberty cannot.
Religion is much more necessary in the republic which they set forth in
glowing colors than in the monarchy which they attack; and it is more
needed in democratic republics than in any others. How is it possible
that society should escape destruction if the moral tie be not
strengthened in proportion as the political tie is relaxed? and what
can be done with a people which is its own master, if it be not
submissive to the Divinity?




 Chapter XVII: Principal Causes Maintaining The Democratic
 Republic—Part III


Principal Causes Which Render Religion Powerful In America Care taken
by the Americans to separate the Church from the State—The laws, public
opinion, and even the exertions of the clergy concur to promote this
end—Influence of religion upon the mind in the United States
attributable to this cause—Reason of this—What is the natural state of
men with regard to religion at the present time—What are the peculiar
and incidental causes which prevent men, in certain countries, from
arriving at this state.

The philosophers of the eighteenth century explained the gradual decay
of religious faith in a very simple manner. Religious zeal, said they,
must necessarily fail, the more generally liberty is established and
knowledge diffused. Unfortunately, facts are by no means in accordance
with their theory. There are certain populations in Europe whose
unbelief is only equalled by their ignorance and their debasement,
whilst in America one of the freest and most enlightened nations in the
world fulfils all the outward duties of religious fervor.

Upon my arrival in the United States, the religious aspect of the
country was the first thing that struck my attention; and the longer I
stayed there the more did I perceive the great political consequences
resulting from this state of things, to which I was unaccustomed. In
France I had almost always seen the spirit of religion and the spirit
of freedom pursuing courses diametrically opposed to each other; but in
America I found that they were intimately united, and that they reigned
in common over the same country. My desire to discover the causes of
this phenomenon increased from day to day. In order to satisfy it I
questioned the members of all the different sects; and I more
especially sought the society of the clergy, who are the depositaries
of the different persuasions, and who are more especially interested in
their duration. As a member of the Roman Catholic Church I was more
particularly brought into contact with several of its priests, with
whom I became intimately acquainted. To each of these men I expressed
my astonishment and I explained my doubts; I found that they differed
upon matters of detail alone; and that they mainly attributed the
peaceful dominion of religion in their country to the separation of
Church and State. I do not hesitate to affirm that during my stay in
America I did not meet with a single individual, of the clergy or of
the laity, who was not of the same opinion upon this point.

This led me to examine more attentively than I had hitherto done, the
station which the American clergy occupy in political society. I
learned with surprise that they filled no public appointments; *f not
one of them is to be met with in the administration, and they are not
even represented in the legislative assemblies. In several States *g
the law excludes them from political life, public opinion in all. And
when I came to inquire into the prevailing spirit of the clergy I found
that most of its members seemed to retire of their own accord from the
exercise of power, and that they made it the pride of their profession
to abstain from politics.

f
[ Unless this term be applied to the functions which many of them fill
in the schools. Almost all education is entrusted to the clergy.]


g
[ See the Constitution of New York, art. 7, Section 4:— “And whereas
the ministers of the gospel are, by their profession, dedicated to the
service of God and the care of souls, and ought not to be diverted from
the great duties of their functions: therefore no minister of the
gospel, or priest of any denomination whatsoever, shall at any time
hereafter, under any pretence or description whatever, be eligible to,
or capable of holding, any civil or military office or place within
this State.”


See also the constitutions of North Carolina, art. 31; Virginia; South
Carolina, art. I, Section 23; Kentucky, art. 2, Section 26; Tennessee,
art. 8, Section I; Louisiana, art. 2, Section 22.]

I heard them inveigh against ambition and deceit, under whatever
political opinions these vices might chance to lurk; but I learned from
their discourses that men are not guilty in the eye of God for any
opinions concerning political government which they may profess with
sincerity, any more than they are for their mistakes in building a
house or in driving a furrow. I perceived that these ministers of the
gospel eschewed all parties with the anxiety attendant upon personal
interest. These facts convinced me that what I had been told was true;
and it then became my object to investigate their causes, and to
inquire how it happened that the real authority of religion was
increased by a state of things which diminished its apparent force:
these causes did not long escape my researches.

The short space of threescore years can never content the imagination
of man; nor can the imperfect joys of this world satisfy his heart. Man
alone, of all created beings, displays a natural contempt of existence,
and yet a boundless desire to exist; he scorns life, but he dreads
annihilation. These different feelings incessantly urge his soul to the
contemplation of a future state, and religion directs his musings
thither. Religion, then, is simply another form of hope; and it is no
less natural to the human heart than hope itself. Men cannot abandon
their religious faith without a kind of aberration of intellect, and a
sort of violent distortion of their true natures; but they are
invincibly brought back to more pious sentiments; for unbelief is an
accident, and faith is the only permanent state of mankind. If we only
consider religious institutions in a purely human point of view, they
may be said to derive an inexhaustible element of strength from man
himself, since they belong to one of the constituent principles of
human nature.

I am aware that at certain times religion may strengthen this
influence, which originates in itself, by the artificial power of the
laws, and by the support of those temporal institutions which direct
society. Religions, intimately united to the governments of the earth,
have been known to exercise a sovereign authority derived from the
twofold source of terror and of faith; but when a religion contracts an
alliance of this nature, I do not hesitate to affirm that it commits
the same error as a man who should sacrifice his future to his present
welfare; and in obtaining a power to which it has no claim, it risks
that authority which is rightfully its own. When a religion founds its
empire upon the desire of immortality which lives in every human heart,
it may aspire to universal dominion; but when it connects itself with a
government, it must necessarily adopt maxims which are only applicable
to certain nations. Thus, in forming an alliance with a political
power, religion augments its authority over a few, and forfeits the
hope of reigning over all.

As long as a religion rests upon those sentiments which are the
consolation of all affliction, it may attract the affections of
mankind. But if it be mixed up with the bitter passions of the world,
it may be constrained to defend allies whom its interests, and not the
principle of love, have given to it; or to repel as antagonists men who
are still attached to its own spirit, however opposed they may be to
the powers to which it is allied. The Church cannot share the temporal
power of the State without being the object of a portion of that
animosity which the latter excites.

The political powers which seem to be most firmly established have
frequently no better guarantee for their duration than the opinions of
a generation, the interests of the time, or the life of an individual.
A law may modify the social condition which seems to be most fixed and
determinate; and with the social condition everything else must change.
The powers of society are more or less fugitive, like the years which
we spend upon the earth; they succeed each other with rapidity, like
the fleeting cares of life; and no government has ever yet been founded
upon an invariable disposition of the human heart, or upon an
imperishable interest.

As long as a religion is sustained by those feelings, propensities, and
passions which are found to occur under the same forms, at all the
different periods of history, it may defy the efforts of time; or at
least it can only be destroyed by another religion. But when religion
clings to the interests of the world, it becomes almost as fragile a
thing as the powers of earth. It is the only one of them all which can
hope for immortality; but if it be connected with their ephemeral
authority, it shares their fortunes, and may fall with those transient
passions which supported them for a day. The alliance which religion
contracts with political powers must needs be onerous to itself; since
it does not require their assistance to live, and by giving them its
assistance it may be exposed to decay.

The danger which I have just pointed out always exists, but it is not
always equally visible. In some ages governments seem to be
imperishable; in others, the existence of society appears to be more
precarious than the life of man. Some constitutions plunge the citizens
into a lethargic somnolence, and others rouse them to feverish
excitement. When governments appear to be so strong, and laws so
stable, men do not perceive the dangers which may accrue from a union
of Church and State. When governments display so much weakness, and
laws so much inconstancy, the danger is self-evident, but it is no
longer possible to avoid it; to be effectual, measures must be taken to
discover its approach.

In proportion as a nation assumes a democratic condition of society,
and as communities display democratic propensities, it becomes more and
more dangerous to connect religion with political institutions; for the
time is coming when authority will be bandied from hand to hand, when
political theories will succeed each other, and when men, laws, and
constitutions will disappear, or be modified from day to day, and this,
not for a season only, but unceasingly. Agitation and mutability are
inherent in the nature of democratic republics, just as stagnation and
inertness are the law of absolute monarchies.

If the Americans, who change the head of the Government once in four
years, who elect new legislators every two years, and renew the
provincial officers every twelvemonth; if the Americans, who have
abandoned the political world to the attempts of innovators, had not
placed religion beyond their reach, where could it abide in the ebb and
flow of human opinions? where would that respect which belongs to it be
paid, amidst the struggles of faction? and what would become of its
immortality, in the midst of perpetual decay? The American clergy were
the first to perceive this truth, and to act in conformity with it.
They saw that they must renounce their religious influence, if they
were to strive for political power; and they chose to give up the
support of the State, rather than to share its vicissitudes.

In America, religion is perhaps less powerful than it has been at
certain periods in the history of certain peoples; but its influence is
more lasting. It restricts itself to its own resources, but of those
none can deprive it: its circle is limited to certain principles, but
those principles are entirely its own, and under its undisputed
control.

On every side in Europe we hear voices complaining of the absence of
religious faith, and inquiring the means of restoring to religion some
remnant of its pristine authority. It seems to me that we must first
attentively consider what ought to be the natural state of men with
regard to religion at the present time; and when we know what we have
to hope and to fear, we may discern the end to which our efforts ought
to be directed.

The two great dangers which threaten the existence of religions are
schism and indifference. In ages of fervent devotion, men sometimes
abandon their religion, but they only shake it off in order to adopt
another. Their faith changes the objects to which it is directed, but
it suffers no decline. The old religion then excites enthusiastic
attachment or bitter enmity in either party; some leave it with anger,
others cling to it with increased devotedness, and although persuasions
differ, irreligion is unknown. Such, however, is not the case when a
religious belief is secretly undermined by doctrines which may be
termed negative, since they deny the truth of one religion without
affirming that of any other. Prodigious revolutions then take place in
the human mind, without the apparent co-operation of the passions of
man, and almost without his knowledge. Men lose the objects of their
fondest hopes, as if through forgetfulness. They are carried away by an
imperceptible current which they have not the courage to stem, but
which they follow with regret, since it bears them from a faith they
love, to a scepticism that plunges them into despair.

In ages which answer to this description, men desert their religious
opinions from lukewarmness rather than from dislike; they do not reject
them, but the sentiments by which they were once fostered disappear.
But if the unbeliever does not admit religion to be true, he still
considers it useful. Regarding religious institutions in a human point
of view, he acknowledges their influence upon manners and legislation.
He admits that they may serve to make men live in peace with one
another, and to prepare them gently for the hour of death. He regrets
the faith which he has lost; and as he is deprived of a treasure which
he has learned to estimate at its full value, he scruples to take it
from those who still possess it.

On the other hand, those who continue to believe are not afraid openly
to avow their faith. They look upon those who do not share their
persuasion as more worthy of pity than of opposition; and they are
aware that to acquire the esteem of the unbelieving, they are not
obliged to follow their example. They are hostile to no one in the
world; and as they do not consider the society in which they live as an
arena in which religion is bound to face its thousand deadly foes, they
love their contemporaries, whilst they condemn their weaknesses and
lament their errors.

As those who do not believe, conceal their incredulity; and as those
who believe, display their faith, public opinion pronounces itself in
favor of religion: love, support, and honor are bestowed upon it, and
it is only by searching the human soul that we can detect the wounds
which it has received. The mass of mankind, who are never without the
feeling of religion, do not perceive anything at variance with the
established faith. The instinctive desire of a future life brings the
crowd about the altar, and opens the hearts of men to the precepts and
consolations of religion.

But this picture is not applicable to us: for there are men amongst us
who have ceased to believe in Christianity, without adopting any other
religion; others who are in the perplexities of doubt, and who already
affect not to believe; and others, again, who are afraid to avow that
Christian faith which they still cherish in secret.

Amidst these lukewarm partisans and ardent antagonists a small number
of believers exist, who are ready to brave all obstacles and to scorn
all dangers in defence of their faith. They have done violence to human
weakness, in order to rise superior to public opinion. Excited by the
effort they have made, they scarcely knew where to stop; and as they
know that the first use which the French made of independence was to
attack religion, they look upon their contemporaries with dread, and
they recoil in alarm from the liberty which their fellow-citizens are
seeking to obtain. As unbelief appears to them to be a novelty, they
comprise all that is new in one indiscriminate animosity. They are at
war with their age and country, and they look upon every opinion which
is put forth there as the necessary enemy of the faith.

Such is not the natural state of men with regard to religion at the
present day; and some extraordinary or incidental cause must be at work
in France to prevent the human mind from following its original
propensities and to drive it beyond the limits at which it ought
naturally to stop. I am intimately convinced that this extraordinary
and incidental cause is the close connection of politics and religion.
The unbelievers of Europe attack the Christians as their political
opponents, rather than as their religious adversaries; they hate the
Christian religion as the opinion of a party, much more than as an
error of belief; and they reject the clergy less because they are the
representatives of the Divinity than because they are the allies of
authority.

In Europe, Christianity has been intimately united to the powers of the
earth. Those powers are now in decay, and it is, as it were, buried
under their ruins. The living body of religion has been bound down to
the dead corpse of superannuated polity: cut but the bonds which
restrain it, and that which is alive will rise once more. I know not
what could restore the Christian Church of Europe to the energy of its
earlier days; that power belongs to God alone; but it may be the effect
of human policy to leave the faith in the full exercise of the strength
which it still retains.

How The Instruction, The Habits, And The Practical Experience Of The
Americans Promote The Success Of Their Democratic Institutions

What is to be understood by the instruction of the American people—The
human mind more superficially instructed in the United States than in
Europe—No one completely uninstructed—Reason of this—Rapidity with
which opinions are diffused even in the uncultivated States of the
West—Practical experience more serviceable to the Americans than
book-learning.

I have but little to add to what I have already said concerning the
influence which the instruction and the habits of the Americans
exercise upon the maintenance of their political institutions.

America has hitherto produced very few writers of distinction; it
possesses no great historians, and not a single eminent poet. The
inhabitants of that country look upon what are properly styled literary
pursuits with a kind of disapprobation; and there are towns of very
second-rate importance in Europe in which more literary works are
annually published than in the twenty-four States of the Union put
together. The spirit of the Americans is averse to general ideas; and
it does not seek theoretical discoveries. Neither politics nor
manufactures direct them to these occupations; and although new laws
are perpetually enacted in the United States, no great writers have
hitherto inquired into the general principles of their legislation. The
Americans have lawyers and commentators, but no jurists; *h and they
furnish examples rather than lessons to the world. The same observation
applies to the mechanical arts. In America, the inventions of Europe
are adopted with sagacity; they are perfected, and adapted with
admirable skill to the wants of the country. Manufactures exist, but
the science of manufacture is not cultivated; and they have good
workmen, but very few inventors. Fulton was obliged to proffer his
services to foreign nations for a long time before he was able to
devote them to his own country.

h
[ [This cannot be said with truth of the country of Kent, Story, and
Wheaton.]]


The observer who is desirous of forming an opinion on the state of
instruction amongst the Anglo-Americans must consider the same object
from two different points of view. If he only singles out the learned,
he will be astonished to find how rare they are; but if he counts the
ignorant, the American people will appear to be the most enlightened
community in the world. The whole population, as I observed in another
place, is situated between these two extremes. In New England, every
citizen receives the elementary notions of human knowledge; he is
moreover taught the doctrines and the evidences of his religion, the
history of his country, and the leading features of its Constitution.
In the States of Connecticut and Massachusetts, it is extremely rare to
find a man imperfectly acquainted with all these things, and a person
wholly ignorant of them is a sort of phenomenon.

When I compare the Greek and Roman republics with these American
States; the manuscript libraries of the former, and their rude
population, with the innumerable journals and the enlightened people of
the latter; when I remember all the attempts which are made to judge
the modern republics by the assistance of those of antiquity, and to
infer what will happen in our time from what took place two thousand
years ago, I am tempted to burn my books, in order to apply none but
novel ideas to so novel a condition of society.

What I have said of New England must not, however, be applied
indistinctly to the whole Union; as we advance towards the West or the
South, the instruction of the people diminishes. In the States which
are adjacent to the Gulf of Mexico, a certain number of individuals may
be found, as in our own countries, who are devoid of the rudiments of
instruction. But there is not a single district in the United States
sunk in complete ignorance; and for a very simple reason: the peoples
of Europe started from the darkness of a barbarous condition, to
advance toward the light of civilization; their progress has been
unequal; some of them have improved apace, whilst others have loitered
in their course, and some have stopped, and are still sleeping upon the
way. *i

i
[ [In the Northern States the number of persons destitute of
instruction is inconsiderable, the largest number being 241,152 in the
State of New York (according to Spaulding’s “Handbook of American
Statistics” for 1874); but in the South no less than 1,516,339 whites
and 2,671,396 colored persons are returned as “illiterate.”]]


Such has not been the case in the United States. The Anglo-Americans
settled in a state of civilization, upon that territory which their
descendants occupy; they had not to begin to learn, and it was
sufficient for them not to forget. Now the children of these same
Americans are the persons who, year by year, transport their dwellings
into the wilds; and with their dwellings their acquired information and
their esteem for knowledge. Education has taught them the utility of
instruction, and has enabled them to transmit that instruction to their
posterity. In the United States society has no infancy, but it is born
in man’s estate.

The Americans never use the word “peasant,” because they have no idea
of the peculiar class which that term denotes; the ignorance of more
remote ages, the simplicity of rural life, and the rusticity of the
villager have not been preserved amongst them; and they are alike
unacquainted with the virtues, the vices, the coarse habits, and the
simple graces of an early stage of civilization. At the extreme borders
of the Confederate States, upon the confines of society and of the
wilderness, a population of bold adventurers have taken up their abode,
who pierce the solitudes of the American woods, and seek a country
there, in order to escape that poverty which awaited them in their
native provinces. As soon as the pioneer arrives upon the spot which is
to serve him for a retreat, he fells a few trees and builds a loghouse.
Nothing can offer a more miserable aspect than these isolated
dwellings. The traveller who approaches one of them towards nightfall,
sees the flicker of the hearth-flame through the chinks in the walls;
and at night, if the wind rises, he hears the roof of boughs shake to
and fro in the midst of the great forest trees. Who would not suppose
that this poor hut is the asylum of rudeness and ignorance? Yet no sort
of comparison can be drawn between the pioneer and the dwelling which
shelters him. Everything about him is primitive and unformed, but he is
himself the result of the labor and the experience of eighteen
centuries. He wears the dress, and he speaks the language of cities; he
is acquainted with the past, curious of the future, and ready for
argument upon the present; he is, in short, a highly civilized being,
who consents, for a time, to inhabit the backwoods, and who penetrates
into the wilds of the New World with the Bible, an axe, and a file of
newspapers.

It is difficult to imagine the incredible rapidity with which public
opinion circulates in the midst of these deserts. *j I do not think
that so much intellectual intercourse takes place in the most
enlightened and populous districts of France. *k It cannot be doubted
that, in the United States, the instruction of the people powerfully
contributes to the support of a democratic republic; and such must
always be the case, I believe, where instruction which awakens the
understanding is not separated from moral education which amends the
heart. But I by no means exaggerate this benefit, and I am still
further from thinking, as so many people do think in Europe, that men
can be instantaneously made citizens by teaching them to read and
write. True information is mainly derived from experience; and if the
Americans had not been gradually accustomed to govern themselves, their
book-learning would not assist them much at the present day.

j
[ I travelled along a portion of the frontier of the United States in a
sort of cart which was termed the mail. We passed, day and night, with
great rapidity along the roads which were scarcely marked out, through
immense forests; when the gloom of the woods became impenetrable the
coachman lighted branches of fir, and we journeyed along by the light
they cast. From time to time we came to a hut in the midst of the
forest, which was a post-office. The mail dropped an enormous bundle of
letters at the door of this isolated dwelling, and we pursued our way
at full gallop, leaving the inhabitants of the neighboring log houses
to send for their share of the treasure.


[When the author visited America the locomotive and the railroad were
scarcely invented, and not yet introduced in the United States. It is
superfluous to point out the immense effect of those inventions in
extending civilization and developing the resources of that vast
continent. In 1831 there were 51 miles of railway in the United States;
in 1872 there were 60,000 miles of railway.]]

k
[ In 1832 each inhabitant of Michigan paid a sum equivalent to 1 fr. 22
cent. (French money) to the post-office revenue, and each inhabitant of
the Floridas paid 1 fr. 5 cent. (See “National Calendar,” 1833, p.
244.) In the same year each inhabitant of the Departement du Nord paid
1 fr. 4 cent. to the revenue of the French post-office. (See the
“Compte rendu de l’administration des Finances,” 1833, p. 623.) Now the
State of Michigan only contained at that time 7 inhabitants per square
league and Florida only 5: the public instruction and the commercial
activity of these districts is inferior to that of most of the States
in the Union, whilst the Departement du Nord, which contains 3,400
inhabitants per square league, is one of the most enlightened and
manufacturing parts of France.]


I have lived a great deal with the people in the United States, and I
cannot express how much I admire their experience and their good sense.
An American should never be allowed to speak of Europe; for he will
then probably display a vast deal of presumption and very foolish
pride. He will take up with those crude and vague notions which are so
useful to the ignorant all over the world. But if you question him
respecting his own country, the cloud which dimmed his intelligence
will immediately disperse; his language will become as clear and as
precise as his thoughts. He will inform you what his rights are, and by
what means he exercises them; he will be able to point out the customs
which obtain in the political world. You will find that he is well
acquainted with the rules of the administration, and that he is
familiar with the mechanism of the laws. The citizen of the United
States does not acquire his practical science and his positive notions
from books; the instruction he has acquired may have prepared him for
receiving those ideas, but it did not furnish them. The American learns
to know the laws by participating in the act of legislation; and he
takes a lesson in the forms of government from governing. The great
work of society is ever going on beneath his eyes, and, as it were,
under his hands.

In the United States politics are the end and aim of education; in
Europe its principal object is to fit men for private life. The
interference of the citizens in public affairs is too rare an
occurrence for it to be anticipated beforehand. Upon casting a glance
over society in the two hemispheres, these differences are indicated
even by its external aspect.

In Europe we frequently introduce the ideas and the habits of private
life into public affairs; and as we pass at once from the domestic
circle to the government of the State, we may frequently be heard to
discuss the great interests of society in the same manner in which we
converse with our friends. The Americans, on the other hand, transfuse
the habits of public life into their manners in private; and in their
country the jury is introduced into the games of schoolboys, and
parliamentary forms are observed in the order of a feast.




 Chapter XVII: Principal Causes Maintaining The Democratic
 Republic—Part IV


The Laws Contribute More To The Maintenance Of The Democratic Republic
In The United States Than The Physical Circumstances Of The Country,
And The Manners More Than The Laws

All the nations of America have a democratic state of society—Yet
democratic institutions only subsist amongst the Anglo-Americans—The
Spaniards of South America, equally favored by physical causes as the
Anglo-Americans, unable to maintain a democratic republic—Mexico, which
has adopted the Constitution of the United States, in the same
predicament—The Anglo-Americans of the West less able to maintain it
than those of the East—Reason of these different results.

I have remarked that the maintenance of democratic institutions in the
United States is attributable to the circumstances, the laws, and the
manners of that country. *l Most Europeans are only acquainted with the
first of these three causes, and they are apt to give it a
preponderating importance which it does not really possess.

l
[ I remind the reader of the general signification which I give to the
word “manners,” namely, the moral and intellectual characteristics of
social man taken collectively.]


It is true that the Anglo-Saxons settled in the New World in a state of
social equality; the low-born and the noble were not to be found
amongst them; and professional prejudices were always as entirely
unknown as the prejudices of birth. Thus, as the condition of society
was democratic, the empire of democracy was established without
difficulty. But this circumstance is by no means peculiar to the United
States; almost all the trans-Atlantic colonies were founded by men
equal amongst themselves, or who became so by inhabiting them. In no
one part of the New World have Europeans been able to create an
aristocracy. Nevertheless, democratic institutions prosper nowhere but
in the United States.

The American Union has no enemies to contend with; it stands in the
wilds like an island in the ocean. But the Spaniards of South America
were no less isolated by nature; yet their position has not relieved
them from the charge of standing armies. They make war upon each other
when they have no foreign enemies to oppose; and the Anglo-American
democracy is the only one which has hitherto been able to maintain
itself in peace. *m

m
[ [A remark which, since the great Civil War of 1861-65, ceases to be
applicable.]]


The territory of the Union presents a boundless field to human
activity, and inexhaustible materials for industry and labor. The
passion of wealth takes the place of ambition, and the warmth of
faction is mitigated by a sense of prosperity. But in what portion of
the globe shall we meet with more fertile plains, with mightier rivers,
or with more unexplored and inexhaustible riches than in South America?

Nevertheless, South America has been unable to maintain democratic
institutions. If the welfare of nations depended on their being placed
in a remote position, with an unbounded space of habitable territory
before them, the Spaniards of South America would have no reason to
complain of their fate. And although they might enjoy less prosperity
than the inhabitants of the United States, their lot might still be
such as to excite the envy of some nations in Europe. There are,
however, no nations upon the face of the earth more miserable than
those of South America.

Thus, not only are physical causes inadequate to produce results
analogous to those which occur in North America, but they are unable to
raise the population of South America above the level of European
States, where they act in a contrary direction. Physical causes do not,
therefore, affect the destiny of nations so much as has been supposed.

I have met with men in New England who were on the point of leaving a
country, where they might have remained in easy circumstances, to go to
seek their fortune in the wilds. Not far from that district I found a
French population in Canada, which was closely crowded on a narrow
territory, although the same wilds were at hand; and whilst the
emigrant from the United States purchased an extensive estate with the
earnings of a short term of labor, the Canadian paid as much for land
as he would have done in France. Nature offers the solitudes of the New
World to Europeans; but they are not always acquainted with the means
of turning her gifts to account. Other peoples of America have the same
physical conditions of prosperity as the Anglo-Americans, but without
their laws and their manners; and these peoples are wretched. The laws
and manners of the Anglo-Americans are therefore that efficient cause
of their greatness which is the object of my inquiry.

I am far from supposing that the American laws are preeminently good in
themselves; I do not hold them to be applicable to all democratic
peoples; and several of them seem to be dangerous, even in the United
States. Nevertheless, it cannot be denied that the American
legislation, taken collectively, is extremely well adapted to the
genius of the people and the nature of the country which it is intended
to govern. The American laws are therefore good, and to them must be
attributed a large portion of the success which attends the government
of democracy in America: but I do not believe them to be the principal
cause of that success; and if they seem to me to have more influence
upon the social happiness of the Americans than the nature of the
country, on the other hand there is reason to believe that their effect
is still inferior to that produced by the manners of the people.

The Federal laws undoubtedly constitute the most important part of the
legislation of the United States. Mexico, which is not less fortunately
situated than the Anglo-American Union, has adopted the same laws, but
is unable to accustom itself to the government of democracy. Some other
cause is therefore at work, independently of those physical
circumstances and peculiar laws which enable the democracy to rule in
the United States.

Another still more striking proof may be adduced. Almost all the
inhabitants of the territory of the Union are the descendants of a
common stock; they speak the same language, they worship God in the
same manner, they are affected by the same physical causes, and they
obey the same laws. Whence, then, do their characteristic differences
arise? Why, in the Eastern States of the Union, does the republican
government display vigor and regularity, and proceed with mature
deliberation? Whence does it derive the wisdom and the durability which
mark its acts, whilst in the Western States, on the contrary, society
seems to be ruled by the powers of chance? There, public business is
conducted with an irregularity and a passionate and feverish
excitement, which does not announce a long or sure duration.

I am no longer comparing the Anglo-American States to foreign nations;
but I am contrasting them with each other, and endeavoring to discover
why they are so unlike. The arguments which are derived from the nature
of the country and the difference of legislation are here all set
aside. Recourse must be had to some other cause; and what other cause
can there be except the manners of the people?

It is in the Eastern States that the Anglo-Americans have been longest
accustomed to the government of democracy, and that they have adopted
the habits and conceived the notions most favorable to its maintenance.
Democracy has gradually penetrated into their customs, their opinions,
and the forms of social intercourse; it is to be found in all the
details of daily life equally as in the laws. In the Eastern States the
instruction and practical education of the people have been most
perfected, and religion has been most thoroughly amalgamated with
liberty. Now these habits, opinions, customs, and convictions are
precisely the constituent elements of that which I have denominated
manners.

In the Western States, on the contrary, a portion of the same
advantages is still wanting. Many of the Americans of the West were
born in the woods, and they mix the ideas and the customs of savage
life with the civilization of their parents. Their passions are more
intense; their religious morality less authoritative; and their
convictions less secure. The inhabitants exercise no sort of control
over their fellow-citizens, for they are scarcely acquainted with each
other. The nations of the West display, to a certain extent, the
inexperience and the rude habits of a people in its infancy; for
although they are composed of old elements, their assemblage is of
recent date.

The manners of the Americans of the United States are, then, the real
cause which renders that people the only one of the American nations
that is able to support a democratic government; and it is the
influence of manners which produces the different degrees of order and
of prosperity that may be distinguished in the several Anglo-American
democracies. Thus the effect which the geographical position of a
country may have upon the duration of democratic institutions is
exaggerated in Europe. Too much importance is attributed to
legislation, too little to manners. These three great causes serve, no
doubt, to regulate and direct the American democracy; but if they were
to be classed in their proper order, I should say that the physical
circumstances are less efficient than the laws, and the laws very
subordinate to the manners of the people. I am convinced that the most
advantageous situation and the best possible laws cannot maintain a
constitution in spite of the manners of a country; whilst the latter
may turn the most unfavorable positions and the worst laws to some
advantage. The importance of manners is a common truth to which study
and experience incessantly direct our attention. It may be regarded as
a central point in the range of human observation, and the common
termination of all inquiry. So seriously do I insist upon this head,
that if I have hitherto failed in making the reader feel the important
influence which I attribute to the practical experience, the habits,
the opinions, in short, to the manners of the Americans, upon the
maintenance of their institutions, I have failed in the principal
object of my work.

Whether Laws And Manners Are Sufficient To Maintain Democratic
Institutions In Other Countries Besides America

The Anglo-Americans, if transported into Europe, would be obliged to
modify their laws—Distinction to be made between democratic
institutions and American institutions—Democratic laws may be conceived
better than, or at least different from, those which the American
democracy has adopted—The example of America only proves that it is
possible to regulate democracy by the assistance of manners and
legislation.

I have asserted that the success of democratic institutions in the
United States is more intimately connected with the laws themselves,
and the manners of the people, than with the nature of the country. But
does it follow that the same causes would of themselves produce the
same results, if they were put into operation elsewhere; and if the
country is no adequate substitute for laws and manners, can laws and
manners in their turn prove a substitute for the country? It will
readily be understood that the necessary elements of a reply to this
question are wanting: other peoples are to be found in the New World
besides the Anglo-Americans, and as these people are affected by the
same physical circumstances as the latter, they may fairly be compared
together. But there are no nations out of America which have adopted
the same laws and manners, being destitute of the physical advantages
peculiar to the Anglo-Americans. No standard of comparison therefore
exists, and we can only hazard an opinion upon this subject.

It appears to me, in the first place, that a careful distinction must
be made between the institutions of the United States and democratic
institutions in general. When I reflect upon the state of Europe, its
mighty nations, its populous cities, its formidable armies, and the
complex nature of its politics, I cannot suppose that even the
Anglo-Americans, if they were transported to our hemisphere, with their
ideas, their religion, and their manners, could exist without
considerably altering their laws. But a democratic nation may be
imagined, organized differently from the American people. It is not
impossible to conceive a government really established upon the will of
the majority; but in which the majority, repressing its natural
propensity to equality, should consent, with a view to the order and
the stability of the State, to invest a family or an individual with
all the prerogatives of the executive. A democratic society might
exist, in which the forces of the nation would be more centralized than
they are in the United States; the people would exercise a less direct
and less irresistible influence upon public affairs, and yet every
citizen invested with certain rights would participate, within his
sphere, in the conduct of the government. The observations I made
amongst the Anglo-Americans induce me to believe that democratic
institutions of this kind, prudently introduced into society, so as
gradually to mix with the habits and to be interfused with the opinions
of the people, might subsist in other countries besides America. If the
laws of the United States were the only imaginable democratic laws, or
the most perfect which it is possible to conceive, I should admit that
the success of those institutions affords no proof of the success of
democratic institutions in general, in a country less favored by
natural circumstances. But as the laws of America appear to me to be
defective in several respects, and as I can readily imagine others of
the same general nature, the peculiar advantages of that country do not
prove that democratic institutions cannot succeed in a nation less
favored by circumstances, if ruled by better laws.

If human nature were different in America from what it is elsewhere; or
if the social condition of the Americans engendered habits and opinions
amongst them different from those which originate in the same social
condition in the Old World, the American democracies would afford no
means of predicting what may occur in other democracies. If the
Americans displayed the same propensities as all other democratic
nations, and if their legislators had relied upon the nature of the
country and the favor of circumstances to restrain those propensities
within due limits, the prosperity of the United States would be
exclusively attributable to physical causes, and it would afford no
encouragement to a people inclined to imitate their example, without
sharing their natural advantages. But neither of these suppositions is
borne out by facts.

In America the same passions are to be met with as in Europe; some
originating in human nature, others in the democratic condition of
society. Thus in the United States I found that restlessness of heart
which is natural to men, when all ranks are nearly equal and the
chances of elevation are the same to all. I found the democratic
feeling of envy expressed under a thousand different forms. I remarked
that the people frequently displayed, in the conduct of affairs, a
consummate mixture of ignorance and presumption; and I inferred that in
America, men are liable to the same failings and the same absurdities
as amongst ourselves. But upon examining the state of society more
attentively, I speedily discovered that the Americans had made great
and successful efforts to counteract these imperfections of human
nature, and to correct the natural defects of democracy. Their divers
municipal laws appeared to me to be a means of restraining the ambition
of the citizens within a narrow sphere, and of turning those same
passions which might have worked havoc in the State, to the good of the
township or the parish. The American legislators have succeeded to a
certain extent in opposing the notion of rights to the feelings of
envy; the permanence of the religious world to the continual shifting
of politics; the experience of the people to its theoretical ignorance;
and its practical knowledge of business to the impatience of its
desires.

The Americans, then, have not relied upon the nature of their country
to counterpoise those dangers which originate in their Constitution and
in their political laws. To evils which are common to all democratic
peoples they have applied remedies which none but themselves had ever
thought of before; and although they were the first to make the
experiment, they have succeeded in it.

The manners and laws of the Americans are not the only ones which may
suit a democratic people; but the Americans have shown that it would be
wrong to despair of regulating democracy by the aid of manners and of
laws. If other nations should borrow this general and pregnant idea
from the Americans, without however intending to imitate them in the
peculiar application which they have made of it; if they should attempt
to fit themselves for that social condition, which it seems to be the
will of Providence to impose upon the generations of this age, and so
to escape from the despotism or the anarchy which threatens them; what
reason is there to suppose that their efforts would not be crowned with
success? The organization and the establishment of democracy in
Christendom is the great political problem of the time. The Americans,
unquestionably, have not resolved this problem, but they furnish useful
data to those who undertake the task.

Importance Of What Precedes With Respect To The State Of Europe

It may readily be discovered with what intention I undertook the
foregoing inquiries. The question here discussed is interesting not
only to the United States, but to the whole world; it concerns, not a
nation, but all mankind. If those nations whose social condition is
democratic could only remain free as long as they are inhabitants of
the wilds, we could not but despair of the future destiny of the human
race; for democracy is rapidly acquiring a more extended sway, and the
wilds are gradually peopled with men. If it were true that laws and
manners are insufficient to maintain democratic institutions, what
refuge would remain open to the nations, except the despotism of a
single individual? I am aware that there are many worthy persons at the
present time who are not alarmed at this latter alternative, and who
are so tired of liberty as to be glad of repose, far from those storms
by which it is attended. But these individuals are ill acquainted with
the haven towards which they are bound. They are so deluded by their
recollections, as to judge the tendency of absolute power by what it
was formerly, and not by what it might become at the present time.

If absolute power were re-established amongst the democratic nations of
Europe, I am persuaded that it would assume a new form, and appear
under features unknown to our forefathers. There was a time in Europe
when the laws and the consent of the people had invested princes with
almost unlimited authority; but they scarcely ever availed themselves
of it. I do not speak of the prerogatives of the nobility, of the
authority of supreme courts of justice, of corporations and their
chartered rights, or of provincial privileges, which served to break
the blows of the sovereign authority, and to maintain a spirit of
resistance in the nation. Independently of these political
institutions—which, however opposed they might be to personal liberty,
served to keep alive the love of freedom in the mind of the public, and
which may be esteemed to have been useful in this respect—the manners
and opinions of the nation confined the royal authority within barriers
which were not less powerful, although they were less conspicuous.
Religion, the affections of the people, the benevolence of the prince,
the sense of honor, family pride, provincial prejudices, custom, and
public opinion limited the power of kings, and restrained their
authority within an invisible circle. The constitution of nations was
despotic at that time, but their manners were free. Princes had the
right, but they had neither the means nor the desire, of doing whatever
they pleased.

But what now remains of those barriers which formerly arrested the
aggressions of tyranny? Since religion has lost its empire over the
souls of men, the most prominent boundary which divided good from evil
is overthrown; the very elements of the moral world are indeterminate;
the princes and the peoples of the earth are guided by chance, and none
can define the natural limits of despotism and the bounds of license.
Long revolutions have forever destroyed the respect which surrounded
the rulers of the State; and since they have been relieved from the
burden of public esteem, princes may henceforward surrender themselves
without fear to the seductions of arbitrary power.

When kings find that the hearts of their subjects are turned towards
them, they are clement, because they are conscious of their strength,
and they are chary of the affection of their people, because the
affection of their people is the bulwark of the throne. A mutual
interchange of good-will then takes place between the prince and the
people, which resembles the gracious intercourse of domestic society.
The subjects may murmur at the sovereign’s decree, but they are grieved
to displease him; and the sovereign chastises his subjects with the
light hand of parental affection.

But when once the spell of royalty is broken in the tumult of
revolution; when successive monarchs have crossed the throne, so as
alternately to display to the people the weakness of their right and
the harshness of their power, the sovereign is no longer regarded by
any as the Father of the State, and he is feared by all as its master.
If he be weak, he is despised; if he be strong, he is detested. He
himself is full of animosity and alarm; he finds that he is as a
stranger in his own country, and he treats his subjects like conquered
enemies.

When the provinces and the towns formed so many different nations in
the midst of their common country, each of them had a will of its own,
which was opposed to the general spirit of subjection; but now that all
the parts of the same empire, after having lost their immunities, their
customs, their prejudices, their traditions, and their names, are
subjected and accustomed to the same laws, it is not more difficult to
oppress them collectively than it was formerly to oppress them singly.

Whilst the nobles enjoyed their power, and indeed long after that power
was lost, the honor of aristocracy conferred an extraordinary degree of
force upon their personal opposition. They afford instances of men who,
notwithstanding their weakness, still entertained a high opinion of
their personal value, and dared to cope single-handed with the efforts
of the public authority. But at the present day, when all ranks are
more and more confounded, when the individual disappears in the throng,
and is easily lost in the midst of a common obscurity, when the honor
of monarchy has almost lost its empire without being succeeded by
public virtue, and when nothing can enable man to rise above himself,
who shall say at what point the exigencies of power and the servility
of weakness will stop?

As long as family feeling was kept alive, the antagonist of oppression
was never alone; he looked about him, and found his clients, his
hereditary friends, and his kinsfolk. If this support was wanting, he
was sustained by his ancestors and animated by his posterity. But when
patrimonial estates are divided, and when a few years suffice to
confound the distinctions of a race, where can family feeling be found?
What force can there be in the customs of a country which has changed
and is still perpetually changing its aspect; in which every act of
tyranny has a precedent, and every crime an example; in which there is
nothing so old that its antiquity can save it from destruction, and
nothing so unparalleled that its novelty can prevent it from being
done? What resistance can be offered by manners of so pliant a make
that they have already often yielded? What strength can even public
opinion have retained, when no twenty persons are connected by a common
tie; when not a man, nor a family, nor chartered corporation, nor
class, nor free institution, has the power of representing or exerting
that opinion; and when every citizen—being equally weak, equally poor,
and equally dependent—has only his personal impotence to oppose to the
organized force of the government?

The annals of France furnish nothing analogous to the condition in
which that country might then be thrown. But it may more aptly be
assimilated to the times of old, and to those hideous eras of Roman
oppression, when the manners of the people were corrupted, their
traditions obliterated, their habits destroyed, their opinions shaken,
and freedom, expelled from the laws, could find no refuge in the land;
when nothing protected the citizens, and the citizens no longer
protected themselves; when human nature was the sport of man, and
princes wearied out the clemency of Heaven before they exhausted the
patience of their subjects. Those who hope to revive the monarchy of
Henry IV or of Louis XIV, appear to me to be afflicted with mental
blindness; and when I consider the present condition of several
European nations—a condition to which all the others tend—I am led to
believe that they will soon be left with no other alternative than
democratic liberty, or the tyranny of the Caesars. *n

n
[ [This prediction of the return of France to imperial despotism, and
of the true character of that despotic power, was written in 1832, and
realized to the letter in 1852.]]


And indeed it is deserving of consideration, whether men are to be
entirely emancipated or entirely enslaved; whether their rights are to
be made equal, or wholly taken away from them. If the rulers of society
were reduced either gradually to raise the crowd to their own level, or
to sink the citizens below that of humanity, would not the doubts of
many be resolved, the consciences of many be healed, and the community
prepared to make great sacrifices with little difficulty? In that case,
the gradual growth of democratic manners and institutions should be
regarded, not as the best, but as the only means of preserving freedom;
and without liking the government of democracy, it might be adopted as
the most applicable and the fairest remedy for the present ills of
society.

It is difficult to associate a people in the work of government; but it
is still more difficult to supply it with experience, and to inspire it
with the feelings which it requires in order to govern well. I grant
that the caprices of democracy are perpetual; its instruments are rude;
its laws imperfect. But if it were true that soon no just medium would
exist between the empire of democracy and the dominion of a single arm,
should we not rather incline towards the former than submit voluntarily
to the latter? And if complete equality be our fate, is it not better
to be levelled by free institutions than by despotic power?

Those who, after having read this book, should imagine that my
intention in writing it has been to propose the laws and manners of the
Anglo-Americans for the imitation of all democratic peoples, would
commit a very great mistake; they must have paid more attention to the
form than to the substance of my ideas. My aim has been to show, by the
example of America, that laws, and especially manners, may exist which
will allow a democratic people to remain free. But I am very far from
thinking that we ought to follow the example of the American democracy,
and copy the means which it has employed to attain its ends; for I am
well aware of the influence which the nature of a country and its
political precedents exercise upon a constitution; and I should regard
it as a great misfortune for mankind if liberty were to exist all over
the world under the same forms.

But I am of opinion that if we do not succeed in gradually introducing
democratic institutions into France, and if we despair of imparting to
the citizens those ideas and sentiments which first prepare them for
freedom, and afterwards allow them to enjoy it, there will be no
independence at all, either for the middling classes or the nobility,
for the poor or for the rich, but an equal tyranny over all; and I
foresee that if the peaceable empire of the majority be not founded
amongst us in time, we shall sooner or later arrive at the unlimited
authority of a single despot.




 Chapter XVIII: Future Condition Of Three Races In The United
 States—Part I


The Present And Probable Future Condition Of The Three Races Which
Inhabit The Territory Of The United States

The principal part of the task which I had imposed upon myself is now
performed. I have shown, as far as I was able, the laws and the manners
of the American democracy. Here I might stop; but the reader would
perhaps feel that I had not satisfied his expectations.

The absolute supremacy of democracy is not all that we meet with in
America; the inhabitants of the New World may be considered from more
than one point of view. In the course of this work my subject has often
led me to speak of the Indians and the Negroes; but I have never been
able to stop in order to show what place these two races occupy in the
midst of the democratic people whom I was engaged in describing. I have
mentioned in what spirit, and according to what laws, the
Anglo-American Union was formed; but I could only glance at the dangers
which menace that confederation, whilst it was equally impossible for
me to give a detailed account of its chances of duration, independently
of its laws and manners. When speaking of the united republican States,
I hazarded no conjectures upon the permanence of republican forms in
the New World, and when making frequent allusion to the commercial
activity which reigns in the Union, I was unable to inquire into the
future condition of the Americans as a commercial people.

These topics are collaterally connected with my subject without forming
a part of it; they are American without being democratic; and to
portray democracy has been my principal aim. It was therefore necessary
to postpone these questions, which I now take up as the proper
termination of my work.

The territory now occupied or claimed by the American Union spreads
from the shores of the Atlantic to those of the Pacific Ocean. On the
east and west its limits are those of the continent itself. On the
south it advances nearly to the tropic, and it extends upwards to the
icy regions of the North. The human beings who are scattered over this
space do not form, as in Europe, so many branches of the same stock.
Three races, naturally distinct, and, I might almost say, hostile to
each other, are discoverable amongst them at the first glance. Almost
insurmountable barriers had been raised between them by education and
by law, as well as by their origin and outward characteristics; but
fortune has brought them together on the same soil, where, although
they are mixed, they do not amalgamate, and each race fulfils its
destiny apart.

Amongst these widely differing families of men, the first which
attracts attention, the superior in intelligence, in power and in
enjoyment, is the white or European, the man pre-eminent; and in
subordinate grades, the negro and the Indian. These two unhappy races
have nothing in common; neither birth, nor features, nor language, nor
habits. Their only resemblance lies in their misfortunes. Both of them
occupy an inferior rank in the country they inhabit; both suffer from
tyranny; and if their wrongs are not the same, they originate, at any
rate, with the same authors.

If we reasoned from what passes in the world, we should almost say that
the European is to the other races of mankind, what man is to the lower
animals;—he makes them subservient to his use; and when he cannot
subdue, he destroys them. Oppression has, at one stroke, deprived the
descendants of the Africans of almost all the privileges of humanity.
The negro of the United States has lost all remembrance of his country;
the language which his forefathers spoke is never heard around him; he
abjured their religion and forgot their customs when he ceased to
belong to Africa, without acquiring any claim to European privileges.
But he remains half way between the two communities; sold by the one,
repulsed by the other; finding not a spot in the universe to call by
the name of country, except the faint image of a home which the shelter
of his master’s roof affords.

The negro has no family; woman is merely the temporary companion of his
pleasures, and his children are upon an equality with himself from the
moment of their birth. Am I to call it a proof of God’s mercy or a
visitation of his wrath, that man in certain states appears to be
insensible to his extreme wretchedness, and almost affects, with a
depraved taste, the cause of his misfortunes? The negro, who is plunged
in this abyss of evils, scarcely feels his own calamitous situation.
Violence made him a slave, and the habit of servitude gives him the
thoughts and desires of a slave; he admires his tyrants more than he
hates them, and finds his joy and his pride in the servile imitation of
those who oppress him: his understanding is degraded to the level of
his soul.

The negro enters upon slavery as soon as he is born: nay, he may have
been purchased in the womb, and have begun his slavery before he began
his existence. Equally devoid of wants and of enjoyment, and useless to
himself, he learns, with his first notions of existence, that he is the
property of another, who has an interest in preserving his life, and
that the care of it does not devolve upon himself; even the power of
thought appears to him a useless gift of Providence, and he quietly
enjoys the privileges of his debasement. If he becomes free,
independence is often felt by him to be a heavier burden than slavery;
for having learned, in the course of his life, to submit to everything
except reason, he is too much unacquainted with her dictates to obey
them. A thousand new desires beset him, and he is destitute of the
knowledge and energy necessary to resist them: these are masters which
it is necessary to contend with, and he has learnt only to submit and
obey. In short, he sinks to such a depth of wretchedness, that while
servitude brutalizes, liberty destroys him.

Oppression has been no less fatal to the Indian than to the negro race,
but its effects are different. Before the arrival of white men in the
New World, the inhabitants of North America lived quietly in their
woods, enduring the vicissitudes and practising the virtues and vices
common to savage nations. The Europeans, having dispersed the Indian
tribes and driven them into the deserts, condemned them to a wandering
life full of inexpressible sufferings.

Savage nations are only controlled by opinion and by custom. When the
North American Indians had lost the sentiment of attachment to their
country; when their families were dispersed, their traditions obscured,
and the chain of their recollections broken; when all their habits were
changed, and their wants increased beyond measure, European tyranny
rendered them more disorderly and less civilized than they were before.
The moral and physical condition of these tribes continually grew
worse, and they became more barbarous as they became more wretched.
Nevertheless, the Europeans have not been able to metamorphose the
character of the Indians; and though they have had power to destroy
them, they have never been able to make them submit to the rules of
civilized society.

The lot of the negro is placed on the extreme limit of servitude, while
that of the Indian lies on the uttermost verge of liberty; and slavery
does not produce more fatal effects upon the first, than independence
upon the second. The negro has lost all property in his own person, and
he cannot dispose of his existence without committing a sort of fraud:
but the savage is his own master as soon as he is able to act; parental
authority is scarcely known to him; he has never bent his will to that
of any of his kind, nor learned the difference between voluntary
obedience and a shameful subjection; and the very name of law is
unknown to him. To be free, with him, signifies to escape from all the
shackles of society. As he delights in this barbarous independence, and
would rather perish than sacrifice the least part of it, civilization
has little power over him.

The negro makes a thousand fruitless efforts to insinuate himself
amongst men who repulse him; he conforms to the tastes of his
oppressors, adopts their opinions, and hopes by imitating them to form
a part of their community. Having been told from infancy that his race
is naturally inferior to that of the whites, he assents to the
proposition and is ashamed of his own nature. In each of his features
he discovers a trace of slavery, and, if it were in his power, he would
willingly rid himself of everything that makes him what he is.

The Indian, on the contrary, has his imagination inflated with the
pretended nobility of his origin, and lives and dies in the midst of
these dreams of pride. Far from desiring to conform his habits to ours,
he loves his savage life as the distinguishing mark of his race, and he
repels every advance to civilization, less perhaps from the hatred
which he entertains for it, than from a dread of resembling the
Europeans. *a While he has nothing to oppose to our perfection in the
arts but the resources of the desert, to our tactics nothing but
undisciplined courage; whilst our well-digested plans are met by the
spontaneous instincts of savage life, who can wonder if he fails in
this unequal contest?

a
[ The native of North America retains his opinions and the most
insignificant of his habits with a degree of tenacity which has no
parallel in history. For more than two hundred years the wandering
tribes of North America have had daily intercourse with the whites, and
they have never derived from them either a custom or an idea. Yet the
Europeans have exercised a powerful influence over the savages: they
have made them more licentious, but not more European. In the summer of
1831 I happened to be beyond Lake Michigan, at a place called Green
Bay, which serves as the extreme frontier between the United States and
the Indians on the north-western side. Here I became acquainted with an
American officer, Major H., who, after talking to me at length on the
inflexibility of the Indian character, related the following fact:—“I
formerly knew a young Indian,” said he, “who had been educated at a
college in New England, where he had greatly distinguished himself, and
had acquired the external appearance of a member of civilized society.
When the war broke out between ourselves and the English in 1810, I saw
this young man again; he was serving in our army, at the head of the
warriors of his tribe, for the Indians were admitted amongst the ranks
of the Americans, upon condition that they would abstain from their
horrible custom of scalping their victims. On the evening of the battle
of . . ., C. came and sat himself down by the fire of our bivouac. I
asked him what had been his fortune that day: he related his exploits;
and growing warm and animated by the recollection of them, he concluded
by suddenly opening the breast of his coat, saying, ‘You must not
betray me—see here!’ And I actually beheld,” said the Major, “between
his body and his shirt, the skin and hair of an English head, still
dripping with gore.”]


The negro, who earnestly desires to mingle his race with that of the
European, cannot effect if; while the Indian, who might succeed to a
certain extent, disdains to make the attempt. The servility of the one
dooms him to slavery, the pride of the other to death.

I remember that while I was travelling through the forests which still
cover the State of Alabama, I arrived one day at the log house of a
pioneer. I did not wish to penetrate into the dwelling of the American,
but retired to rest myself for a while on the margin of a spring, which
was not far off, in the woods. While I was in this place (which was in
the neighborhood of the Creek territory), an Indian woman appeared,
followed by a negress, and holding by the hand a little white girl of
five or six years old, whom I took to be the daughter of the pioneer. A
sort of barbarous luxury set off the costume of the Indian; rings of
metal were hanging from her nostrils and ears; her hair, which was
adorned with glass beads, fell loosely upon her shoulders; and I saw
that she was not married, for she still wore that necklace of shells
which the bride always deposits on the nuptial couch. The negress was
clad in squalid European garments. They all three came and seated
themselves upon the banks of the fountain; and the young Indian, taking
the child in her arms, lavished upon her such fond caresses as mothers
give; while the negress endeavored by various little artifices to
attract the attention of the young Creole.

The child displayed in her slightest gestures a consciousness of
superiority which formed a strange contrast with her infantine
weakness; as if she received the attentions of her companions with a
sort of condescension. The negress was seated on the ground before her
mistress, watching her smallest desires, and apparently divided between
strong affection for the child and servile fear; whilst the savage
displayed, in the midst of her tenderness, an air of freedom and of
pride which was almost ferocious. I had approached the group, and I
contemplated them in silence; but my curiosity was probably displeasing
to the Indian woman, for she suddenly rose, pushed the child roughly
from her, and giving me an angry look plunged into the thicket. I had
often chanced to see individuals met together in the same place, who
belonged to the three races of men which people North America. I had
perceived from many different results the preponderance of the whites.
But in the picture which I have just been describing there was
something peculiarly touching; a bond of affection here united the
oppressors with the oppressed, and the effort of nature to bring them
together rendered still more striking the immense distance placed
between them by prejudice and by law.

The Present And Probable Future Condition Of The Indian Tribes Which
Inhabit The Territory Possessed By The Union

Gradual disappearance of the native tribes—Manner in which it takes
place—Miseries accompanying the forced migrations of the Indians—The
savages of North America had only two ways of escaping destruction; war
or civilization—They are no longer able to make war—Reasons why they
refused to become civilized when it was in their power, and why they
cannot become so now that they desire it—Instance of the Creeks and
Cherokees—Policy of the particular States towards these Indians—Policy
of the Federal Government.

None of the Indian tribes which formerly inhabited the territory of New
England—the Naragansetts, the Mohicans, the Pecots—have any existence
but in the recollection of man. The Lenapes, who received William Penn,
a hundred and fifty years ago, upon the banks of the Delaware, have
disappeared; and I myself met with the last of the Iroquois, who were
begging alms. The nations I have mentioned formerly covered the country
to the sea-coast; but a traveller at the present day must penetrate
more than a hundred leagues into the interior of the continent to find
an Indian. Not only have these wild tribes receded, but they are
destroyed; *b and as they give way or perish, an immense and increasing
people fills their place. There is no instance upon record of so
prodigious a growth, or so rapid a destruction: the manner in which the
latter change takes place is not difficult to describe.

b
[ In the thirteen original States there are only 6,273 Indians
remaining. (See Legislative Documents, 20th Congress, No. 117, p. 90.)
[The decrease in now far greater, and is verging on extinction. See
page 360 of this volume.]]


When the Indians were the sole inhabitants of the wilds from whence
they have since been expelled, their wants were few. Their arms were of
their own manufacture, their only drink was the water of the brook, and
their clothes consisted of the skins of animals, whose flesh furnished
them with food.

The Europeans introduced amongst the savages of North America
fire-arms, ardent spirits, and iron: they taught them to exchange for
manufactured stuffs, the rough garments which had previously satisfied
their untutored simplicity. Having acquired new tastes, without the
arts by which they could be gratified, the Indians were obliged to have
recourse to the workmanship of the whites; but in return for their
productions the savage had nothing to offer except the rich furs which
still abounded in his woods. Hence the chase became necessary, not
merely to provide for his subsistence, but in order to procure the only
objects of barter which he could furnish to Europe. *c Whilst the wants
of the natives were thus increasing, their resources continued to
diminish.

c
[ Messrs. Clarke and Cass, in their Report to Congress on February 4,
1829, p. 23, expressed themselves thus:—“The time when the Indians
generally could supply themselves with food and clothing, without any
of the articles of civilized life, has long since passed away. The more
remote tribes, beyond the Mississippi, who live where immense herds of
buffalo are yet to be found and who follow those animals in their
periodical migrations, could more easily than any others recur to the
habits of their ancestors, and live without the white man or any of his
manufactures. But the buffalo is constantly receding. The smaller
animals, the bear, the deer, the beaver, the otter, the muskrat, etc.,
principally minister to the comfort and support of the Indians; and
these cannot be taken without guns, ammunition, and traps. Among the
Northwestern Indians particularly, the labor of supplying a family with
food is excessive. Day after day is spent by the hunter without
success, and during this interval his family must subsist upon bark or
roots, or perish. Want and misery are around them and among them. Many
die every winter from actual starvation.”


The Indians will not live as Europeans live, and yet they can neither
subsist without them, nor exactly after the fashion of their fathers.
This is demonstrated by a fact which I likewise give upon official
authority. Some Indians of a tribe on the banks of Lake Superior had
killed a European; the American government interdicted all traffic with
the tribe to which the guilty parties belonged, until they were
delivered up to justice. This measure had the desired effect.]

From the moment when a European settlement is formed in the
neighborhood of the territory occupied by the Indians, the beasts of
chase take the alarm. *d Thousands of savages, wandering in the forests
and destitute of any fixed dwelling, did not disturb them; but as soon
as the continuous sounds of European labor are heard in their
neighborhood, they begin to flee away, and retire to the West, where
their instinct teaches them that they will find deserts of immeasurable
extent. “The buffalo is constantly receding,” say Messrs. Clarke and
Cass in their Report of the year 1829; “a few years since they
approached the base of the Alleghany; and a few years hence they may
even be rare upon the immense plains which extend to the base of the
Rocky Mountains.” I have been assured that this effect of the approach
of the whites is often felt at two hundred leagues’ distance from their
frontier. Their influence is thus exerted over tribes whose name is
unknown to them; and who suffer the evils of usurpation long before
they are acquainted with the authors of their distress. *e

d
[ “Five years ago,” (says Volney in his “Tableau des Etats-Unis,” p.
370) “in going from Vincennes to Kaskaskia, a territory which now forms
part of the State of Illinois, but which at the time I mention was
completely wild (1797), you could not cross a prairie without seeing
herds of from four to five hundred buffaloes. There are now none
remaining; they swam across the Mississippi to escape from the hunters,
and more particularly from the bells of the American cows.”]


e
[ The truth of what I here advance may be easily proved by consulting
the tabular statement of Indian tribes inhabiting the United States and
their territories. (Legislative Documents, 20th Congress, No. 117, pp.
90-105.) It is there shown that the tribes in the centre of America are
rapidly decreasing, although the Europeans are still at a considerable
distance from them.]


Bold adventurers soon penetrate into the country the Indians have
deserted, and when they have advanced about fifteen or twenty leagues
from the extreme frontiers of the whites, they begin to build
habitations for civilized beings in the midst of the wilderness. This
is done without difficulty, as the territory of a hunting-nation is
ill-defined; it is the common property of the tribe, and belongs to no
one in particular, so that individual interests are not concerned in
the protection of any part of it.

A few European families, settled in different situations at a
considerable distance from each other, soon drive away the wild animals
which remain between their places of abode. The Indians, who had
previously lived in a sort of abundance, then find it difficult to
subsist, and still more difficult to procure the articles of barter
which they stand in need of.

To drive away their game is to deprive them of the means of existence,
as effectually as if the fields of our agriculturists were stricken
with barrenness; and they are reduced, like famished wolves, to prowl
through the forsaken woods in quest of prey. Their instinctive love of
their country attaches them to the soil which gave them birth, *f even
after it has ceased to yield anything but misery and death. At length
they are compelled to acquiesce, and to depart: they follow the traces
of the elk, the buffalo, and the beaver, and are guided by these wild
animals in the choice of their future country. Properly speaking,
therefore, it is not the Europeans who drive away the native
inhabitants of America; it is famine which compels them to recede; a
happy distinction which had escaped the casuists of former times, and
for which we are indebted to modern discovery!

f
[ “The Indians,” say Messrs. Clarke and Cass in their Report to
Congress, p. 15, “are attached to their country by the same feelings
which bind us to ours; and, besides, there are certain superstitious
notions connected with the alienation of what the Great Spirit gave to
their ancestors, which operate strongly upon the tribes who have made
few or no cessions, but which are gradually weakened as our intercourse
with them is extended. ‘We will not sell the spot which contains the
bones of our fathers,’ is almost always the first answer to a
proposition for a sale.”]


It is impossible to conceive the extent of the sufferings which attend
these forced emigrations. They are undertaken by a people already
exhausted and reduced; and the countries to which the newcomers betake
themselves are inhabited by other tribes which receive them with
jealous hostility. Hunger is in the rear; war awaits them, and misery
besets them on all sides. In the hope of escaping from such a host of
enemies, they separate, and each individual endeavors to procure the
means of supporting his existence in solitude and secrecy, living in
the immensity of the desert like an outcast in civilized society. The
social tie, which distress had long since weakened, is then dissolved;
they have lost their country, and their people soon desert them: their
very families are obliterated; the names they bore in common are
forgotten, their language perishes, and all traces of their origin
disappear. Their nation has ceased to exist, except in the recollection
of the antiquaries of America and a few of the learned of Europe.

I should be sorry to have my reader suppose that I am coloring the
picture too highly; I saw with my own eyes several of the cases of
misery which I have been describing; and I was the witness of
sufferings which I have not the power to portray.

At the end of the year 1831, whilst I was on the left bank of the
Mississippi at a place named by Europeans, Memphis, there arrived a
numerous band of Choctaws (or Chactas, as they are called by the French
in Louisiana). These savages had left their country, and were
endeavoring to gain the right bank of the Mississippi, where they hoped
to find an asylum which had been promised them by the American
government. It was then the middle of winter, and the cold was
unusually severe; the snow had frozen hard upon the ground, and the
river was drifting huge masses of ice. The Indians had their families
with them; and they brought in their train the wounded and sick, with
children newly born, and old men upon the verge of death. They
possessed neither tents nor wagons, but only their arms and some
provisions. I saw them embark to pass the mighty river, and never will
that solemn spectacle fade from my remembrance. No cry, no sob was
heard amongst the assembled crowd; all were silent. Their calamities
were of ancient date, and they knew them to be irremediable. The
Indians had all stepped into the bark which was to carry them across,
but their dogs remained upon the bank. As soon as these animals
perceived that their masters were finally leaving the shore, they set
up a dismal howl, and, plunging all together into the icy waters of the
Mississippi, they swam after the boat.

The ejectment of the Indians very often takes place at the present day,
in a regular, and, as it were, a legal manner. When the European
population begins to approach the limit of the desert inhabited by a
savage tribe, the government of the United States usually dispatches
envoys to them, who assemble the Indians in a large plain, and having
first eaten and drunk with them, accost them in the following manner:
“What have you to do in the land of your fathers? Before long, you must
dig up their bones in order to live. In what respect is the country you
inhabit better than another? Are there no woods, marshes, or prairies,
except where you dwell? And can you live nowhere but under your own
sun? Beyond those mountains which you see at the horizon, beyond the
lake which bounds your territory on the west, there lie vast countries
where beasts of chase are found in great abundance; sell your lands to
us, and go to live happily in those solitudes.” After holding this
language, they spread before the eyes of the Indians firearms, woollen
garments, kegs of brandy, glass necklaces, bracelets of tinsel,
earrings, and looking-glasses. *g If, when they have beheld all these
riches, they still hesitate, it is insinuated that they have not the
means of refusing their required consent, and that the government
itself will not long have the power of protecting them in their rights.
What are they to do? Half convinced, and half compelled, they go to
inhabit new deserts, where the importunate whites will not let them
remain ten years in tranquillity. In this manner do the Americans
obtain, at a very low price, whole provinces, which the richest
sovereigns of Europe could not purchase. *h

g
[ See, in the Legislative Documents of Congress (Doc. 117), the
narrative of what takes place on these occasions. This curious passage
is from the above-mentioned report, made to Congress by Messrs. Clarke
and Cass in February, 1829. Mr. Cass is now the Secretary of War.


“The Indians,” says the report, “reach the treaty-ground poor and
almost naked. Large quantities of goods are taken there by the traders,
and are seen and examined by the Indians. The women and children become
importunate to have their wants supplied, and their influence is soon
exerted to induce a sale. Their improvidence is habitual and
unconquerable. The gratification of his immediate wants and desires is
the ruling passion of an Indian. The expectation of future advantages
seldom produces much effect. The experience of the past is lost, and
the prospects of the future disregarded. It would be utterly hopeless
to demand a cession of land, unless the means were at hand of
gratifying their immediate wants; and when their condition and
circumstances are fairly considered, it ought not to surprise us that
they are so anxious to relieve themselves.”]

h
[ On May 19, 1830, Mr. Edward Everett affirmed before the House of
Representatives, that the Americans had already acquired by treaty, to
the east and west of the Mississippi, 230,000,000 of acres. In 1808 the
Osages gave up 48,000,000 acres for an annual payment of $1,000. In
1818 the Quapaws yielded up 29,000,000 acres for $4,000. They reserved
for themselves a territory of 1,000,000 acres for a hunting-ground. A
solemn oath was taken that it should be respected: but before long it
was invaded like the rest. Mr. Bell, in his Report of the Committee on
Indian Affairs, February 24, 1830, has these words:—“To pay an Indian
tribe what their ancient hunting-grounds are worth to them, after the
game is fled or destroyed, as a mode of appropriating wild lands
claimed by Indians, has been found more convenient, and certainly it is
more agreeable to the forms of justice, as well as more merciful, than
to assert the possession of them by the sword. Thus the practice of
buying Indian titles is but the substitute which humanity and
expediency have imposed, in place of the sword, in arriving at the
actual enjoyment of property claimed by the right of discovery, and
sanctioned by the natural superiority allowed to the claims of
civilized communities over those of savage tribes. Up to the present
time so invariable has been the operation of certain causes, first in
diminishing the value of forest lands to the Indians, and secondly in
disposing them to sell readily, that the plan of buying their right of
occupancy has never threatened to retard, in any perceptible degree,
the prosperity of any of the States.” (Legislative Documents, 21st
Congress, No. 227, p. 6.)]




 Chapter XVIII: Future Condition Of Three Races—Part II


These are great evils; and it must be added that they appear to me to
be irremediable. I believe that the Indian nations of North America are
doomed to perish; and that whenever the Europeans shall be established
on the shores of the Pacific Ocean, that race of men will be no more.
*i The Indians had only the two alternatives of war or civilization; in
other words, they must either have destroyed the Europeans or become
their equals.

i
[ This seems, indeed, to be the opinion of almost all American
statesmen. “Judging of the future by the past,” says Mr. Cass, “we
cannot err in anticipating a progressive diminution of their numbers,
and their eventual extinction, unless our border should become
stationary, and they be removed beyond it, or unless some radical
change should take place in the principles of our intercourse with
them, which it is easier to hope for than to expect.”]


At the first settlement of the colonies they might have found it
possible, by uniting their forces, to deliver themselves from the small
bodies of strangers who landed on their continent. *j They several
times attempted to do it, and were on the point of succeeding; but the
disproportion of their resources, at the present day, when compared
with those of the whites, is too great to allow such an enterprise to
be thought of. Nevertheless, there do arise from time to time among the
Indians men of penetration, who foresee the final destiny which awaits
the native population, and who exert themselves to unite all the tribes
in common hostility to the Europeans; but their efforts are unavailing.
Those tribes which are in the neighborhood of the whites, are too much
weakened to offer an effectual resistance; whilst the others, giving
way to that childish carelessness of the morrow which characterizes
savage life, wait for the near approach of danger before they prepare
to meet it; some are unable, the others are unwilling, to exert
themselves.

j
[ Amongst other warlike enterprises, there was one of the Wampanaogs,
and other confederate tribes, under Metacom in 1675, against the
colonists of New England; the English were also engaged in war in
Virginia in 1622.]


It is easy to foresee that the Indians will never conform to
civilization; or that it will be too late, whenever they may be
inclined to make the experiment.

Civilization is the result of a long social process which takes place
in the same spot, and is handed down from one generation to another,
each one profiting by the experience of the last. Of all nations, those
submit to civilization with the most difficulty which habitually live
by the chase. Pastoral tribes, indeed, often change their place of
abode; but they follow a regular order in their migrations, and often
return again to their old stations, whilst the dwelling of the hunter
varies with that of the animals he pursues.

Several attempts have been made to diffuse knowledge amongst the
Indians, without controlling their wandering propensities; by the
Jesuits in Canada, and by the Puritans in New England; *k but none of
these endeavors were crowned by any lasting success. Civilization began
in the cabin, but it soon retired to expire in the woods. The great
error of these legislators of the Indians was their not understanding
that, in order to succeed in civilizing a people, it is first necessary
to fix it; which cannot be done without inducing it to cultivate the
soil; the Indians ought in the first place to have been accustomed to
agriculture. But not only are they destitute of this indispensable
preliminary to civilization, they would even have great difficulty in
acquiring it. Men who have once abandoned themselves to the restless
and adventurous life of the hunter, feel an insurmountable disgust for
the constant and regular labor which tillage requires. We see this
proved in the bosom of our own society; but it is far more visible
among peoples whose partiality for the chase is a part of their
national character.

k
[ See the “Histoire de la Nouvelle France,” by Charlevoix, and the work
entitled “Lettres edifiantes.”]


Independently of this general difficulty, there is another, which
applies peculiarly to the Indians; they consider labor not merely as an
evil, but as a disgrace; so that their pride prevents them from
becoming civilized, as much as their indolence. *l

l
[ “In all the tribes,” says Volney, in his “Tableau des Etats-Unis,” p.
423, “there still exists a generation of old warriors, who cannot
forbear, when they see their countrymen using the hoe, from exclaiming
against the degradation of ancient manners, and asserting that the
savages owe their decline to these innovations; adding, that they have
only to return to their primitive habits in order to recover their
power and their glory.”]


There is no Indian so wretched as not to retain under his hut of bark a
lofty idea of his personal worth; he considers the cares of industry
and labor as degrading occupations; he compares the husbandman to the
ox which traces the furrow; and even in our most ingenious handicraft,
he can see nothing but the labor of slaves. Not that he is devoid of
admiration for the power and intellectual greatness of the whites; but
although the result of our efforts surprises him, he contemns the means
by which we obtain it; and while he acknowledges our ascendancy, he
still believes in his superiority. War and hunting are the only
pursuits which appear to him worthy to be the occupations of a man. *m
The Indian, in the dreary solitude of his woods, cherishes the same
ideas, the same opinions as the noble of the Middle Ages in his castle,
and he only requires to become a conqueror to complete the resemblance;
thus, however strange it may seem, it is in the forests of the New
World, and not amongst the Europeans who people its coasts, that the
ancient prejudices of Europe are still in existence.

m
[ The following description occurs in an official document: “Until a
young man has been engaged with an enemy, and has performed some acts
of valor, he gains no consideration, but is regarded nearly as a woman.
In their great war-dances all the warriors in succession strike the
post, as it is called, and recount their exploits. On these occasions
their auditory consists of the kinsmen, friends, and comrades of the
narrator. The profound impression which his discourse produces on them
is manifested by the silent attention it receives, and by the loud
shouts which hail its termination. The young man who finds himself at
such a meeting without anything to recount is very unhappy; and
instances have sometimes occurred of young warriors, whose passions had
been thus inflamed, quitting the war-dance suddenly, and going off
alone to seek for trophies which they might exhibit, and adventures
which they might be allowed to relate.”]


More than once, in the course of this work, I have endeavored to
explain the prodigious influence which the social condition appears to
exercise upon the laws and the manners of men; and I beg to add a few
words on the same subject.

When I perceive the resemblance which exists between the political
institutions of our ancestors, the Germans, and of the wandering tribes
of North America; between the customs described by Tacitus, and those
of which I have sometimes been a witness, I cannot help thinking that
the same cause has brought about the same results in both hemispheres;
and that in the midst of the apparent diversity of human affairs, a
certain number of primary facts may be discovered, from which all the
others are derived. In what we usually call the German institutions,
then, I am inclined only to perceive barbarian habits; and the opinions
of savages in what we style feudal principles.

However strongly the vices and prejudices of the North American Indians
may be opposed to their becoming agricultural and civilized, necessity
sometimes obliges them to it. Several of the Southern nations, and
amongst others the Cherokees and the Creeks, *n were surrounded by
Europeans, who had landed on the shores of the Atlantic; and who,
either descending the Ohio or proceeding up the Mississippi, arrived
simultaneously upon their borders. These tribes have not been driven
from place to place, like their Northern brethren; but they have been
gradually enclosed within narrow limits, like the game within the
thicket, before the huntsmen plunge into the interior. The Indians who
were thus placed between civilization and death, found themselves
obliged to live by ignominious labor like the whites. They took to
agriculture, and without entirely forsaking their old habits or
manners, sacrificed only as much as was necessary to their existence.

n
[ These nations are now swallowed up in the States of Georgia,
Tennessee, Alabama, and Mississippi. There were formerly in the South
four great nations (remnants of which still exist), the Choctaws, the
Chickasaws, the Creeks, and the Cherokees. The remnants of these four
nations amounted, in 1830, to about 75,000 individuals. It is computed
that there are now remaining in the territory occupied or claimed by
the Anglo-American Union about 300,000 Indians. (See Proceedings of the
Indian Board in the City of New York.) The official documents supplied
to Congress make the number amount to 313,130. The reader who is
curious to know the names and numerical strength of all the tribes
which inhabit the Anglo-American territory should consult the documents
I refer to. (Legislative Documents, 20th Congress, No. 117, pp.
90-105.) [In the Census of 1870 it is stated that the Indian population
of the United States is only 25,731, of whom 7,241 are in California.]]


The Cherokees went further; they created a written language;
established a permanent form of government; and as everything proceeds
rapidly in the New World, before they had all of them clothes, they set
up a newspaper. *o

o
[ I brought back with me to France one or two copies of this singular
publication.]


The growth of European habits has been remarkably accelerated among
these Indians by the mixed race which has sprung up. *p Deriving
intelligence from their father’s side, without entirely losing the
savage customs of the mother, the half-blood forms the natural link
between civilization and barbarism. Wherever this race has multiplied
the savage state has become modified, and a great change has taken
place in the manners of the people. *q

p
[ See in the Report of the Committee on Indian Affairs, 21st Congress,
No. 227, p. 23, the reasons for the multiplication of Indians of mixed
blood among the Cherokees. The principal cause dates from the War of
Independence. Many Anglo-Americans of Georgia, having taken the side of
England, were obliged to retreat among the Indians, where they
married.]


q
[ Unhappily the mixed race has been less numerous and less influential
in North America than in any other country. The American continent was
peopled by two great nations of Europe, the French and the English. The
former were not slow in connecting themselves with the daughters of the
natives, but there was an unfortunate affinity between the Indian
character and their own: instead of giving the tastes and habits of
civilized life to the savages, the French too often grew passionately
fond of the state of wild freedom they found them in. They became the
most dangerous of the inhabitants of the desert, and won the friendship
of the Indian by exaggerating his vices and his virtues. M. de
Senonville, the governor of Canada, wrote thus to Louis XIV in 1685:
“It has long been believed that in order to civilize the savages we
ought to draw them nearer to us. But there is every reason to suppose
we have been mistaken. Those which have been brought into contact with
us have not become French, and the French who have lived among them are
changed into savages, affecting to dress and live like them.” (“History
of New France,” by Charlevoix, vol. ii., p. 345.) The Englishman, on
the contrary, continuing obstinately attached to the customs and the
most insignificant habits of his forefathers, has remained in the midst
of the American solitudes just what he was in the bosom of European
cities; he would not allow of any communication with savages whom he
despised, and avoided with care the union of his race with theirs. Thus
while the French exercised no salutary influence over the Indians, the
English have always remained alien from them.]


The success of the Cherokees proves that the Indians are capable of
civilization, but it does not prove that they will succeed in it. This
difficulty which the Indians find in submitting to civilization
proceeds from the influence of a general cause, which it is almost
impossible for them to escape. An attentive survey of history
demonstrates that, in general, barbarous nations have raised themselves
to civilization by degrees, and by their own efforts. Whenever they
derive knowledge from a foreign people, they stood towards it in the
relation of conquerors, and not of a conquered nation. When the
conquered nation is enlightened, and the conquerors are half savage, as
in the case of the invasion of Rome by the Northern nations or that of
China by the Mongols, the power which victory bestows upon the
barbarian is sufficient to keep up his importance among civilized men,
and permit him to rank as their equal, until he becomes their rival:
the one has might on his side, the other has intelligence; the former
admires the knowledge and the arts of the conquered, the latter envies
the power of the conquerors. The barbarians at length admit civilized
man into their palaces, and he in turn opens his schools to the
barbarians. But when the side on which the physical force lies, also
possesses an intellectual preponderance, the conquered party seldom
become civilized; it retreats, or is destroyed. It may therefore be
said, in a general way, that savages go forth in arms to seek
knowledge, but that they do not receive it when it comes to them.

If the Indian tribes which now inhabit the heart of the continent could
summon up energy enough to attempt to civilize themselves, they might
possibly succeed. Superior already to the barbarous nations which
surround them, they would gradually gain strength and experience, and
when the Europeans should appear upon their borders, they would be in a
state, if not to maintain their independence, at least to assert their
right to the soil, and to incorporate themselves with the conquerors.
But it is the misfortune of Indians to be brought into contact with a
civilized people, which is also (it must be owned) the most avaricious
nation on the globe, whilst they are still semi-barbarian: to find
despots in their instructors, and to receive knowledge from the hand of
oppression. Living in the freedom of the woods, the North American
Indian was destitute, but he had no feeling of inferiority towards
anyone; as soon, however, as he desires to penetrate into the social
scale of the whites, he takes the lowest rank in society, for he
enters, ignorant and poor, within the pale of science and wealth. After
having led a life of agitation, beset with evils and dangers, but at
the same time filled with proud emotions, *r he is obliged to submit to
a wearisome, obscure, and degraded state; and to gain the bread which
nourishes him by hard and ignoble labor; such are in his eyes the only
results of which civilization can boast: and even this much he is not
sure to obtain.

r
[ There is in the adventurous life of the hunter a certain irresistible
charm, which seizes the heart of man and carries him away in spite of
reason and experience. This is plainly shown by the memoirs of Tanner.
Tanner is a European who was carried away at the age of six by the
Indians, and has remained thirty years with them in the woods. Nothing
can be conceived more appalling that the miseries which he describes.
He tells us of tribes without a chief, families without a nation to
call their own, men in a state of isolation, wrecks of powerful tribes
wandering at random amid the ice and snow and desolate solitudes of
Canada. Hunger and cold pursue them; every day their life is in
jeopardy. Amongst these men, manners have lost their empire, traditions
are without power. They become more and more savage. Tanner shared in
all these miseries; he was aware of his European origin; he was not
kept away from the whites by force; on the contrary, he came every year
to trade with them, entered their dwellings, and witnessed their
enjoyments; he knew that whenever he chose to return to civilized life
he was perfectly able to do so—and he remained thirty years in the
deserts. When he came into civilized society he declared that the rude
existence which he described, had a secret charm for him which he was
unable to define: he returned to it again and again: at length he
abandoned it with poignant regret; and when he was at length fixed
among the whites, several of his children refused to share his tranquil
and easy situation. I saw Tanner myself at the lower end of Lake
Superior; he seemed to me to be more like a savage than a civilized
being. His book is written without either taste or order; but he gives,
even unconsciously, a lively picture of the prejudices, the passions,
the vices, and, above all, of the destitution in which he lived.]


When the Indians undertake to imitate their European neighbors, and to
till the earth like the settlers, they are immediately exposed to a
very formidable competition. The white man is skilled in the craft of
agriculture; the Indian is a rough beginner in an art with which he is
unacquainted. The former reaps abundant crops without difficulty, the
latter meets with a thousand obstacles in raising the fruits of the
earth.

The European is placed amongst a population whose wants he knows and
partakes. The savage is isolated in the midst of a hostile people, with
whose manners, language, and laws he is imperfectly acquainted, but
without whose assistance he cannot live. He can only procure the
materials of comfort by bartering his commodities against the goods of
the European, for the assistance of his countrymen is wholly
insufficient to supply his wants. When the Indian wishes to sell the
produce of his labor, he cannot always meet with a purchaser, whilst
the European readily finds a market; and the former can only produce at
a considerable cost that which the latter vends at a very low rate.
Thus the Indian has no sooner escaped those evils to which barbarous
nations are exposed, than he is subjected to the still greater miseries
of civilized communities; and he finds is scarcely less difficult to
live in the midst of our abundance, than in the depth of his own
wilderness.

He has not yet lost the habits of his erratic life; the traditions of
his fathers and his passion for the chase are still alive within him.
The wild enjoyments which formerly animated him in the woods, painfully
excite his troubled imagination; and his former privations appear to be
less keen, his former perils less appalling. He contrasts the
independence which he possessed amongst his equals with the servile
position which he occupies in civilized society. On the other hand, the
solitudes which were so long his free home are still at hand; a few
hours’ march will bring him back to them once more. The whites offer
him a sum, which seems to him to be considerable, for the ground which
he has begun to clear. This money of the Europeans may possibly furnish
him with the means of a happy and peaceful subsistence in remoter
regions; and he quits the plough, resumes his native arms, and returns
to the wilderness forever. *s The condition of the Creeks and
Cherokees, to which I have already alluded, sufficiently corroborates
the truth of this deplorable picture.

s
[ The destructive influence of highly civilized nations upon others
which are less so, has been exemplified by the Europeans themselves.
About a century ago the French founded the town of Vincennes up on the
Wabash, in the middle of the desert; and they lived there in great
plenty until the arrival of the American settlers, who first ruined the
previous inhabitants by their competition, and afterwards purchased
their lands at a very low rate. At the time when M. de Volney, from
whom I borrow these details, passed through Vincennes, the number of
the French was reduced to a hundred individuals, most of whom were
about to pass over to Louisiana or to Canada. These French settlers
were worthy people, but idle and uninstructed: they had contracted many
of the habits of savages. The Americans, who were perhaps their
inferiors, in a moral point of view, were immeasurably superior to them
in intelligence: they were industrious, well informed, rich, and
accustomed to govern their own community.


I myself saw in Canada, where the intellectual difference between the
two races is less striking, that the English are the masters of
commerce and manufacture in the Canadian country, that they spread on
all sides, and confine the French within limits which scarcely suffice
to contain them. In like manner, in Louisiana, almost all activity in
commerce and manufacture centres in the hands of the Anglo-Americans.

But the case of Texas is still more striking: the State of Texas is a
part of Mexico, and lies upon the frontier between that country and the
United States. In the course of the last few years the Anglo-Americans
have penetrated into this province, which is still thinly peopled; they
purchase land, they produce the commodities of the country, and
supplant the original population. It may easily be foreseen that if
Mexico takes no steps to check this change, the province of Texas will
very shortly cease to belong to that government.

If the different degrees—comparatively so slight—which exist in
European civilization produce results of such magnitude, the
consequences which must ensue from the collision of the most perfect
European civilization with Indian savages may readily be conceived.]

The Indians, in the little which they have done, have unquestionably
displayed as much natural genius as the peoples of Europe in their most
important designs; but nations as well as men require time to learn,
whatever may be their intelligence and their zeal. Whilst the savages
were engaged in the work of civilization, the Europeans continued to
surround them on every side, and to confine them within narrower
limits; the two races gradually met, and they are now in immediate
juxtaposition to each other. The Indian is already superior to his
barbarous parent, but he is still very far below his white neighbor.
With their resources and acquired knowledge, the Europeans soon
appropriated to themselves most of the advantages which the natives
might have derived from the possession of the soil; they have settled
in the country, they have purchased land at a very low rate or have
occupied it by force, and the Indians have been ruined by a competition
which they had not the means of resisting. They were isolated in their
own country, and their race only constituted a colony of troublesome
aliens in the midst of a numerous and domineering people. *t

t
[ See in the Legislative Documents (21st Congress, No. 89) instances of
excesses of every kind committed by the whites upon the territory of
the Indians, either in taking possession of a part of their lands,
until compelled to retire by the troops of Congress, or carrying off
their cattle, burning their houses, cutting down their corn, and doing
violence to their persons. It appears, nevertheless, from all these
documents that the claims of the natives are constantly protected by
the government from the abuse of force. The Union has a representative
agent continually employed to reside among the Indians; and the report
of the Cherokee agent, which is among the documents I have referred to,
is almost always favorable to the Indians. “The intrusion of whites,”
he says, “upon the lands of the Cherokees would cause ruin to the poor,
helpless, and inoffensive inhabitants.” And he further remarks upon the
attempt of the State of Georgia to establish a division line for the
purpose of limiting the boundaries of the Cherokees, that the line
drawn having been made by the whites, and entirely upon ex parte
evidence of their several rights, was of no validity whatever.]


Washington said in one of his messages to Congress, “We are more
enlightened and more powerful than the Indian nations, we are therefore
bound in honor to treat them with kindness and even with generosity.”
But this virtuous and high-minded policy has not been followed. The
rapacity of the settlers is usually backed by the tyranny of the
government. Although the Cherokees and the Creeks are established upon
the territory which they inhabited before the settlement of the
Europeans, and although the Americans have frequently treated with them
as with foreign nations, the surrounding States have not consented to
acknowledge them as independent peoples, and attempts have been made to
subject these children of the woods to Anglo-American magistrates,
laws, and customs. *u Destitution had driven these unfortunate Indians
to civilization, and oppression now drives them back to their former
condition: many of them abandon the soil which they had begun to clear,
and return to their savage course of life.

u
[ In 1829 the State of Alabama divided the Creek territory into
counties, and subjected the Indian population to the power of European
magistrates.

In 1830 the State of Mississippi assimilated the Choctaws and
Chickasaws to the white population, and declared that any of them that
should take the title of chief would be punished by a fine of $1,000
and a year’s imprisonment. When these laws were enforced upon the
Choctaws, who inhabited that district, the tribe assembled, their chief
communicated to them the intentions of the whites, and read to them
some of the laws to which it was intended that they should submit; and
they unanimously declared that it was better at once to retreat again
into the wilds.]




Chapter XVIII: Future Condition Of Three Races—Part III


If we consider the tyrannical measures which have been adopted by the
legislatures of the Southern States, the conduct of their Governors,
and the decrees of their courts of justice, we shall be convinced that
the entire expulsion of the Indians is the final result to which the
efforts of their policy are directed. The Americans of that part of the
Union look with jealousy upon the aborigines, *v they are aware that
these tribes have not yet lost the traditions of savage life, and
before civilization has permanently fixed them to the soil, it is
intended to force them to recede by reducing them to despair. The
Creeks and Cherokees, oppressed by the several States, have appealed to
the central government, which is by no means insensible to their
misfortunes, and is sincerely desirous of saving the remnant of the
natives, and of maintaining them in the free possession of that
territory, which the Union is pledged to respect. *w But the several
States oppose so formidable a resistance to the execution of this
design, that the government is obliged to consent to the extirpation of
a few barbarous tribes in order not to endanger the safety of the
American Union.

v
[ The Georgians, who are so much annoyed by the proximity of the
Indians, inhabit a territory which does not at present contain more
than seven inhabitants to the square mile. In France there are one
hundred and sixty-two inhabitants to the same extent of country.]


w
[ In 1818 Congress appointed commissioners to visit the Arkansas
Territory, accompanied by a deputation of Creeks, Choctaws, and
Chickasaws. This expedition was commanded by Messrs. Kennerly, M’Coy,
Wash Hood, and John Bell. See the different reports of the
commissioners, and their journal, in the Documents of Congress, No. 87,
House of Representatives.]


But the federal government, which is not able to protect the Indians,
would fain mitigate the hardships of their lot; and, with this
intention, proposals have been made to transport them into more remote
regions at the public cost.

Between the thirty-third and thirty-seventh degrees of north latitude,
a vast tract of country lies, which has taken the name of Arkansas,
from the principal river that waters its extent. It is bounded on the
one side by the confines of Mexico, on the other by the Mississippi.
Numberless streams cross it in every direction; the climate is mild,
and the soil productive, but it is only inhabited by a few wandering
hordes of savages. The government of the Union wishes to transport the
broken remnants of the indigenous population of the South to the
portion of this country which is nearest to Mexico, and at a great
distance from the American settlements.

We were assured, towards the end of the year 1831, that 10,000 Indians
had already gone down to the shores of the Arkansas; and fresh
detachments were constantly following them; but Congress has been
unable to excite a unanimous determination in those whom it is disposed
to protect. Some, indeed, are willing to quit the seat of oppression,
but the most enlightened members of the community refuse to abandon
their recent dwellings and their springing crops; they are of opinion
that the work of civilization, once interrupted, will never be resumed;
they fear that those domestic habits which have been so recently
contracted, may be irrevocably lost in the midst of a country which is
still barbarous, and where nothing is prepared for the subsistence of
an agricultural people; they know that their entrance into those wilds
will be opposed by inimical hordes, and that they have lost the energy
of barbarians, without acquiring the resources of civilization to
resist their attacks. Moreover, the Indians readily discover that the
settlement which is proposed to them is merely a temporary expedient.
Who can assure them that they will at length be allowed to dwell in
peace in their new retreat? The United States pledge themselves to the
observance of the obligation; but the territory which they at present
occupy was formerly secured to them by the most solemn oaths of
Anglo-American faith. *x The American government does not indeed rob
them of their lands, but it allows perpetual incursions to be made on
them. In a few years the same white population which now flocks around
them, will track them to the solitudes of the Arkansas; they will then
be exposed to the same evils without the same remedies, and as the
limits of the earth will at last fail them, their only refuge is the
grave.

x
[ The fifth article of the treaty made with the Creeks in August, 1790,
is in the following words:—“The United States solemnly guarantee to the
Creek nation all their land within the limits of the United States.”


The seventh article of the treaty concluded in 1791 with the Cherokees
says:—“The United States solemnly guarantee to the Cherokee nation all
their lands not hereby ceded.” The following article declared that if
any citizen of the United States or other settler not of the Indian
race should establish himself upon the territory of the Cherokees, the
United States would withdraw their protection from that individual, and
give him up to be punished as the Cherokee nation should think fit.]

The Union treats the Indians with less cupidity and rigor than the
policy of the several States, but the two governments are alike
destitute of good faith. The States extend what they are pleased to
term the benefits of their laws to the Indians, with a belief that the
tribes will recede rather than submit; and the central government,
which promises a permanent refuge to these unhappy beings is well aware
of its inability to secure it to them. *y

y
[ This does not prevent them from promising in the most solemn manner
to do so. See the letter of the President addressed to the Creek
Indians, March 23, 1829 (Proceedings of the Indian Board, in the city
of New York, p. 5): “Beyond the great river Mississippi, where a part
of your nation has gone, your father has provided a country large
enough for all of you, and he advises you to remove to it. There your
white brothers will not trouble you; they will have no claim to the
land, and you can live upon it, you and all your children, as long as
the grass grows, or the water runs, in peace and plenty. It will be
yours forever.”


The Secretary of War, in a letter written to the Cherokees, April 18,
1829, (see the same work, p. 6), declares to them that they cannot
expect to retain possession of the lands at that time occupied by them,
but gives them the most positive assurance of uninterrupted peace if
they would remove beyond the Mississippi: as if the power which could
not grant them protection then, would be able to afford it them
hereafter!]

Thus the tyranny of the States obliges the savages to retire, the
Union, by its promises and resources, facilitates their retreat; and
these measures tend to precisely the same end. *z “By the will of our
Father in Heaven, the Governor of the whole world,” said the Cherokees
in their petition to Congress, *a “the red man of America has become
small, and the white man great and renowned. When the ancestors of the
people of these United States first came to the shores of America they
found the red man strong: though he was ignorant and savage, yet he
received them kindly, and gave them dry land to rest their weary feet.
They met in peace, and shook hands in token of friendship. Whatever the
white man wanted and asked of the Indian, the latter willingly gave. At
that time the Indian was the lord, and the white man the suppliant. But
now the scene has changed. The strength of the red man has become
weakness. As his neighbors increased in numbers his power became less
and less, and now, of the many and powerful tribes who once covered
these United States, only a few are to be seen—a few whom a sweeping
pestilence has left. The northern tribes, who were once so numerous and
powerful, are now nearly extinct. Thus it has happened to the red man
of America. Shall we, who are remnants, share the same fate?”

z
[ To obtain a correct idea of the policy pursued by the several States
and the Union with respect to the Indians, it is necessary to consult,
1st, “The Laws of the Colonial and State Governments relating to the
Indian Inhabitants.” (See the Legislative Documents, 21st Congress, No.
319.) 2d, The Laws of the Union on the same subject, and especially
that of March 30, 1802. (See Story’s “Laws of the United States.”) 3d,
The Report of Mr. Cass, Secretary of War, relative to Indian Affairs,
November 29, 1823.]


a
[ December 18, 1829.]


“The land on which we stand we have received as an inheritance from our
fathers, who possessed it from time immemorial, as a gift from our
common Father in Heaven. They bequeathed it to us as their children,
and we have sacredly kept it, as containing the remains of our beloved
men. This right of inheritance we have never ceded nor ever forfeited.
Permit us to ask what better right can the people have to a country
than the right of inheritance and immemorial peaceable possession? We
know it is said of late by the State of Georgia and by the Executive of
the United States, that we have forfeited this right; but we think this
is said gratuitously. At what time have we made the forfeit? What great
crime have we committed, whereby we must forever be divested of our
country and rights? Was it when we were hostile to the United States,
and took part with the King of Great Britain, during the struggle for
independence? If so, why was not this forfeiture declared in the first
treaty of peace between the United States and our beloved men? Why was
not such an article as the following inserted in the treaty:—‘The
United States give peace to the Cherokees, but, for the part they took
in the late war, declare them to be but tenants at will, to be removed
when the convenience of the States, within whose chartered limits they
live, shall require it’? That was the proper time to assume such a
possession. But it was not thought of, nor would our forefathers have
agreed to any treaty whose tendency was to deprive them of their rights
and their country.”

Such is the language of the Indians: their assertions are true, their
forebodings inevitable. From whichever side we consider the destinies
of the aborigines of North America, their calamities appear to be
irremediable: if they continue barbarous, they are forced to retire; if
they attempt to civilize their manners, the contact of a more civilized
community subjects them to oppression and destitution. They perish if
they continue to wander from waste to waste, and if they attempt to
settle they still must perish; the assistance of Europeans is necessary
to instruct them, but the approach of Europeans corrupts and repels
them into savage life; they refuse to change their habits as long as
their solitudes are their own, and it is too late to change them when
they are constrained to submit.

The Spaniards pursued the Indians with bloodhounds, like wild beasts;
they sacked the New World with no more temper or compassion than a city
taken by storm; but destruction must cease, and frenzy be stayed; the
remnant of the Indian population which had escaped the massacre mixed
with its conquerors, and adopted in the end their religion and their
manners. *b The conduct of the Americans of the United States towards
the aborigines is characterized, on the other hand, by a singular
attachment to the formalities of law. Provided that the Indians retain
their barbarous condition, the Americans take no part in their affairs;
they treat them as independent nations, and do not possess themselves
of their hunting grounds without a treaty of purchase; and if an Indian
nation happens to be so encroached upon as to be unable to subsist upon
its territory, they afford it brotherly assistance in transporting it
to a grave sufficiently remote from the land of its fathers.

b
[ The honor of this result is, however, by no means due to the
Spaniards. If the Indian tribes had not been tillers of the ground at
the time of the arrival of the Europeans, they would unquestionably
have been destroyed in South as well as in North America.]


The Spaniards were unable to exterminate the Indian race by those
unparalleled atrocities which brand them with indelible shame, nor did
they even succeed in wholly depriving it of its rights; but the
Americans of the United States have accomplished this twofold purpose
with singular felicity; tranquilly, legally, philanthropically, without
shedding blood, and without violating a single great principle of
morality in the eyes of the world. *c It is impossible to destroy men
with more respect for the laws of humanity.

c
[ See, amongst other documents, the report made by Mr. Bell in the name
of the Committee on Indian Affairs, February 24, 1830, in which is most
logically established and most learnedly proved, that “the fundamental
principle that the Indians had no right by virtue of their ancient
possession either of will or sovereignty, has never been abandoned
either expressly or by implication.” In perusing this report, which is
evidently drawn up by an experienced hand, one is astonished at the
facility with which the author gets rid of all arguments founded upon
reason and natural right, which he designates as abstract and
theoretical principles. The more I contemplate the difference between
civilized and uncivilized man with regard to the principles of justice,
the more I observe that the former contests the justice of those rights
which the latter simply violates.]


[I leave this chapter wholly unchanged, for it has always appeared to
me to be one of the most eloquent and touching parts of this book. But
it has ceased to be prophetic; the destruction of the Indian race in
the United States is already consummated. In 1870 there remained but
25,731 Indians in the whole territory of the Union, and of these by far
the largest part exist in California, Michigan, Wisconsin, Dakota, and
New Mexico and Nevada. In New England, Pennsylvania, and New York the
race is extinct; and the predictions of M. de Tocqueville are
fulfilled. —Translator’s Note.]

Situation Of The Black Population In The United States, And Dangers
With Which Its Presence Threatens The Whites

Why it is more difficult to abolish slavery, and to efface all vestiges
of it amongst the moderns than it was amongst the ancients—In the
United States the prejudices of the Whites against the Blacks seem to
increase in proportion as slavery is abolished—Situation of the Negroes
in the Northern and Southern States—Why the Americans abolish
slavery—Servitude, which debases the slave, impoverishes the
master—Contrast between the left and the right bank of the Ohio—To what
attributable—The Black race, as well as slavery, recedes towards the
South—Explanation of this fact—Difficulties attendant upon the
abolition of slavery in the South—Dangers to come—General
anxiety—Foundation of a Black colony in Africa—Why the Americans of the
South increase the hardships of slavery, whilst they are distressed at
its continuance.

The Indians will perish in the same isolated condition in which they
have lived; but the destiny of the negroes is in some measure
interwoven with that of the Europeans. These two races are attached to
each other without intermingling, and they are alike unable entirely to
separate or to combine. The most formidable of all the ills which
threaten the future existence of the Union arises from the presence of
a black population upon its territory; and in contemplating the cause
of the present embarrassments or of the future dangers of the United
States, the observer is invariably led to consider this as a primary
fact.

The permanent evils to which mankind is subjected are usually produced
by the vehement or the increasing efforts of men; but there is one
calamity which penetrated furtively into the world, and which was at
first scarcely distinguishable amidst the ordinary abuses of power; it
originated with an individual whose name history has not preserved; it
was wafted like some accursed germ upon a portion of the soil, but it
afterwards nurtured itself, grew without effort, and spreads naturally
with the society to which it belongs. I need scarcely add that this
calamity is slavery. Christianity suppressed slavery, but the
Christians of the sixteenth century re-established it—as an exception,
indeed, to their social system, and restricted to one of the races of
mankind; but the wound thus inflicted upon humanity, though less
extensive, was at the same time rendered far more difficult of cure.

It is important to make an accurate distinction between slavery itself
and its consequences. The immediate evils which are produced by slavery
were very nearly the same in antiquity as they are amongst the moderns;
but the consequences of these evils were different. The slave, amongst
the ancients, belonged to the same race as his master, and he was often
the superior of the two in education *d and instruction. Freedom was
the only distinction between them; and when freedom was conferred they
were easily confounded together. The ancients, then, had a very simple
means of avoiding slavery and its evil consequences, which was that of
affranchisement; and they succeeded as soon as they adopted this
measure generally. Not but, in ancient States, the vestiges of
servitude subsisted for some time after servitude itself was abolished.
There is a natural prejudice which prompts men to despise whomsoever
has been their inferior long after he is become their equal; and the
real inequality which is produced by fortune or by law is always
succeeded by an imaginary inequality which is implanted in the manners
of the people. Nevertheless, this secondary consequence of slavery was
limited to a certain term amongst the ancients, for the freedman bore
so entire a resemblance to those born free, that it soon became
impossible to distinguish him from amongst them.

d
[ It is well known that several of the most distinguished authors of
antiquity, and amongst them Aesop and Terence, were, or had been
slaves. Slaves were not always taken from barbarous nations, and the
chances of war reduced highly civilized men to servitude.]


The greatest difficulty in antiquity was that of altering the law;
amongst the moderns it is that of altering the manners; and, as far as
we are concerned, the real obstacles begin where those of the ancients
left off. This arises from the circumstance that, amongst the moderns,
the abstract and transient fact of slavery is fatally united to the
physical and permanent fact of color. The tradition of slavery
dishonors the race, and the peculiarity of the race perpetuates the
tradition of slavery. No African has ever voluntarily emigrated to the
shores of the New World; whence it must be inferred, that all the
blacks who are now to be found in that hemisphere are either slaves or
freedmen. Thus the negro transmits the eternal mark of his ignominy to
all his descendants; and although the law may abolish slavery, God
alone can obliterate the traces of its existence.

The modern slave differs from his master not only in his condition, but
in his origin. You may set the negro free, but you cannot make him
otherwise than an alien to the European. Nor is this all; we scarcely
acknowledge the common features of mankind in this child of debasement
whom slavery has brought amongst us. His physiognomy is to our eyes
hideous, his understanding weak, his tastes low; and we are almost
inclined to look upon him as a being intermediate between man and the
brutes. *e The moderns, then, after they have abolished slavery, have
three prejudices to contend against, which are less easy to attack and
far less easy to conquer than the mere fact of servitude: the prejudice
of the master, the prejudice of the race, and the prejudice of color.

e
[ To induce the whites to abandon the opinion they have conceived of
the moral and intellectual inferiority of their former slaves, the
negroes must change; but as long as this opinion subsists, to change is
impossible.]


It is difficult for us, who have had the good fortune to be born
amongst men like ourselves by nature, and equal to ourselves by law, to
conceive the irreconcilable differences which separate the negro from
the European in America. But we may derive some faint notion of them
from analogy. France was formerly a country in which numerous
distinctions of rank existed, that had been created by the legislation.
Nothing can be more fictitious than a purely legal inferiority; nothing
more contrary to the instinct of mankind than these permanent divisions
which had been established between beings evidently similar.
Nevertheless these divisions subsisted for ages; they still subsist in
many places; and on all sides they have left imaginary vestiges, which
time alone can efface. If it be so difficult to root out an inequality
which solely originates in the law, how are those distinctions to be
destroyed which seem to be based upon the immutable laws of Nature
herself? When I remember the extreme difficulty with which aristocratic
bodies, of whatever nature they may be, are commingled with the mass of
the people; and the exceeding care which they take to preserve the
ideal boundaries of their caste inviolate, I despair of seeing an
aristocracy disappear which is founded upon visible and indelible
signs. Those who hope that the Europeans will ever mix with the
negroes, appear to me to delude themselves; and I am not led to any
such conclusion by my own reason, or by the evidence of facts.

Hitherto, wherever the whites have been the most powerful, they have
maintained the blacks in a subordinate or a servile position; wherever
the negroes have been strongest they have destroyed the whites; such
has been the only retribution which has ever taken place between the
two races.

I see that in a certain portion of the territory of the United States
at the present day, the legal barrier which separated the two races is
tending to fall away, but not that which exists in the manners of the
country; slavery recedes, but the prejudice to which it has given birth
remains stationary. Whosoever has inhabited the United States must have
perceived that in those parts of the Union in which the negroes are no
longer slaves, they have in no wise drawn nearer to the whites. On the
contrary, the prejudice of the race appears to be stronger in the
States which have abolished slavery, than in those where it still
exists; and nowhere is it so intolerant as in those States where
servitude has never been known.

It is true, that in the North of the Union, marriages may be legally
contracted between negroes and whites; but public opinion would
stigmatize a man who should connect himself with a negress as infamous,
and it would be difficult to meet with a single instance of such a
union. The electoral franchise has been conferred upon the negroes in
almost all the States in which slavery has been abolished; but if they
come forward to vote, their lives are in danger. If oppressed, they may
bring an action at law, but they will find none but whites amongst
their judges; and although they may legally serve as jurors, prejudice
repulses them from that office. The same schools do not receive the
child of the black and of the European. In the theatres, gold cannot
procure a seat for the servile race beside their former masters; in the
hospitals they lie apart; and although they are allowed to invoke the
same Divinity as the whites, it must be at a different altar, and in
their own churches, with their own clergy. The gates of Heaven are not
closed against these unhappy beings; but their inferiority is continued
to the very confines of the other world; when the negro is defunct, his
bones are cast aside, and the distinction of condition prevails even in
the equality of death. The negro is free, but he can share neither the
rights, nor the pleasures, nor the labor, nor the afflictions, nor the
tomb of him whose equal he has been declared to be; and he cannot meet
him upon fair terms in life or in death.

In the South, where slavery still exists, the negroes are less
carefully kept apart; they sometimes share the labor and the
recreations of the whites; the whites consent to intermix with them to
a certain extent, and although the legislation treats them more
harshly, the habits of the people are more tolerant and compassionate.
In the South the master is not afraid to raise his slave to his own
standing, because he knows that he can in a moment reduce him to the
dust at pleasure. In the North the white no longer distinctly perceives
the barrier which separates him from the degraded race, and he shuns
the negro with the more pertinacity, since he fears lest they should
some day be confounded together.

Amongst the Americans of the South, nature sometimes reasserts her
rights, and restores a transient equality between the blacks and the
whites; but in the North pride restrains the most imperious of human
passions. The American of the Northern States would perhaps allow the
negress to share his licentious pleasures, if the laws of his country
did not declare that she may aspire to be the legitimate partner of his
bed; but he recoils with horror from her who might become his wife.

Thus it is, in the United States, that the prejudice which repels the
negroes seems to increase in proportion as they are emancipated, and
inequality is sanctioned by the manners whilst it is effaced from the
laws of the country. But if the relative position of the two races
which inhabit the United States is such as I have described, it may be
asked why the Americans have abolished slavery in the North of the
Union, why they maintain it in the South, and why they aggravate its
hardships there? The answer is easily given. It is not for the good of
the negroes, but for that of the whites, that measures are taken to
abolish slavery in the United States.

The first negroes were imported into Virginia about the year 1621. *f
In America, therefore, as well as in the rest of the globe, slavery
originated in the South. Thence it spread from one settlement to
another; but the number of slaves diminished towards the Northern
States, and the negro population was always very limited in New
England. *g

f
[ See Beverley’s “History of Virginia.” See also in Jefferson’s
“Memoirs” some curious details concerning the introduction of negroes
into Virginia, and the first Act which prohibited the importation of
them in 1778.]


g
[ The number of slaves was less considerable in the North, but the
advantages resulting from slavery were not more contested there than in
the South. In 1740, the Legislature of the State of New York declared
that the direct importation of slaves ought to be encouraged as much as
possible, and smuggling severely punished in order not to discourage
the fair trader. (Kent’s “Commentaries,” vol. ii. p. 206.) Curious
researches, by Belknap, upon slavery in New England, are to be found in
the “Historical Collection of Massachusetts,” vol. iv. p. 193. It
appears that negroes were introduced there in 1630, but that the
legislation and manners of the people were opposed to slavery from the
first; see also, in the same work, the manner in which public opinion,
and afterwards the laws, finally put an end to slavery.]


A century had scarcely elapsed since the foundation of the colonies,
when the attention of the planters was struck by the extraordinary
fact, that the provinces which were comparatively destitute of slaves,
increased in population, in wealth, and in prosperity more rapidly than
those which contained the greatest number of negroes. In the former,
however, the inhabitants were obliged to cultivate the soil themselves,
or by hired laborers; in the latter they were furnished with hands for
which they paid no wages; yet although labor and expenses were on the
one side, and ease with economy on the other, the former were in
possession of the most advantageous system. This consequence seemed to
be the more difficult to explain, since the settlers, who all belonged
to the same European race, had the same habits, the same civilization,
the same laws, and their shades of difference were extremely slight.

Time, however, continued to advance, and the Anglo-Americans, spreading
beyond the coasts of the Atlantic Ocean, penetrated farther and farther
into the solitudes of the West; they met with a new soil and an
unwonted climate; the obstacles which opposed them were of the most
various character; their races intermingled, the inhabitants of the
South went up towards the North, those of the North descended to the
South; but in the midst of all these causes, the same result occurred
at every step, and in general, the colonies in which there were no
slaves became more populous and more rich than those in which slavery
flourished. The more progress was made, the more was it shown that
slavery, which is so cruel to the slave, is prejudicial to the master.




 Chapter XVIII: Future Condition Of Three Races—Part IV


But this truth was most satisfactorily demonstrated when civilization
reached the banks of the Ohio. The stream which the Indians had
distinguished by the name of Ohio, or Beautiful River, waters one of
the most magnificent valleys that has ever been made the abode of man.
Undulating lands extend upon both shores of the Ohio, whose soil
affords inexhaustible treasures to the laborer; on either bank the air
is wholesome and the climate mild, and each of them forms the extreme
frontier of a vast State: That which follows the numerous windings of
the Ohio upon the left is called Kentucky, that upon the right bears
the name of the river. These two States only differ in a single
respect; Kentucky has admitted slavery, but the State of Ohio has
prohibited the existence of slaves within its borders. *h

h
[ Not only is slavery prohibited in Ohio, but no free negroes are
allowed to enter the territory of that State, or to hold property in
it. See the Statutes of Ohio.]


Thus the traveller who floats down the current of the Ohio to the spot
where that river falls into the Mississippi, may be said to sail
between liberty and servitude; and a transient inspection of the
surrounding objects will convince him as to which of the two is most
favorable to mankind. Upon the left bank of the stream the population
is rare; from time to time one descries a troop of slaves loitering in
the half-desert fields; the primaeval forest recurs at every turn;
society seems to be asleep, man to be idle, and nature alone offers a
scene of activity and of life. From the right bank, on the contrary, a
confused hum is heard which proclaims the presence of industry; the
fields are covered with abundant harvests, the elegance of the
dwellings announces the taste and activity of the laborer, and man
appears to be in the enjoyment of that wealth and contentment which is
the reward of labor. *i

i
[ The activity of Ohio is not confined to individuals, but the
undertakings of the State are surprisingly great; a canal has been
established between Lake Erie and the Ohio, by means of which the
valley of the Mississippi communicates with the river of the North, and
the European commodities which arrive at New York may be forwarded by
water to New Orleans across five hundred leagues of continent.]


The State of Kentucky was founded in 1775, the State of Ohio only
twelve years later; but twelve years are more in America than half a
century in Europe, and, at the present day, the population of Ohio
exceeds that of Kentucky by two hundred and fifty thousand souls. *j
These opposite consequences of slavery and freedom may readily be
understood, and they suffice to explain many of the differences which
we remark between the civilization of antiquity and that of our own
time.

j
[ The exact numbers given by the census of 1830 were: Kentucky,
688,-844; Ohio, 937,679. [In 1890 the population of Ohio was 3,672,316,
that of Kentucky, 1,858,635.]]


Upon the left bank of the Ohio labor is confounded with the idea of
slavery, upon the right bank it is identified with that of prosperity
and improvement; on the one side it is degraded, on the other it is
honored; on the former territory no white laborers can be found, for
they would be afraid of assimilating themselves to the negroes; on the
latter no one is idle, for the white population extends its activity
and its intelligence to every kind of employment. Thus the men whose
task it is to cultivate the rich soil of Kentucky are ignorant and
lukewarm; whilst those who are active and enlightened either do nothing
or pass over into the State of Ohio, where they may work without
dishonor.

It is true that in Kentucky the planters are not obliged to pay wages
to the slaves whom they employ; but they derive small profits from
their labor, whilst the wages paid to free workmen would be returned
with interest in the value of their services. The free workman is paid,
but he does his work quicker than the slave, and rapidity of execution
is one of the great elements of economy. The white sells his services,
but they are only purchased at the times at which they may be useful;
the black can claim no remuneration for his toil, but the expense of
his maintenance is perpetual; he must be supported in his old age as
well as in the prime of manhood, in his profitless infancy as well as
in the productive years of youth. Payment must equally be made in order
to obtain the services of either class of men: the free workman
receives his wages in money, the slave in education, in food, in care,
and in clothing. The money which a master spends in the maintenance of
his slaves goes gradually and in detail, so that it is scarcely
perceived; the salary of the free workman is paid in a round sum, which
appears only to enrich the individual who receives it, but in the end
the slave has cost more than the free servant, and his labor is less
productive. *k

k
[ Independently of these causes, which, wherever free workmen abound,
render their labor more productive and more economical than that of
slaves, another cause may be pointed out which is peculiar to the
United States: the sugar-cane has hitherto been cultivated with success
only upon the banks of the Mississippi, near the mouth of that river in
the Gulf of Mexico. In Louisiana the cultivation of the sugar-cane is
exceedingly lucrative, and nowhere does a laborer earn so much by his
work, and, as there is always a certain relation between the cost of
production and the value of the produce, the price of slaves is very
high in Louisiana. But Louisiana is one of the confederated States, and
slaves may be carried thither from all parts of the Union; the price
given for slaves in New Orleans consequently raises the value of slaves
in all the other markets. The consequence of this is, that in the
countries where the land is less productive, the cost of slave labor is
still very considerable, which gives an additional advantage to the
competition of free labor.]


The influence of slavery extends still further; it affects the
character of the master, and imparts a peculiar tendency to his ideas
and his tastes. Upon both banks of the Ohio, the character of the
inhabitants is enterprising and energetic; but this vigor is very
differently exercised in the two States. The white inhabitant of Ohio,
who is obliged to subsist by his own exertions, regards temporal
prosperity as the principal aim of his existence; and as the country
which he occupies presents inexhaustible resources to his industry and
ever-varying lures to his activity, his acquisitive ardor surpasses the
ordinary limits of human cupidity: he is tormented by the desire of
wealth, and he boldly enters upon every path which fortune opens to
him; he becomes a sailor, a pioneer, an artisan, or a laborer with the
same indifference, and he supports, with equal constancy, the fatigues
and the dangers incidental to these various professions; the resources
of his intelligence are astonishing, and his avidity in the pursuit of
gain amounts to a species of heroism.

But the Kentuckian scorns not only labor, but all the undertakings
which labor promotes; as he lives in an idle independence, his tastes
are those of an idle man; money loses a portion of its value in his
eyes; he covets wealth much less than pleasure and excitement; and the
energy which his neighbor devotes to gain, turns with him to a
passionate love of field sports and military exercises; he delights in
violent bodily exertion, he is familiar with the use of arms, and is
accustomed from a very early age to expose his life in single combat.
Thus slavery not only prevents the whites from becoming opulent, but
even from desiring to become so.

As the same causes have been continually producing opposite effects for
the last two centuries in the British colonies of North America, they
have established a very striking difference between the commercial
capacity of the inhabitants of the South and those of the North. At the
present day it is only the Northern States which are in possession of
shipping, manufactures, railroads, and canals. This difference is
perceptible not only in comparing the North with the South, but in
comparing the several Southern States. Almost all the individuals who
carry on commercial operations, or who endeavor to turn slave labor to
account in the most Southern districts of the Union, have emigrated
from the North. The natives of the Northern States are constantly
spreading over that portion of the American territory where they have
less to fear from competition; they discover resources there which
escaped the notice of the inhabitants; and, as they comply with a
system which they do not approve, they succeed in turning it to better
advantage than those who first founded and who still maintain it.

Were I inclined to continue this parallel, I could easily prove that
almost all the differences which may be remarked between the characters
of the Americans in the Southern and in the Northern States have
originated in slavery; but this would divert me from my subject, and my
present intention is not to point out all the consequences of
servitude, but those effects which it has produced upon the prosperity
of the countries which have admitted it.

The influence of slavery upon the production of wealth must have been
very imperfectly known in antiquity, as slavery then obtained
throughout the civilized world; and the nations which were unacquainted
with it were barbarous. And indeed Christianity only abolished slavery
by advocating the claims of the slave; at the present time it may be
attacked in the name of the master, and, upon this point, interest is
reconciled with morality.

As these truths became apparent in the United States, slavery receded
before the progress of experience. Servitude had begun in the South,
and had thence spread towards the North; but it now retires again.
Freedom, which started from the North, now descends uninterruptedly
towards the South. Amongst the great States, Pennsylvania now
constitutes the extreme limit of slavery to the North: but even within
those limits the slave system is shaken: Maryland, which is immediately
below Pennsylvania, is preparing for its abolition; and Virginia, which
comes next to Maryland, is already discussing its utility and its
dangers. *l

l
[ A peculiar reason contributes to detach the two last-mentioned States
from the cause of slavery. The former wealth of this part of the Union
was principally derived from the cultivation of tobacco. This
cultivation is specially carried on by slaves; but within the last few
years the market-price of tobacco has diminished, whilst the value of
the slaves remains the same. Thus the ratio between the cost of
production and the value of the produce is changed. The natives of
Maryland and Virginia are therefore more disposed than they were thirty
years ago, to give up slave labor in the cultivation of tobacco, or to
give up slavery and tobacco at the same time.]


No great change takes place in human institutions without involving
amongst its causes the law of inheritance. When the law of
primogeniture obtained in the South, each family was represented by a
wealthy individual, who was neither compelled nor induced to labor; and
he was surrounded, as by parasitic plants, by the other members of his
family who were then excluded by law from sharing the common
inheritance, and who led the same kind of life as himself. The very
same thing then occurred in all the families of the South as still
happens in the wealthy families of some countries in Europe, namely,
that the younger sons remain in the same state of idleness as their
elder brother, without being as rich as he is. This identical result
seems to be produced in Europe and in America by wholly analogous
causes. In the South of the United States the whole race of whites
formed an aristocratic body, which was headed by a certain number of
privileged individuals, whose wealth was permanent, and whose leisure
was hereditary. These leaders of the American nobility kept alive the
traditional prejudices of the white race in the body of which they were
the representatives, and maintained the honor of inactive life. This
aristocracy contained many who were poor, but none who would work; its
members preferred want to labor, consequently no competition was set on
foot against negro laborers and slaves, and, whatever opinion might be
entertained as to the utility of their efforts, it was indispensable to
employ them, since there was no one else to work.

No sooner was the law of primogeniture abolished than fortunes began to
diminish, and all the families of the country were simultaneously
reduced to a state in which labor became necessary to procure the means
of subsistence: several of them have since entirely disappeared, and
all of them learned to look forward to the time at which it would be
necessary for everyone to provide for his own wants. Wealthy
individuals are still to be met with, but they no longer constitute a
compact and hereditary body, nor have they been able to adopt a line of
conduct in which they could persevere, and which they could infuse into
all ranks of society. The prejudice which stigmatized labor was in the
first place abandoned by common consent; the number of needy men was
increased, and the needy were allowed to gain a laborious subsistence
without blushing for their exertions. Thus one of the most immediate
consequences of the partible quality of estates has been to create a
class of free laborers. As soon as a competition was set on foot
between the free laborer and the slave, the inferiority of the latter
became manifest, and slavery was attacked in its fundamental principle,
which is the interest of the master.

As slavery recedes, the black population follows its retrograde course,
and returns with it towards those tropical regions from which it
originally came. However singular this fact may at first appear to be,
it may readily be explained. Although the Americans abolish the
principle of slavery, they do not set their slaves free. To illustrate
this remark, I will quote the example of the State of New York. In
1788, the State of New York prohibited the sale of slaves within its
limits, which was an indirect method of prohibiting the importation of
blacks. Thenceforward the number of negroes could only increase
according to the ratio of the natural increase of population. But eight
years later a more decisive measure was taken, and it was enacted that
all children born of slave parents after July 4, 1799, should be free.
No increase could then take place, and although slaves still existed,
slavery might be said to be abolished.

From the time at which a Northern State prohibited the importation of
slaves, no slaves were brought from the South to be sold in its
markets. On the other hand, as the sale of slaves was forbidden in that
State, an owner was no longer able to get rid of his slave (who thus
became a burdensome possession) otherwise than by transporting him to
the South. But when a Northern State declared that the son of the slave
should be born free, the slave lost a large portion of his market
value, since his posterity was no longer included in the bargain, and
the owner had then a strong interest in transporting him to the South.
Thus the same law prevents the slaves of the South from coming to the
Northern States, and drives those of the North to the South.

The want of free hands is felt in a State in proportion as the number
of slaves decreases. But in proportion as labor is performed by free
hands, slave labor becomes less productive; and the slave is then a
useless or onerous possession, whom it is important to export to those
Southern States where the same competition is not to be feared. Thus
the abolition of slavery does not set the slave free, but it merely
transfers him from one master to another, and from the North to the
South.

The emancipated negroes, and those born after the abolition of slavery,
do not, indeed, migrate from the North to the South; but their
situation with regard to the Europeans is not unlike that of the
aborigines of America; they remain half civilized, and deprived of
their rights in the midst of a population which is far superior to them
in wealth and in knowledge; where they are exposed to the tyranny of
the laws *m and the intolerance of the people. On some accounts they
are still more to be pitied than the Indians, since they are haunted by
the reminiscence of slavery, and they cannot claim possession of a
single portion of the soil: many of them perish miserably, *n and the
rest congregate in the great towns, where they perform the meanest
offices, and lead a wretched and precarious existence.

m
[ The States in which slavery is abolished usually do what they can to
render their territory disagreeable to the negroes as a place of
residence; and as a kind of emulation exists between the different
States in this respect, the unhappy blacks can only choose the least of
the evils which beset them.]


n
[ There is a very great difference between the mortality of the blacks
and of the whites in the States in which slavery is abolished; from
1820 to 1831 only one out of forty-two individuals of the white
population died in Philadelphia; but one negro out of twenty-one
individuals of the black population died in the same space of time. The
mortality is by no means so great amongst the negroes who are still
slaves. (See Emerson’s “Medical Statistics,” p. 28.)]


But even if the number of negroes continued to increase as rapidly as
when they were still in a state of slavery, as the number of whites
augments with twofold rapidity since the abolition of slavery, the
blacks would soon be, as it were, lost in the midst of a strange
population.

A district which is cultivated by slaves is in general more scantily
peopled than a district cultivated by free labor: moreover, America is
still a new country, and a State is therefore not half peopled at the
time when it abolishes slavery. No sooner is an end put to slavery than
the want of free labor is felt, and a crowd of enterprising adventurers
immediately arrive from all parts of the country, who hasten to profit
by the fresh resources which are then opened to industry. The soil is
soon divided amongst them, and a family of white settlers takes
possession of each tract of country. Besides which, European emigration
is exclusively directed to the free States; for what would be the fate
of a poor emigrant who crosses the Atlantic in search of ease and
happiness if he were to land in a country where labor is stigmatized as
degrading?

Thus the white population grows by its natural increase, and at the
same time by the immense influx of emigrants; whilst the black
population receives no emigrants, and is upon its decline. The
proportion which existed between the two races is soon inverted. The
negroes constitute a scanty remnant, a poor tribe of vagrants, which is
lost in the midst of an immense people in full possession of the land;
and the presence of the blacks is only marked by the injustice and the
hardships of which they are the unhappy victims.

In several of the Western States the negro race never made its
appearance, and in all the Northern States it is rapidly declining.
Thus the great question of its future condition is confined within a
narrow circle, where it becomes less formidable, though not more easy
of solution.

The more we descend towards the South, the more difficult does it
become to abolish slavery with advantage: and this arises from several
physical causes which it is important to point out.

The first of these causes is the climate; it is well known that in
proportion as Europeans approach the tropics they suffer more from
labor. Many of the Americans even assert that within a certain latitude
the exertions which a negro can make without danger are fatal to them;
*o but I do not think that this opinion, which is so favorable to the
indolence of the inhabitants of southern regions, is confirmed by
experience. The southern parts of the Union are not hotter than the
South of Italy and of Spain; *p and it may be asked why the European
cannot work as well there as in the two latter countries. If slavery
has been abolished in Italy and in Spain without causing the
destruction of the masters, why should not the same thing take place in
the Union? I cannot believe that nature has prohibited the Europeans in
Georgia and the Floridas, under pain of death, from raising the means
of subsistence from the soil, but their labor would unquestionably be
more irksome and less productive to them than to the inhabitants of New
England. As the free workman thus loses a portion of his superiority
over the slave in the Southern States, there are fewer inducements to
abolish slavery.

o
[ This is true of the spots in which rice is cultivated; rice-grounds,
which are unwholesome in all countries, are particularly dangerous in
those regions which are exposed to the beams of a tropical sun.
Europeans would not find it easy to cultivate the soil in that part of
the New World if it must be necessarily be made to produce rice; but
may they not subsist without rice-grounds?]


p
[ These States are nearer to the equator than Italy and Spain, but the
temperature of the continent of America is very much lower than that of
Europe.


The Spanish Government formerly caused a certain number of peasants
from the Acores to be transported into a district of Louisiana called
Attakapas, by way of experiment. These settlers still cultivate the
soil without the assistance of slaves, but their industry is so languid
as scarcely to supply their most necessary wants.]

All the plants of Europe grow in the northern parts of the Union; the
South has special productions of its own. It has been observed that
slave labor is a very expensive method of cultivating corn. The farmer
of corn land in a country where slavery is unknown habitually retains a
small number of laborers in his service, and at seed-time and harvest
he hires several additional hands, who only live at his cost for a
short period. But the agriculturist in a slave State is obliged to keep
a large number of slaves the whole year round, in order to sow his
fields and to gather in his crops, although their services are only
required for a few weeks; but slaves are unable to wait till they are
hired, and to subsist by their own labor in the mean time like free
laborers; in order to have their services they must be bought. Slavery,
independently of its general disadvantages, is therefore still more
inapplicable to countries in which corn is cultivated than to those
which produce crops of a different kind. The cultivation of tobacco, of
cotton, and especially of the sugar-cane, demands, on the other hand,
unremitting attention: and women and children are employed in it, whose
services are of but little use in the cultivation of wheat. Thus
slavery is naturally more fitted to the countries from which these
productions are derived. Tobacco, cotton, and the sugar-cane are
exclusively grown in the South, and they form one of the principal
sources of the wealth of those States. If slavery were abolished, the
inhabitants of the South would be constrained to adopt one of two
alternatives: they must either change their system of cultivation, and
then they would come into competition with the more active and more
experienced inhabitants of the North; or, if they continued to
cultivate the same produce without slave labor, they would have to
support the competition of the other States of the South, which might
still retain their slaves. Thus, peculiar reasons for maintaining
slavery exist in the South which do not operate in the North.

But there is yet another motive which is more cogent than all the
others: the South might indeed, rigorously speaking, abolish slavery;
but how should it rid its territory of the black population? Slaves and
slavery are driven from the North by the same law, but this twofold
result cannot be hoped for in the South.

The arguments which I have adduced to show that slavery is more natural
and more advantageous in the South than in the North, sufficiently
prove that the number of slaves must be far greater in the former
districts. It was to the southern settlements that the first Africans
were brought, and it is there that the greatest number of them have
always been imported. As we advance towards the South, the prejudice
which sanctions idleness increases in power. In the States nearest to
the tropics there is not a single white laborer; the negroes are
consequently much more numerous in the South than in the North. And, as
I have already observed, this disproportion increases daily, since the
negroes are transferred to one part of the Union as soon as slavery is
abolished in the other. Thus the black population augments in the
South, not only by its natural fecundity, but by the compulsory
emigration of the negroes from the North; and the African race has
causes of increase in the South very analogous to those which so
powerfully accelerate the growth of the European race in the North.

In the State of Maine there is one negro in 300 inhabitants; in
Massachusetts, one in 100; in New York, two in 100; in Pennsylvania,
three in the same number; in Maryland, thirty-four; in Virginia,
forty-two; and lastly, in South Carolina *q fifty-five per cent. Such
was the proportion of the black population to the whites in the year
1830. But this proportion is perpetually changing, as it constantly
decreases in the North and augments in the South.

q
[ We find it asserted in an American work, entitled “Letters on the
Colonization Society,” by Mr. Carey, 1833, “That for the last forty
years the black race has increased more rapidly than the white race in
the State of South Carolina; and that if we take the average population
of the five States of the South into which slaves were first
introduced, viz., Maryland, Virginia, South Carolina, North Carolina,
and Georgia, we shall find that from 1790 to 1830 the whites have
augmented in the proportion of 80 to 100, and the blacks in that of 112
to 100.”


In the United States, in 1830, the population of the two races stood as
follows:—

States where slavery is abolished, 6,565,434 whites; 120,520 blacks.
Slave States, 3,960,814 whites; 2,208,102 blacks. [In 1890 the United
States contained a population of 54,983,890 whites, and 7,638,360
negroes.]]

It is evident that the most Southern States of the Union cannot abolish
slavery without incurring very great dangers, which the North had no
reason to apprehend when it emancipated its black population. We have
already shown the system by which the Northern States secure the
transition from slavery to freedom, by keeping the present generation
in chains, and setting their descendants free; by this means the
negroes are gradually introduced into society; and whilst the men who
might abuse their freedom are kept in a state of servitude, those who
are emancipated may learn the art of being free before they become
their own masters. But it would be difficult to apply this method in
the South. To declare that all the negroes born after a certain period
shall be free, is to introduce the principle and the notion of liberty
into the heart of slavery; the blacks whom the law thus maintains in a
state of slavery from which their children are delivered, are
astonished at so unequal a fate, and their astonishment is only the
prelude to their impatience and irritation. Thenceforward slavery
loses, in their eyes, that kind of moral power which it derived from
time and habit; it is reduced to a mere palpable abuse of force. The
Northern States had nothing to fear from the contrast, because in them
the blacks were few in number, and the white population was very
considerable. But if this faint dawn of freedom were to show two
millions of men their true position, the oppressors would have reason
to tremble. After having affranchised the children of their slaves the
Europeans of the Southern States would very shortly be obliged to
extend the same benefit to the whole black population.




 Chapter XVIII: Future Condition Of Three Races—Part V


In the North, as I have already remarked, a twofold migration ensues
upon the abolition of slavery, or even precedes that event when
circumstances have rendered it probable; the slaves quit the country to
be transported southwards; and the whites of the Northern States, as
well as the emigrants from Europe, hasten to fill up their place. But
these two causes cannot operate in the same manner in the Southern
States. On the one hand, the mass of slaves is too great for any
expectation of their ever being removed from the country to be
entertained; and on the other hand, the Europeans and Anglo-Americans
of the North are afraid to come to inhabit a country in which labor has
not yet been reinstated in its rightful honors. Besides, they very
justly look upon the States in which the proportion of the negroes
equals or exceeds that of the whites, as exposed to very great dangers;
and they refrain from turning their activity in that direction.

Thus the inhabitants of the South would not be able, like their
Northern countrymen, to initiate the slaves gradually into a state of
freedom by abolishing slavery; they have no means of perceptibly
diminishing the black population, and they would remain unsupported to
repress its excesses. So that in the course of a few years, a great
people of free negroes would exist in the heart of a white nation of
equal size.

The same abuses of power which still maintain slavery, would then
become the source of the most alarming perils which the white
population of the South might have to apprehend. At the present time
the descendants of the Europeans are the sole owners of the land; the
absolute masters of all labor; and the only persons who are possessed
of wealth, knowledge, and arms. The black is destitute of all these
advantages, but he subsists without them because he is a slave. If he
were free, and obliged to provide for his own subsistence, would it be
possible for him to remain without these things and to support life? Or
would not the very instruments of the present superiority of the white,
whilst slavery exists, expose him to a thousand dangers if it were
abolished?

As long as the negro remains a slave, he may be kept in a condition not
very far removed from that of the brutes; but, with his liberty, he
cannot but acquire a degree of instruction which will enable him to
appreciate his misfortunes, and to discern a remedy for them. Moreover,
there exists a singular principle of relative justice which is very
firmly implanted in the human heart. Men are much more forcibly struck
by those inequalities which exist within the circle of the same class,
than with those which may be remarked between different classes. It is
more easy for them to admit slavery, than to allow several millions of
citizens to exist under a load of eternal infamy and hereditary
wretchedness. In the North the population of freed negroes feels these
hardships and resents these indignities; but its numbers and its powers
are small, whilst in the South it would be numerous and strong.

As soon as it is admitted that the whites and the emancipated blacks
are placed upon the same territory in the situation of two alien
communities, it will readily be understood that there are but two
alternatives for the future; the negroes and the whites must either
wholly part or wholly mingle. I have already expressed the conviction
which I entertain as to the latter event. *r I do not imagine that the
white and black races will ever live in any country upon an equal
footing. But I believe the difficulty to be still greater in the United
States than elsewhere. An isolated individual may surmount the
prejudices of religion, of his country, or of his race, and if this
individual is a king he may effect surprising changes in society; but a
whole people cannot rise, as it were, above itself. A despot who should
subject the Americans and their former slaves to the same yoke, might
perhaps succeed in commingling their races; but as long as the American
democracy remains at the head of affairs, no one will undertake so
difficult a task; and it may be foreseen that the freer the white
population of the United States becomes, the more isolated will it
remain. *s

r
[ This opinion is sanctioned by authorities infinitely weightier than
anything that I can say: thus, for instance, it is stated in the
“Memoirs of Jefferson” (as collected by M. Conseil), “Nothing is more
clearly written in the book of destiny than the emancipation of the
blacks; and it is equally certain that the two races will never live in
a state of equal freedom under the same government, so insurmountable
are the barriers which nature, habit, and opinions have established
between them.”]


s
[ If the British West India planters had governed themselves, they
would assuredly not have passed the Slave Emancipation Bill which the
mother-country has recently imposed upon them.]


I have previously observed that the mixed race is the true bond of
union between the Europeans and the Indians; just so the mulattoes are
the true means of transition between the white and the negro; so that
wherever mulattoes abound, the intermixture of the two races is not
impossible. In some parts of America, the European and the negro races
are so crossed by one another, that it is rare to meet with a man who
is entirely black, or entirely white: when they are arrived at this
point, the two races may really be said to be combined; or rather to
have been absorbed in a third race, which is connected with both
without being identical with either.

Of all the Europeans the English are those who have mixed least with
the negroes. More mulattoes are to be seen in the South of the Union
than in the North, but still they are infinitely more scarce than in
any other European colony: mulattoes are by no means numerous in the
United States; they have no force peculiar to themselves, and when
quarrels originating in differences of color take place, they generally
side with the whites; just as the lackeys of the great, in Europe,
assume the contemptuous airs of nobility to the lower orders.

The pride of origin, which is natural to the English, is singularly
augmented by the personal pride which democratic liberty fosters
amongst the Americans: the white citizen of the United States is proud
of his race, and proud of himself. But if the whites and the negroes do
not intermingle in the North of the Union, how should they mix in the
South? Can it be supposed for an instant, that an American of the
Southern States, placed, as he must forever be, between the white man
with all his physical and moral superiority and the negro, will ever
think of preferring the latter? The Americans of the Southern States
have two powerful passions which will always keep them aloof; the first
is the fear of being assimilated to the negroes, their former slaves;
and the second the dread of sinking below the whites, their neighbors.

If I were called upon to predict what will probably occur at some
future time, I should say, that the abolition of slavery in the South
will, in the common course of things, increase the repugnance of the
white population for the men of color. I found this opinion upon the
analogous observation which I already had occasion to make in the
North. I there remarked that the white inhabitants of the North avoid
the negroes with increasing care, in proportion as the legal barriers
of separation are removed by the legislature; and why should not the
same result take place in the South? In the North, the whites are
deterred from intermingling with the blacks by the fear of an imaginary
danger; in the South, where the danger would be real, I cannot imagine
that the fear would be less general.

If, on the one hand, it be admitted (and the fact is unquestionable)
that the colored population perpetually accumulates in the extreme
South, and that it increases more rapidly than that of the whites; and
if, on the other hand, it be allowed that it is impossible to foresee a
time at which the whites and the blacks will be so intermingled as to
derive the same benefits from society; must it not be inferred that the
blacks and the whites will, sooner or later, come to open strife in the
Southern States of the Union? But if it be asked what the issue of the
struggle is likely to be, it will readily be understood that we are
here left to form a very vague surmise of the truth. The human mind may
succeed in tracing a wide circle, as it were, which includes the course
of future events; but within that circle a thousand various chances and
circumstances may direct it in as many different ways; and in every
picture of the future there is a dim spot, which the eye of the
understanding cannot penetrate. It appears, however, to be extremely
probable that in the West Indian Islands the white race is destined to
be subdued, and the black population to share the same fate upon the
continent.

In the West India Islands the white planters are surrounded by an
immense black population; on the continent, the blacks are placed
between the ocean and an innumerable people, which already extends over
them in a dense mass, from the icy confines of Canada to the frontiers
of Virginia, and from the banks of the Missouri to the shores of the
Atlantic. If the white citizens of North America remain united, it
cannot be supposed that the negroes will escape the destruction with
which they are menaced; they must be subdued by want or by the sword.
But the black population which is accumulated along the coast of the
Gulf of Mexico, has a chance of success if the American Union is
dissolved when the struggle between the two races begins. If the
federal tie were broken, the citizens of the South would be wrong to
rely upon any lasting succor from their Northern countrymen. The latter
are well aware that the danger can never reach them; and unless they
are constrained to march to the assistance of the South by a positive
obligation, it may be foreseen that the sympathy of color will be
insufficient to stimulate their exertions.

Yet, at whatever period the strife may break out, the whites of the
South, even if they are abandoned to their own resources, will enter
the lists with an immense superiority of knowledge and of the means of
warfare; but the blacks will have numerical strength and the energy of
despair upon their side, and these are powerful resources to men who
have taken up arms. The fate of the white population of the Southern
States will, perhaps, be similar to that of the Moors in Spain. After
having occupied the land for centuries, it will perhaps be forced to
retire to the country whence its ancestors came, and to abandon to the
negroes the possession of a territory, which Providence seems to have
more peculiarly destined for them, since they can subsist and labor in
it more easily that the whites.

The danger of a conflict between the white and the black inhabitants of
the Southern States of the Union—a danger which, however remote it may
be, is inevitable—perpetually haunts the imagination of the Americans.
The inhabitants of the North make it a common topic of conversation,
although they have no direct injury to fear from the struggle; but they
vainly endeavor to devise some means of obviating the misfortunes which
they foresee. In the Southern States the subject is not discussed: the
planter does not allude to the future in conversing with strangers; the
citizen does not communicate his apprehensions to his friends; he seeks
to conceal them from himself; but there is something more alarming in
the tacit forebodings of the South, than in the clamorous fears of the
Northern States.

This all-pervading disquietude has given birth to an undertaking which
is but little known, but which may have the effect of changing the fate
of a portion of the human race. From apprehension of the dangers which
I have just been describing, a certain number of American citizens have
formed a society for the purpose of exporting to the coast of Guinea,
at their own expense, such free negroes as may be willing to escape
from the oppression to which they are subject. *t In 1820, the society
to which I allude formed a settlement in Africa, upon the seventh
degree of north latitude, which bears the name of Liberia. The most
recent intelligence informs us that 2,500 negroes are collected there;
they have introduced the democratic institutions of America into the
country of their forefathers; and Liberia has a representative system
of government, negro jurymen, negro magistrates, and negro priests;
churches have been built, newspapers established, and, by a singular
change in the vicissitudes of the world, white men are prohibited from
sojourning within the settlement. *u

t
[ This society assumed the name of “The Society for the Colonization of
the Blacks.” See its annual reports; and more particularly the
fifteenth. See also the pamphlet, to which allusion has already been
made, entitled “Letters on the Colonization Society, and on its
probable Results,” by Mr. Carey, Philadelphia, 1833.]


u
[ This last regulation was laid down by the founders of the settlement;
they apprehended that a state of things might arise in Africa similar
to that which exists on the frontiers of the United States, and that if
the negroes, like the Indians, were brought into collision with a
people more enlightened than themselves, they would be destroyed before
they could be civilized.]


This is indeed a strange caprice of fortune. Two hundred years have now
elapsed since the inhabitants of Europe undertook to tear the negro
from his family and his home, in order to transport him to the shores
of North America; at the present day, the European settlers are engaged
in sending back the descendants of those very negroes to the Continent
from which they were originally taken; and the barbarous Africans have
been brought into contact with civilization in the midst of bondage,
and have become acquainted with free political institutions in slavery.
Up to the present time Africa has been closed against the arts and
sciences of the whites; but the inventions of Europe will perhaps
penetrate into those regions, now that they are introduced by Africans
themselves. The settlement of Liberia is founded upon a lofty and a
most fruitful idea; but whatever may be its results with regard to the
Continent of Africa, it can afford no remedy to the New World.

In twelve years the Colonization Society has transported 2,500 negroes
to Africa; in the same space of time about 700,000 blacks were born in
the United States. If the colony of Liberia were so situated as to be
able to receive thousands of new inhabitants every year, and if the
negroes were in a state to be sent thither with advantage; if the Union
were to supply the society with annual subsidies, *v and to transport
the negroes to Africa in the vessels of the State, it would still be
unable to counterpoise the natural increase of population amongst the
blacks; and as it could not remove as many men in a year as are born
upon its territory within the same space of time, it would fail in
suspending the growth of the evil which is daily increasing in the
States. *w The negro race will never leave those shores of the American
continent, to which it was brought by the passions and the vices of
Europeans; and it will not disappear from the New World as long as it
continues to exist. The inhabitants of the United States may retard the
calamities which they apprehend, but they cannot now destroy their
efficient cause.

v
[ Nor would these be the only difficulties attendant upon the
undertaking; if the Union undertook to buy up the negroes now in
America, in order to transport them to Africa, the price of slaves,
increasing with their scarcity, would soon become enormous; and the
States of the North would never consent to expend such great sums for a
purpose which would procure such small advantages to themselves. If the
Union took possession of the slaves in the Southern States by force, or
at a rate determined by law, an insurmountable resistance would arise
in that part of the country. Both alternatives are equally impossible.]


w
[ In 1830 there were in the United States 2,010,327 slaves and 319,439
free blacks, in all 2,329,766 negroes: which formed about one-fifth of
the total population of the United States at that time.]


I am obliged to confess that I do not regard the abolition of slavery
as a means of warding off the struggle of the two races in the United
States. The negroes may long remain slaves without complaining; but if
they are once raised to the level of free men, they will soon revolt at
being deprived of all their civil rights; and as they cannot become the
equals of the whites, they will speedily declare themselves as enemies.
In the North everything contributed to facilitate the emancipation of
the slaves; and slavery was abolished, without placing the free negroes
in a position which could become formidable, since their number was too
small for them ever to claim the exercise of their rights. But such is
not the case in the South. The question of slavery was a question of
commerce and manufacture for the slave-owners in the North; for those
of the South, it is a question of life and death. God forbid that I
should seek to justify the principle of negro slavery, as has been done
by some American writers! But I only observe that all the countries
which formerly adopted that execrable principle are not equally able to
abandon it at the present time.

When I contemplate the condition of the South, I can only discover two
alternatives which may be adopted by the white inhabitants of those
States; viz., either to emancipate the negroes, and to intermingle with
them; or, remaining isolated from them, to keep them in a state of
slavery as long as possible. All intermediate measures seem to me
likely to terminate, and that shortly, in the most horrible of civil
wars, and perhaps in the extirpation of one or other of the two races.
Such is the view which the Americans of the South take of the question,
and they act consistently with it. As they are determined not to mingle
with the negroes, they refuse to emancipate them.

Not that the inhabitants of the South regard slavery as necessary to
the wealth of the planter, for on this point many of them agree with
their Northern countrymen in freely admitting that slavery is
prejudicial to their interest; but they are convinced that, however
prejudicial it may be, they hold their lives upon no other tenure. The
instruction which is now diffused in the South has convinced the
inhabitants that slavery is injurious to the slave-owner, but it has
also shown them, more clearly than before, that no means exist of
getting rid of its bad consequences. Hence arises a singular contrast;
the more the utility of slavery is contested, the more firmly is it
established in the laws; and whilst the principle of servitude is
gradually abolished in the North, that self-same principle gives rise
to more and more rigorous consequences in the South.

The legislation of the Southern States with regard to slaves, presents
at the present day such unparalleled atrocities as suffice to show how
radically the laws of humanity have been perverted, and to betray the
desperate position of the community in which that legislation has been
promulgated. The Americans of this portion of the Union have not,
indeed, augmented the hardships of slavery; they have, on the contrary,
bettered the physical condition of the slaves. The only means by which
the ancients maintained slavery were fetters and death; the Americans
of the South of the Union have discovered more intellectual securities
for the duration of their power. They have employed their despotism and
their violence against the human mind. In antiquity, precautions were
taken to prevent the slave from breaking his chains; at the present day
measures are adopted to deprive him even of the desire of freedom. The
ancients kept the bodies of their slaves in bondage, but they placed no
restraint upon the mind and no check upon education; and they acted
consistently with their established principle, since a natural
termination of slavery then existed, and one day or other the slave
might be set free, and become the equal of his master. But the
Americans of the South, who do not admit that the negroes can ever be
commingled with themselves, have forbidden them to be taught to read or
to write, under severe penalties; and as they will not raise them to
their own level, they sink them as nearly as possible to that of the
brutes.

The hope of liberty had always been allowed to the slave to cheer the
hardships of his condition. But the Americans of the South are well
aware that emancipation cannot but be dangerous, when the freed man can
never be assimilated to his former master. To give a man his freedom,
and to leave him in wretchedness and ignominy, is nothing less than to
prepare a future chief for a revolt of the slaves. Moreover, it has
long been remarked that the presence of a free negro vaguely agitates
the minds of his less fortunate brethren, and conveys to them a dim
notion of their rights. The Americans of the South have consequently
taken measures to prevent slave-owners from emancipating their slaves
in most cases; not indeed by a positive prohibition, but by subjecting
that step to various forms which it is difficult to comply with. I
happened to meet with an old man, in the South of the Union, who had
lived in illicit intercourse with one of his negresses, and had had
several children by her, who were born the slaves of their father. He
had indeed frequently thought of bequeathing to them at least their
liberty; but years had elapsed without his being able to surmount the
legal obstacles to their emancipation, and in the mean while his old
age was come, and he was about to die. He pictured to himself his sons
dragged from market to market, and passing from the authority of a
parent to the rod of the stranger, until these horrid anticipations
worked his expiring imagination into frenzy. When I saw him he was a
prey to all the anguish of despair, and he made me feel how awful is
the retribution of nature upon those who have broken her laws.

These evils are unquestionably great; but they are the necessary and
foreseen consequence of the very principle of modern slavery. When the
Europeans chose their slaves from a race differing from their own,
which many of them considered as inferior to the other races of
mankind, and which they all repelled with horror from any notion of
intimate connection, they must have believed that slavery would last
forever; since there is no intermediate state which can be durable
between the excessive inequality produced by servitude and the complete
equality which originates in independence. The Europeans did
imperfectly feel this truth, but without acknowledging it even to
themselves. Whenever they have had to do with negroes, their conduct
has either been dictated by their interest and their pride, or by their
compassion. They first violated every right of humanity by their
treatment of the negro and they afterwards informed him that those
rights were precious and inviolable. They affected to open their ranks
to the slaves, but the negroes who attempted to penetrate into the
community were driven back with scorn; and they have incautiously and
involuntarily been led to admit of freedom instead of slavery, without
having the courage to be wholly iniquitous, or wholly just.

If it be impossible to anticipate a period at which the Americans of
the South will mingle their blood with that of the negroes, can they
allow their slaves to become free without compromising their own
security? And if they are obliged to keep that race in bondage in order
to save their own families, may they not be excused for availing
themselves of the means best adapted to that end? The events which are
taking place in the Southern States of the Union appear to me to be at
once the most horrible and the most natural results of slavery. When I
see the order of nature overthrown, and when I hear the cry of humanity
in its vain struggle against the laws, my indignation does not light
upon the men of our own time who are the instruments of these outrages;
but I reserve my execration for those who, after a thousand years of
freedom, brought back slavery into the world once more.

Whatever may be the efforts of the Americans of the South to maintain
slavery, they will not always succeed. Slavery, which is now confined
to a single tract of the civilized earth, which is attacked by
Christianity as unjust, and by political economy as prejudicial; and
which is now contrasted with democratic liberties and the information
of our age, cannot survive. By the choice of the master, or by the will
of the slave, it will cease; and in either case great calamities may be
expected to ensue. If liberty be refused to the negroes of the South,
they will in the end seize it for themselves by force; if it be given,
they will abuse it ere long. *x

x
[ [This chapter is no longer applicable to the condition of the negro
race in the United States, since the abolition of slavery was the
result, though not the object, of the great Civil War, and the negroes
have been raised to the condition not only of freedmen, but of
citizens; and in some States they exercise a preponderating political
power by reason of their numerical majority. Thus, in South Carolina
there were in 1870, 289,667 whites and 415,814 blacks. But the
emancipation of the slaves has not solved the problem, how two races so
different and so hostile are to live together in peace in one country
on equal terms. That problem is as difficult, perhaps more difficult
than ever; and to this difficulty the author’s remarks are still
perfectly applicable.]]




 Chapter XVIII: Future Condition Of Three Races—Part VI


What Are The Chances In Favor Of The Duration Of The American Union,
And What Dangers Threaten It *y

y
[ [This chapter is one of the most curious and interesting portions of
the work, because it embraces almost all the constitutional and social
questions which were raised by the great secession of the South and
decided by the results of the Civil War. But it must be confessed that
the sagacity of the author is sometimes at fault in these speculations,
and did not save him from considerable errors, which the course of
events has since made apparent. He held that “the legislators of the
Constitution of 1789 were not appointed to constitute the government of
a single people, but to regulate the association of several States;
that the Union was formed by the voluntary agreement of the States, and
in uniting together they have not forfeited their nationality, nor have
they been reduced to the condition of one and the same people.” Whence
he inferred that “if one of the States chose to withdraw its name from
the contract, it would be difficult to disprove its right of doing so;
and that the Federal Government would have no means of maintaining its
claims directly, either by force or by right.” This is the Southern
theory of the Constitution, and the whole case of the South in favor of
secession. To many Europeans, and to some American (Northern) jurists,
this view appeared to be sound; but it was vigorously resisted by the
North, and crushed by force of arms.


The author of this book was mistaken in supposing that the “Union was a
vast body which presents no definite object to patriotic feeling.” When
the day of trial came, millions of men were ready to lay down their
lives for it. He was also mistaken in supposing that the Federal
Executive is so weak that it requires the free consent of the governed
to enable it to subsist, and that it would be defeated in a struggle to
maintain the Union against one or more separate States. In 1861 nine
States, with a population of 8,753,000, seceded, and maintained for
four years a resolute but unequal contest for independence, but they
were defeated.

Lastly, the author was mistaken in supposing that a community of
interests would always prevail between North and South sufficiently
powerful to bind them together. He overlooked the influence which the
question of slavery must have on the Union the moment that the majority
of the people of the North declared against it. In 1831, when the
author visited America, the anti-slavery agitation had scarcely begun;
and the fact of Southern slavery was accepted by men of all parties,
even in the States where there were no slaves: and that was
unquestionably the view taken by all the States and by all American
statesmen at the time of the adoption of the Constitution, in 1789. But
in the course of thirty years a great change took place, and the North
refused to perpetuate what had become the “peculiar institution” of the
South, especially as it gave the South a species of aristocratic
preponderance. The result was the ratification, in December, 1865, of
the celebrated 13th article or amendment of the Constitution, which
declared that “neither slavery nor involuntary servitude—except as a
punishment for crime—shall exist within the United States.” To which
was soon afterwards added the 15th article, “The right of citizens to
vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States, or by any
State, on account of race, color, or previous servitude.” The
emancipation of several millions of negro slaves without compensation,
and the transfer to them of political preponderance in the States in
which they outnumber the white population, were acts of the North
totally opposed to the interests of the South, and which could only
have been carried into effect by conquest.—Translator’s Note.]]

Reason for which the preponderating force lies in the States rather
than in the Union—The Union will only last as long as all the States
choose to belong to it—Causes which tend to keep them united—Utility of
the Union to resist foreign enemies, and to prevent the existence of
foreigners in America—No natural barriers between the several States—No
conflicting interests to divide them—Reciprocal interests of the
Northern, Southern, and Western States—Intellectual ties of
union—Uniformity of opinions—Dangers of the Union resulting from the
different characters and the passions of its citizens—Character of the
citizens in the South and in the North—The rapid growth of the Union
one of its greatest dangers—Progress of the population to the
Northwest—Power gravitates in the same direction—Passions originating
from sudden turns of fortune—Whether the existing Government of the
Union tends to gain strength, or to lose it—Various signs of its
decrease—Internal improvements—Waste lands—Indians—The Bank—The
Tariff—General Jackson.

The maintenance of the existing institutions of the several States
depends in some measure upon the maintenance of the Union itself. It is
therefore important in the first instance to inquire into the probable
fate of the Union. One point may indeed be assumed at once: if the
present confederation were dissolved, it appears to me to be
incontestable that the States of which it is now composed would not
return to their original isolated condition, but that several unions
would then be formed in the place of one. It is not my intention to
inquire into the principles upon which these new unions would probably
be established, but merely to show what the causes are which may effect
the dismemberment of the existing confederation.

With this object I shall be obliged to retrace some of the steps which
I have already taken, and to revert to topics which I have before
discussed. I am aware that the reader may accuse me of repetition, but
the importance of the matter which still remains to be treated is my
excuse; I had rather say too much, than say too little to be thoroughly
understood, and I prefer injuring the author to slighting the subject.

The legislators who formed the Constitution of 1789 endeavored to
confer a distinct and preponderating authority upon the federal power.
But they were confined by the conditions of the task which they had
undertaken to perform. They were not appointed to constitute the
government of a single people, but to regulate the association of
several States; and, whatever their inclinations might be, they could
not but divide the exercise of sovereignty in the end.

In order to understand the consequences of this division, it is
necessary to make a short distinction between the affairs of the
Government. There are some objects which are national by their very
nature, that is to say, which affect the nation as a body, and can only
be intrusted to the man or the assembly of men who most completely
represent the entire nation. Amongst these may be reckoned war and
diplomacy. There are other objects which are provincial by their very
nature, that is to say, which only affect certain localities, and which
can only be properly treated in that locality. Such, for instance, is
the budget of a municipality. Lastly, there are certain objects of a
mixed nature, which are national inasmuch as they affect all the
citizens who compose the nation, and which are provincial inasmuch as
it is not necessary that the nation itself should provide for them all.
Such are the rights which regulate the civil and political condition of
the citizens. No society can exist without civil and political rights.
These rights therefore interest all the citizens alike; but it is not
always necessary to the existence and the prosperity of the nation that
these rights should be uniform, nor, consequently, that they should be
regulated by the central authority.

There are, then, two distinct categories of objects which are submitted
to the direction of the sovereign power; and these categories occur in
all well-constituted communities, whatever the basis of the political
constitution may otherwise be. Between these two extremes the objects
which I have termed mixed may be considered to lie. As these objects
are neither exclusively national nor entirely provincial, they may be
obtained by a national or by a provincial government, according to the
agreement of the contracting parties, without in any way impairing the
contract of association.

The sovereign power is usually formed by the union of separate
individuals, who compose a people; and individual powers or collective
forces, each representing a very small portion of the sovereign
authority, are the sole elements which are subjected to the general
Government of their choice. In this case the general Government is more
naturally called upon to regulate, not only those affairs which are of
essential national importance, but those which are of a more local
interest; and the local governments are reduced to that small share of
sovereign authority which is indispensable to their prosperity.

But sometimes the sovereign authority is composed of preorganized
political bodies, by virtue of circumstances anterior to their union;
and in this case the provincial governments assume the control, not
only of those affairs which more peculiarly belong to their province,
but of all, or of a part of the mixed affairs to which allusion has
been made. For the confederate nations which were independent sovereign
States before their union, and which still represent a very
considerable share of the sovereign power, have only consented to cede
to the general Government the exercise of those rights which are
indispensable to the Union.

When the national Government, independently of the prerogatives
inherent in its nature, is invested with the right of regulating the
affairs which relate partly to the general and partly to the local
interests, it possesses a preponderating influence. Not only are its
own rights extensive, but all the rights which it does not possess
exist by its sufferance, and it may be apprehended that the provincial
governments may be deprived of their natural and necessary prerogatives
by its influence.

When, on the other hand, the provincial governments are invested with
the power of regulating those same affairs of mixed interest, an
opposite tendency prevails in society. The preponderating force resides
in the province, not in the nation; and it may be apprehended that the
national Government may in the end be stripped of the privileges which
are necessary to its existence.

Independent nations have therefore a natural tendency to
centralization, and confederations to dismemberment.

It now only remains for us to apply these general principles to the
American Union. The several States were necessarily possessed of the
right of regulating all exclusively provincial affairs. Moreover these
same States retained the rights of determining the civil and political
competency of the citizens, or regulating the reciprocal relations of
the members of the community, and of dispensing justice; rights which
are of a general nature, but which do not necessarily appertain to the
national Government. We have shown that the Government of the Union is
invested with the power of acting in the name of the whole nation in
those cases in which the nation has to appear as a single and undivided
power; as, for instance, in foreign relations, and in offering a common
resistance to a common enemy; in short, in conducting those affairs
which I have styled exclusively national.

In this division of the rights of sovereignty, the share of the Union
seems at first sight to be more considerable than that of the States;
but a more attentive investigation shows it to be less so. The
undertakings of the Government of the Union are more vast, but their
influence is more rarely felt. Those of the provincial governments are
comparatively small, but they are incessant, and they serve to keep
alive the authority which they represent. The Government of the Union
watches the general interests of the country; but the general interests
of a people have a very questionable influence upon individual
happiness, whilst provincial interests produce a most immediate effect
upon the welfare of the inhabitants. The Union secures the independence
and the greatness of the nation, which do not immediately affect
private citizens; but the several States maintain the liberty, regulate
the rights, protect the fortune, and secure the life and the whole
future prosperity of every citizen.

The Federal Government is very far removed from its subjects, whilst
the provincial governments are within the reach of them all, and are
ready to attend to the smallest appeal. The central Government has upon
its side the passions of a few superior men who aspire to conduct it;
but upon the side of the provincial governments are the interests of
all those second-rate individuals who can only hope to obtain power
within their own State, and who nevertheless exercise the largest share
of authority over the people because they are placed nearest to its
level. The Americans have therefore much more to hope and to fear from
the States than from the Union; and, in conformity with the natural
tendency of the human mind, they are more likely to attach themselves
to the former than to the latter. In this respect their habits and
feelings harmonize with their interests.

When a compact nation divides its sovereignty, and adopts a confederate
form of government, the traditions, the customs, and the manners of the
people are for a long time at variance with their legislation; and the
former tend to give a degree of influence to the central government
which the latter forbids. When a number of confederate states unite to
form a single nation, the same causes operate in an opposite direction.
I have no doubt that if France were to become a confederate republic
like that of the United States, the government would at first display
more energy than that of the Union; and if the Union were to alter its
constitution to a monarchy like that of France, I think that the
American Government would be a long time in acquiring the force which
now rules the latter nation. When the national existence of the
Anglo-Americans began, their provincial existence was already of long
standing; necessary relations were established between the townships
and the individual citizens of the same States; and they were
accustomed to consider some objects as common to them all, and to
conduct other affairs as exclusively relating to their own special
interests.

The Union is a vast body which presents no definite object to patriotic
feeling. The forms and limits of the State are distinct and
circumscribed; since it represents a certain number of objects which
are familiar to the citizens and beloved by all. It is identified with
the very soil, with the right of property and the domestic affections,
with the recollections of the past, the labors of the present, and the
hopes of the future. Patriotism, then, which is frequently a mere
extension of individual egotism, is still directed to the State, and is
not excited by the Union. Thus the tendency of the interests, the
habits, and the feelings of the people is to centre political activity
in the States, in preference to the Union.

It is easy to estimate the different forces of the two governments, by
remarking the manner in which they fulfil their respective functions.
Whenever the government of a State has occasion to address an
individual or an assembly of individuals, its language is clear and
imperative; and such is also the tone of the Federal Government in its
intercourse with individuals, but no sooner has it anything to do with
a State than it begins to parley, to explain its motives and to justify
its conduct, to argue, to advise, and, in short, anything but to
command. If doubts are raised as to the limits of the constitutional
powers of each government, the provincial government prefers its claim
with boldness, and takes prompt and energetic steps to support it. In
the mean while the Government of the Union reasons; it appeals to the
interests, to the good sense, to the glory of the nation; it
temporizes, it negotiates, and does not consent to act until it is
reduced to the last extremity. At first sight it might readily be
imagined that it is the provincial government which is armed with the
authority of the nation, and that Congress represents a single State.

The Federal Government is, therefore, notwithstanding the precautions
of those who founded it, naturally so weak that it more peculiarly
requires the free consent of the governed to enable it to subsist. It
is easy to perceive that its object is to enable the States to realize
with facility their determination of remaining united; and, as long as
this preliminary condition exists, its authority is great, temperate,
and effective. The Constitution fits the Government to control
individuals, and easily to surmount such obstacles as they may be
inclined to offer; but it was by no means established with a view to
the possible separation of one or more of the States from the Union.

If the sovereignty of the Union were to engage in a struggle with that
of the States at the present day, its defeat may be confidently
predicted; and it is not probable that such a struggle would be
seriously undertaken. As often as a steady resistance is offered to the
Federal Government it will be found to yield. Experience has hitherto
shown that whenever a State has demanded anything with perseverance and
resolution, it has invariably succeeded; and that if a separate
government has distinctly refused to act, it was left to do as it
thought fit. *z

z
[ See the conduct of the Northern States in the war of 1812. “During
that war,” says Jefferson in a letter to General Lafayette, “four of
the Eastern States were only attached to the Union, like so many
inanimate bodies to living men.”]


But even if the Government of the Union had any strength inherent in
itself, the physical situation of the country would render the exercise
of that strength very difficult. *a The United States cover an immense
territory; they are separated from each other by great distances; and
the population is disseminated over the surface of a country which is
still half a wilderness. If the Union were to undertake to enforce the
allegiance of the confederate States by military means, it would be in
a position very analogous to that of England at the time of the War of
Independence.

a
[ The profound peace of the Union affords no pretext for a standing
army; and without a standing army a government is not prepared to
profit by a favorable opportunity to conquer resistance, and take the
sovereign power by surprise. [This note, and the paragraph in the text
which precedes, have been shown by the results of the Civil War to be a
misconception of the writer.]]


However strong a government may be, it cannot easily escape from the
consequences of a principle which it has once admitted as the
foundation of its constitution. The Union was formed by the voluntary
agreement of the States; and, in uniting together, they have not
forfeited their nationality, nor have they been reduced to the
condition of one and the same people. If one of the States chose to
withdraw its name from the contract, it would be difficult to disprove
its right of doing so; and the Federal Government would have no means
of maintaining its claims directly, either by force or by right. In
order to enable the Federal Government easily to conquer the resistance
which may be offered to it by any one of its subjects, it would be
necessary that one or more of them should be specially interested in
the existence of the Union, as has frequently been the case in the
history of confederations.

If it be supposed that amongst the States which are united by the
federal tie there are some which exclusively enjoy the principal
advantages of union, or whose prosperity depends on the duration of
that union, it is unquestionable that they will always be ready to
support the central Government in enforcing the obedience of the
others. But the Government would then be exerting a force not derived
from itself, but from a principle contrary to its nature. States form
confederations in order to derive equal advantages from their union;
and in the case just alluded to, the Federal Government would derive
its power from the unequal distribution of those benefits amongst the
States.

If one of the confederate States have acquired a preponderance
sufficiently great to enable it to take exclusive possession of the
central authority, it will consider the other States as subject
provinces, and it will cause its own supremacy to be respected under
the borrowed name of the sovereignty of the Union. Great things may
then be done in the name of the Federal Government, but in reality that
Government will have ceased to exist. *b In both these cases, the power
which acts in the name of the confederation becomes stronger the more
it abandons the natural state and the acknowledged principles of
confederations.

b
[ Thus the province of Holland in the republic of the Low Countries,
and the Emperor in the Germanic Confederation, have sometimes put
themselves in the place of the union, and have employed the federal
authority to their own advantage.]


In America the existing Union is advantageous to all the States, but it
is not indispensable to any one of them. Several of them might break
the federal tie without compromising the welfare of the others,
although their own prosperity would be lessened. As the existence and
the happiness of none of the States are wholly dependent on the present
Constitution, they would none of them be disposed to make great
personal sacrifices to maintain it. On the other hand, there is no
State which seems hitherto to have its ambition much interested in the
maintenance of the existing Union. They certainly do not all exercise
the same influence in the federal councils, but no one of them can hope
to domineer over the rest, or to treat them as its inferiors or as its
subjects.

It appears to me unquestionable that if any portion of the Union
seriously desired to separate itself from the other States, they would
not be able, nor indeed would they attempt, to prevent it; and that the
present Union will only last as long as the States which compose it
choose to continue members of the confederation. If this point be
admitted, the question becomes less difficult; and our object is, not
to inquire whether the States of the existing Union are capable of
separating, but whether they will choose to remain united.

Amongst the various reasons which tend to render the existing Union
useful to the Americans, two principal causes are peculiarly evident to
the observer. Although the Americans are, as it were, alone upon their
continent, their commerce makes them the neighbors of all the nations
with which they trade. Notwithstanding their apparent isolation, the
Americans require a certain degree of strength, which they cannot
retain otherwise than by remaining united to each other. If the States
were to split, they would not only diminish the strength which they are
now able to display towards foreign nations, but they would soon create
foreign powers upon their own territory. A system of inland
custom-houses would then be established; the valleys would be divided
by imaginary boundary lines; the courses of the rivers would be
confined by territorial distinctions; and a multitude of hindrances
would prevent the Americans from exploring the whole of that vast
continent which Providence has allotted to them for a dominion. At
present they have no invasion to fear, and consequently no standing
armies to maintain, no taxes to levy. If the Union were dissolved, all
these burdensome measures might ere long be required. The Americans are
then very powerfully interested in the maintenance of their Union. On
the other hand, it is almost impossible to discover any sort of
material interest which might at present tempt a portion of the Union
to separate from the other States.

When we cast our eyes upon the map of the United States, we perceive
the chain of the Alleghany Mountains, running from the northeast to the
southwest, and crossing nearly one thousand miles of country; and we
are led to imagine that the design of Providence was to raise between
the valley of the Mississippi and the coast of the Atlantic Ocean one
of those natural barriers which break the mutual intercourse of men,
and form the necessary limits of different States. But the average
height of the Alleghanies does not exceed 2,500 feet; their greatest
elevation is not above 4,000 feet; their rounded summits, and the
spacious valleys which they conceal within their passes, are of easy
access from several sides. Besides which, the principal rivers which
fall into the Atlantic Ocean—the Hudson, the Susquehanna, and the
Potomac—take their rise beyond the Alleghanies, in an open district,
which borders upon the valley of the Mississippi. These streams quit
this tract of country, make their way through the barrier which would
seem to turn them westward, and as they wind through the mountains they
open an easy and natural passage to man. No natural barrier exists in
the regions which are now inhabited by the Anglo-Americans; the
Alleghanies are so far from serving as a boundary to separate nations,
that they do not even serve as a frontier to the States. New York,
Pennsylvania, and Virginia comprise them within their borders, and they
extend as much to the west as to the east of the line. The territory
now occupied by the twenty-four States of the Union, and the three
great districts which have not yet acquired the rank of States,
although they already contain inhabitants, covers a surface of
1,002,600 square miles, *c which is about equal to five times the
extent of France. Within these limits the qualities of the soil, the
temperature, and the produce of the country, are extremely various. The
vast extent of territory occupied by the Anglo-American republics has
given rise to doubts as to the maintenance of their Union. Here a
distinction must be made; contrary interests sometimes arise in the
different provinces of a vast empire, which often terminate in open
dissensions; and the extent of the country is then most prejudicial to
the power of the State. But if the inhabitants of these vast regions
are not divided by contrary interests, the extent of the territory may
be favorable to their prosperity; for the unity of the government
promotes the interchange of the different productions of the soil, and
increases their value by facilitating their consumption.

c
[ See “Darby’s View of the United States,” p. 435. [In 1890 the number
of States and Territories had increased to 51, the population to
62,831,900, and the area of the States, 3,602,990 square miles. This
does not include the Philippine Islands, Hawaii, or Porto Rico. A
conservative estimate of the population of the Philippine Islands is
8,000,000; that of Hawaii, by the census of 1897, was given at 109,020;
and the present estimated population of Porto Rico is 900,000. The area
of the Philippine Islands is about 120,000 square miles, that of Hawaii
is 6,740 square miles, and the area of Porto Rico is about 3,600 square
miles.]]


It is indeed easy to discover different interests in the different
parts of the Union, but I am unacquainted with any which are hostile to
each other. The Southern States are almost exclusively agricultural.
The Northern States are more peculiarly commercial and manufacturing.
The States of the West are at the same time agricultural and
manufacturing. In the South the crops consist of tobacco, of rice, of
cotton, and of sugar; in the North and the West, of wheat and maize.
These are different sources of wealth; but union is the means by which
these sources are opened to all, and rendered equally advantageous to
the several districts.

The North, which ships the produce of the Anglo-Americans to all parts
of the world, and brings back the produce of the globe to the Union, is
evidently interested in maintaining the confederation in its present
condition, in order that the number of American producers and consumers
may remain as large as possible. The North is the most natural agent of
communication between the South and the West of the Union on the one
hand, and the rest of the world upon the other; the North is therefore
interested in the union and prosperity of the South and the West, in
order that they may continue to furnish raw materials for its
manufactures, and cargoes for its shipping.

The South and the West, on their side, are still more directly
interested in the preservation of the Union, and the prosperity of the
North. The produce of the South is, for the most part, exported beyond
seas; the South and the West consequently stand in need of the
commercial resources of the North. They are likewise interested in the
maintenance of a powerful fleet by the Union, to protect them
efficaciously. The South and the West have no vessels, but they cannot
refuse a willing subsidy to defray the expenses of the navy; for if the
fleets of Europe were to blockade the ports of the South and the delta
of the Mississippi, what would become of the rice of the Carolinas, the
tobacco of Virginia, and the sugar and cotton which grow in the valley
of the Mississippi? Every portion of the federal budget does therefore
contribute to the maintenance of material interests which are common to
all the confederate States.

Independently of this commercial utility, the South and the West of the
Union derive great political advantages from their connection with the
North. The South contains an enormous slave population; a population
which is already alarming, and still more formidable for the future.
The States of the West lie in the remotest parts of a single valley;
and all the rivers which intersect their territory rise in the Rocky
Mountains or in the Alleghanies, and fall into the Mississippi, which
bears them onwards to the Gulf of Mexico. The Western States are
consequently entirely cut off, by their position, from the traditions
of Europe and the civilization of the Old World. The inhabitants of the
South, then, are induced to support the Union in order to avail
themselves of its protection against the blacks; and the inhabitants of
the West in order not to be excluded from a free communication with the
rest of the globe, and shut up in the wilds of central America. The
North cannot but desire the maintenance of the Union, in order to
remain, as it now is, the connecting link between that vast body and
the other parts of the world.

The temporal interests of all the several parts of the Union are, then,
intimately connected; and the same assertion holds true respecting
those opinions and sentiments which may be termed the immaterial
interests of men.




 Chapter XVIII: Future Condition Of Three Races—Part VII


The inhabitants of the United States talk a great deal of their
attachment to their country; but I confess that I do not rely upon that
calculating patriotism which is founded upon interest, and which a
change in the interests at stake may obliterate. Nor do I attach much
importance to the language of the Americans, when they manifest, in
their daily conversations, the intention of maintaining the federal
system adopted by their forefathers. A government retains its sway over
a great number of citizens, far less by the voluntary and rational
consent of the multitude, than by that instinctive, and to a certain
extent involuntary agreement, which results from similarity of feelings
and resemblances of opinion. I will never admit that men constitute a
social body, simply because they obey the same head and the same laws.
Society can only exist when a great number of men consider a great
number of things in the same point of view; when they hold the same
opinions upon many subjects, and when the same occurrences suggest the
same thoughts and impressions to their minds.

The observer who examines the present condition of the United States
upon this principle, will readily discover, that although the citizens
are divided into twenty-four distinct sovereignties, they nevertheless
constitute a single people; and he may perhaps be led to think that the
state of the Anglo-American Union is more truly a state of society than
that of certain nations of Europe which live under the same legislation
and the same prince.

Although the Anglo-Americans have several religious sects, they all
regard religion in the same manner. They are not always agreed upon the
measures which are most conducive to good government, and they vary
upon some of the forms of government which it is expedient to adopt;
but they are unanimous upon the general principles which ought to rule
human society. From Maine to the Floridas, and from the Missouri to the
Atlantic Ocean, the people is held to be the legitimate source of all
power. The same notions are entertained respecting liberty and
equality, the liberty of the press, the right of association, the jury,
and the responsibility of the agents of Government.

If we turn from their political and religious opinions to the moral and
philosophical principles which regulate the daily actions of life and
govern their conduct, we shall still find the same uniformity. The
Anglo-Americans *d acknowledge the absolute moral authority of the
reason of the community, as they acknowledge the political authority of
the mass of citizens; and they hold that public opinion is the surest
arbiter of what is lawful or forbidden, true or false. The majority of
them believe that a man will be led to do what is just and good by
following his own interest rightly understood. They hold that every man
is born in possession of the right of self-government, and that no one
has the right of constraining his fellow-creatures to be happy. They
have all a lively faith in the perfectibility of man; they are of
opinion that the effects of the diffusion of knowledge must necessarily
be advantageous, and the consequences of ignorance fatal; they all
consider society as a body in a state of improvement, humanity as a
changing scene, in which nothing is, or ought to be, permanent; and
they admit that what appears to them to be good to-day may be
superseded by something better-to-morrow. I do not give all these
opinions as true, but I quote them as characteristic of the Americans.

d
[ It is scarcely necessary for me to observe that by the expression
Anglo-Americans, I only mean to designate the great majority of the
nation; for a certain number of isolated individuals are of course to
be met with holding very different opinions.]


The Anglo-Americans are not only united together by these common
opinions, but they are separated from all other nations by a common
feeling of pride. For the last fifty years no pains have been spared to
convince the inhabitants of the United States that they constitute the
only religious, enlightened, and free people. They perceive that, for
the present, their own democratic institutions succeed, whilst those of
other countries fail; hence they conceive an overweening opinion of
their superiority, and they are not very remote from believing
themselves to belong to a distinct race of mankind.

The dangers which threaten the American Union do not originate in the
diversity of interests or of opinions, but in the various characters
and passions of the Americans. The men who inhabit the vast territory
of the United States are almost all the issue of a common stock; but
the effects of the climate, and more especially of slavery, have
gradually introduced very striking differences between the British
settler of the Southern States and the British settler of the North. In
Europe it is generally believed that slavery has rendered the interests
of one part of the Union contrary to those of another part; but I by no
means remarked this to be the case: slavery has not created interests
in the South contrary to those of the North, but it has modified the
character and changed the habits of the natives of the South.

I have already explained the influence which slavery has exercised upon
the commercial ability of the Americans in the South; and this same
influence equally extends to their manners. The slave is a servant who
never remonstrates, and who submits to everything without complaint. He
may sometimes assassinate, but he never withstands, his master. In the
South there are no families so poor as not to have slaves. The citizen
of the Southern States of the Union is invested with a sort of domestic
dictatorship, from his earliest years; the first notion he acquires in
life is that he is born to command, and the first habit which he
contracts is that of being obeyed without resistance. His education
tends, then, to give him the character of a supercilious and a hasty
man; irascible, violent, and ardent in his desires, impatient of
obstacles, but easily discouraged if he cannot succeed upon his first
attempt.

The American of the Northern States is surrounded by no slaves in his
childhood; he is even unattended by free servants, and is usually
obliged to provide for his own wants. No sooner does he enter the world
than the idea of necessity assails him on every side: he soon learns to
know exactly the natural limit of his authority; he never expects to
subdue those who withstand him, by force; and he knows that the surest
means of obtaining the support of his fellow-creatures, is to win their
favor. He therefore becomes patient, reflecting, tolerant, slow to act,
and persevering in his designs.

In the Southern States the more immediate wants of life are always
supplied; the inhabitants of those parts are not busied in the material
cares of life, which are always provided for by others; and their
imagination is diverted to more captivating and less definite objects.
The American of the South is fond of grandeur, luxury, and renown, of
gayety, of pleasure, and above all of idleness; nothing obliges him to
exert himself in order to subsist; and as he has no necessary
occupations, he gives way to indolence, and does not even attempt what
would be useful.

But the equality of fortunes, and the absence of slavery in the North,
plunge the inhabitants in those same cares of daily life which are
disdained by the white population of the South. They are taught from
infancy to combat want, and to place comfort above all the pleasures of
the intellect or the heart. The imagination is extinguished by the
trivial details of life, and the ideas become less numerous and less
general, but far more practical and more precise. As prosperity is the
sole aim of exertion, it is excellently well attained; nature and
mankind are turned to the best pecuniary advantage, and society is
dexterously made to contribute to the welfare of each of its members,
whilst individual egotism is the source of general happiness.

The citizen of the North has not only experience, but knowledge:
nevertheless he sets but little value upon the pleasures of knowledge;
he esteems it as the means of attaining a certain end, and he is only
anxious to seize its more lucrative applications. The citizen of the
South is more given to act upon impulse; he is more clever, more frank,
more generous, more intellectual, and more brilliant. The former, with
a greater degree of activity, of common-sense, of information, and of
general aptitude, has the characteristic good and evil qualities of the
middle classes. The latter has the tastes, the prejudices, the
weaknesses, and the magnanimity of all aristocracies. If two men are
united in society, who have the same interests, and to a certain extent
the same opinions, but different characters, different acquirements,
and a different style of civilization, it is probable that these men
will not agree. The same remark is applicable to a society of nations.
Slavery, then, does not attack the American Union directly in its
interests, but indirectly in its manners.

e
[ Census of 1790, 3,929,328; 1830, 12,856,165; 1860, 31,443,321; 1870,
38,555,983; 1890, 62,831,900.]


The States which gave their assent to the federal contract in 1790 were
thirteen in number; the Union now consists of thirty-four members. The
population, which amounted to nearly 4,000,000 in 1790, had more than
tripled in the space of forty years; and in 1830 it amounted to nearly
13,000,000. *e Changes of such magnitude cannot take place without some
danger.

A society of nations, as well as a society of individuals, derives its
principal chances of duration from the wisdom of its members, their
individual weakness, and their limited number. The Americans who quit
the coasts of the Atlantic Ocean to plunge into the western wilderness,
are adventurers impatient of restraint, greedy of wealth, and
frequently men expelled from the States in which they were born. When
they arrive in the deserts they are unknown to each other, and they
have neither traditions, family feeling, nor the force of example to
check their excesses. The empire of the laws is feeble amongst them;
that of morality is still more powerless. The settlers who are
constantly peopling the valley of the Mississippi are, then, in every
respect very inferior to the Americans who inhabit the older parts of
the Union. Nevertheless, they already exercise a great influence in its
councils; and they arrive at the government of the commonwealth before
they have learnt to govern themselves. *f

f
[ This indeed is only a temporary danger. I have no doubt that in time
society will assume as much stability and regularity in the West as it
has already done upon the coast of the Atlantic Ocean.]


The greater the individual weakness of each of the contracting parties,
the greater are the chances of the duration of the contract; for their
safety is then dependent upon their union. When, in 1790, the most
populous of the American republics did not contain 500,000 inhabitants,
*g each of them felt its own insignificance as an independent people,
and this feeling rendered compliance with the federal authority more
easy. But when one of the confederate States reckons, like the State of
New York, 2,000,000 of inhabitants, and covers an extent of territory
equal in surface to a quarter of France, *h it feels its own strength;
and although it may continue to support the Union as advantageous to
its prosperity, it no longer regards that body as necessary to its
existence, and as it continues to belong to the federal compact, it
soon aims at preponderance in the federal assemblies. The probable
unanimity of the States is diminished as their number increases. At
present the interests of the different parts of the Union are not at
variance; but who is able to foresee the multifarious changes of the
future, in a country in which towns are founded from day to day, and
States almost from year to year?

g
[ Pennsylvania contained 431,373 inhabitants in 1790 [and 5,258,014 in
1890.]]


h
[ The area of the State of New York is 49,170 square miles. [See U. S.
census report of 1890.]]


Since the first settlement of the British colonies, the number of
inhabitants has about doubled every twenty-two years. I perceive no
causes which are likely to check this progressive increase of the
Anglo-American population for the next hundred years; and before that
space of time has elapsed, I believe that the territories and
dependencies of the United States will be covered by more than
100,000,000 of inhabitants, and divided into forty States. *i I admit
that these 100,000,000 of men have no hostile interests. I suppose, on
the contrary, that they are all equally interested in the maintenance
of the Union; but I am still of opinion that where there are
100,000,000 of men, and forty distinct nations, unequally strong, the
continuance of the Federal Government can only be a fortunate accident.

i
[ If the population continues to double every twenty-two years, as it
has done for the last two hundred years, the number of inhabitants in
the United States in 1852 will be twenty millions; in 1874, forty-eight
millions; and in 1896, ninety-six millions. This may still be the case
even if the lands on the western slope of the Rocky Mountains should be
found to be unfit for cultivation. The territory which is already
occupied can easily contain this number of inhabitants. One hundred
millions of men disseminated over the surface of the twenty-four
States, and the three dependencies, which constitute the Union, would
only give 762 inhabitants to the square league; this would be far below
the mean population of France, which is 1,063 to the square league; or
of England, which is 1,457; and it would even be below the population
of Switzerland, for that country, notwithstanding its lakes and
mountains, contains 783 inhabitants to the square league. See “Malte
Brun,” vol. vi. p. 92.


[The actual result has fallen somewhat short of these calculations, in
spite of the vast territorial acquisitions of the United States: but in
1899 the population is probably about eighty-seven millions, including
the population of the Philippines, Hawaii, and Porto Rico.]]

Whatever faith I may have in the perfectibility of man, until human
nature is altered, and men wholly transformed, I shall refuse to
believe in the duration of a government which is called upon to hold
together forty different peoples, disseminated over a territory equal
to one-half of Europe in extent; to avoid all rivalry, ambition, and
struggles between them, and to direct their independent activity to the
accomplishment of the same designs.

But the greatest peril to which the Union is exposed by its increase
arises from the continual changes which take place in the position of
its internal strength. The distance from Lake Superior to the Gulf of
Mexico extends from the 47th to the 30th degree of latitude, a distance
of more than 1,200 miles as the bird flies. The frontier of the United
States winds along the whole of this immense line, sometimes falling
within its limits, but more frequently extending far beyond it, into
the waste. It has been calculated that the whites advance every year a
mean distance of seventeen miles along the whole of his vast boundary.
*j Obstacles, such as an unproductive district, a lake or an Indian
nation unexpectedly encountered, are sometimes met with. The advancing
column then halts for a while; its two extremities fall back upon
themselves, and as soon as they are reunited they proceed onwards. This
gradual and continuous progress of the European race towards the Rocky
Mountains has the solemnity of a providential event; it is like a
deluge of men rising unabatedly, and daily driven onwards by the hand
of God.

j
[ See Legislative Documents, 20th Congress, No. 117, p. 105.]


Within this first line of conquering settlers towns are built, and vast
States founded. In 1790 there were only a few thousand pioneers
sprinkled along the valleys of the Mississippi; and at the present day
these valleys contain as many inhabitants as were to be found in the
whole Union in 1790. Their population amounts to nearly 4,000,000. *k
The city of Washington was founded in 1800, in the very centre of the
Union; but such are the changes which have taken place, that it now
stands at one of the extremities; and the delegates of the most remote
Western States are already obliged to perform a journey as long as that
from Vienna to Paris. *l

k
[ 3,672,317—Census of 1830.]


l
[ The distance from Jefferson, the capital of the State of Missouri, to
Washington is 1,019 miles. (“American Almanac,” 1831, p. 48.)]


All the States are borne onwards at the same time in the path of
fortune, but of course they do not all increase and prosper in the same
proportion. To the North of the Union the detached branches of the
Alleghany chain, which extend as far as the Atlantic Ocean, form
spacious roads and ports, which are constantly accessible to vessels of
the greatest burden. But from the Potomac to the mouth of the
Mississippi the coast is sandy and flat. In this part of the Union the
mouths of almost all the rivers are obstructed; and the few harbors
which exist amongst these lagoons afford much shallower water to
vessels, and much fewer commercial advantages than those of the North.

This first natural cause of inferiority is united to another cause
proceeding from the laws. We have already seen that slavery, which is
abolished in the North, still exists in the South; and I have pointed
out its fatal consequences upon the prosperity of the planter himself.

The North is therefore superior to the South both in commerce *m and
manufacture; the natural consequence of which is the more rapid
increase of population and of wealth within its borders. The States
situate upon the shores of the Atlantic Ocean are already half-peopled.
Most of the land is held by an owner; and these districts cannot
therefore receive so many emigrants as the Western States, where a
boundless field is still open to their exertions. The valley of the
Mississippi is far more fertile than the coast of the Atlantic Ocean.
This reason, added to all the others, contributes to drive the
Europeans westward—a fact which may be rigorously demonstrated by
figures. It is found that the sum total of the population of all the
United States has about tripled in the course of forty years. But in
the recent States adjacent to the Mississippi, the population has
increased thirty-one-fold, within the same space of time. *n

m
[ The following statements will suffice to show the difference which
exists between the commerce of the South and that of the North:—


In 1829 the tonnage of all the merchant vessels belonging to Virginia,
the two Carolinas, and Georgia (the four great Southern States),
amounted to only 5,243 tons. In the same year the tonnage of the
vessels of the State of Massachusetts alone amounted to 17,322 tons.
(See Legislative Documents, 21st Congress, 2d session, No. 140, p.
244.) Thus the State of Massachusetts had three times as much shipping
as the four above-mentioned States. Nevertheless the area of the State
of Massachusetts is only 7,335 square miles, and its population amounts
to 610,014 inhabitants [2,238,943 in 1890]; whilst the area of the four
other States I have quoted is 210,000 square miles, and their
population 3,047,767. Thus the area of the State of Massachusetts forms
only one-thirtieth part of the area of the four States; and its
population is five times smaller than theirs. (See “Darby’s View of the
United States.”) Slavery is prejudicial to the commercial prosperity of
the South in several different ways; by diminishing the spirit of
enterprise amongst the whites, and by preventing them from meeting with
as numerous a class of sailors as they require. Sailors are usually
taken from the lowest ranks of the population. But in the Southern
States these lowest ranks are composed of slaves, and it is very
difficult to employ them at sea. They are unable to serve as well as a
white crew, and apprehensions would always be entertained of their
mutinying in the middle of the ocean, or of their escaping in the
foreign countries at which they might touch.]

n
[ “Darby’s View of the United States,” p. 444.]


The relative position of the central federal power is continually
displaced. Forty years ago the majority of the citizens of the Union
was established upon the coast of the Atlantic, in the environs of the
spot upon which Washington now stands; but the great body of the people
is now advancing inland and to the north, so that in twenty years the
majority will unquestionably be on the western side of the Alleghanies.
If the Union goes on to subsist, the basin of the Mississippi is
evidently marked out, by its fertility and its extent, as the future
centre of the Federal Government. In thirty or forty years, that tract
of country will have assumed the rank which naturally belongs to it. It
is easy to calculate that its population, compared to that of the coast
of the Atlantic, will be, in round numbers, as 40 to 11. In a few years
the States which founded the Union will lose the direction of its
policy, and the population of the valley of the Mississippi will
preponderate in the federal assemblies.

This constant gravitation of the federal power and influence towards
the northwest is shown every ten years, when a general census of the
population is made, and the number of delegates which each State sends
to Congress is settled afresh. *o In 1790 Virginia had nineteen
representatives in Congress. This number continued to increase until
the year 1813, when it reached to twenty-three; from that time it began
to decrease, and in 1833 Virginia elected only twenty-one
representatives. *p During the same period the State of New York
progressed in the contrary direction: in 1790 it had ten
representatives in Congress; in 1813, twenty-seven; in 1823,
thirty-four; and in 1833, forty. The State of Ohio had only one
representative in 1803, and in 1833 it had already nineteen.

o
[ It may be seen that in the course of the last ten years (1820-1830)
the population of one district, as, for instance, the State of
Delaware, has increased in the proportion of five per cent.; whilst
that of another, as the territory of Michigan, has increased 250 per
cent. Thus the population of Virginia had augmented thirteen per cent.,
and that of the border State of Ohio sixty-one per cent., in the same
space of time. The general table of these changes, which is given in
the “National Calendar,” displays a striking picture of the unequal
fortunes of the different States.]


p
[ It has just been said that in the course of the last term the
population of Virginia has increased thirteen per cent.; and it is
necessary to explain how the number of representatives for a State may
decrease, when the population of that State, far from diminishing, is
actually upon the increase. I take the State of Virginia, to which I
have already alluded, as my term of comparison. The number of
representatives of Virginia in 1823 was proportionate to the total
number of the representatives of the Union, and to the relation which
the population bore to that of the whole Union: in 1833 the number of
representatives of Virginia was likewise proportionate to the total
number of the representatives of the Union, and to the relation which
its population, augmented in the course of ten years, bore to the
augmented population of the Union in the same space of time. The new
number of Virginian representatives will then be to the old numver, on
the one hand, as the new numver of all the representatives is to the
old number; and, on the other hand, as the augmentation of the
population of Virginia is to that of the whole population of the
country. Thus, if the increase of the population of the lesser country
be to that of the greater in an exact inverse ratio of the proportion
between the new and the old numbers of all the representatives, the
number of the representatives of Virginia will remain stationary; and
if the increase of the Virginian population be to that of the whole
Union in a feeblerratio than the new number of the representatives of
the Union to the old number, the number of the representatives of
Virginia must decrease. [Thus, to the 56th Congress in 1899, Virginia
and West Virginia send only fourteen representatives.]]




 Chapter XVIII: Future Condition Of Three Races—Part VIII


It is difficult to imagine a durable union of a people which is rich
and strong with one which is poor and weak, even if it were proved that
the strength and wealth of the one are not the causes of the weakness
and poverty of the other. But union is still more difficult to maintain
at a time at which one party is losing strength, and the other is
gaining it. This rapid and disproportionate increase of certain States
threatens the independence of the others. New York might perhaps
succeed, with its 2,000,000 of inhabitants and its forty
representatives, in dictating to the other States in Congress. But even
if the more powerful States make no attempt to bear down the lesser
ones, the danger still exists; for there is almost as much in the
possibility of the act as in the act itself. The weak generally
mistrust the justice and the reason of the strong. The States which
increase less rapidly than the others look upon those which are more
favored by fortune with envy and suspicion. Hence arise the deep-seated
uneasiness and ill-defined agitation which are observable in the South,
and which form so striking a contrast to the confidence and prosperity
which are common to other parts of the Union. I am inclined to think
that the hostile measures taken by the Southern provinces upon a recent
occasion are attributable to no other cause. The inhabitants of the
Southern States are, of all the Americans, those who are most
interested in the maintenance of the Union; they would assuredly suffer
most from being left to themselves; and yet they are the only citizens
who threaten to break the tie of confederation. But it is easy to
perceive that the South, which has given four Presidents, Washington,
Jefferson, Madison, and Monroe, to the Union, which perceives that it
is losing its federal influence, and that the number of its
representatives in Congress is diminishing from year to year, whilst
those of the Northern and Western States are increasing; the South,
which is peopled with ardent and irascible beings, is becoming more and
more irritated and alarmed. The citizens reflect upon their present
position and remember their past influence, with the melancholy
uneasiness of men who suspect oppression: if they discover a law of the
Union which is not unequivocally favorable to their interests, they
protest against it as an abuse of force; and if their ardent
remonstrances are not listened to, they threaten to quit an association
which loads them with burdens whilst it deprives them of their due
profits. “The tariff,” said the inhabitants of Carolina in 1832,
“enriches the North, and ruins the South; for if this were not the
case, to what can we attribute the continually increasing power and
wealth of the North, with its inclement skies and arid soil; whilst the
South, which may be styled the garden of America, is rapidly
declining?” *q

q
[ See the report of its committee to the Convention which proclaimed
the nullification of the tariff in South Carolina.]


If the changes which I have described were gradual, so that each
generation at least might have time to disappear with the order of
things under which it had lived, the danger would be less; but the
progress of society in America is precipitate, and almost
revolutionary. The same citizen may have lived to see his State take
the lead in the Union, and afterwards become powerless in the federal
assemblies; and an Anglo-American republic has been known to grow as
rapidly as a man passing from birth and infancy to maturity in the
course of thirty years. It must not be imagined, however, that the
States which lose their preponderance, also lose their population or
their riches: no stop is put to their prosperity, and they even go on
to increase more rapidly than any kingdom in Europe. *r But they
believe themselves to be impoverished because their wealth does not
augment as rapidly as that of their neighbors; any they think that
their power is lost, because they suddenly come into collision with a
power greater than their own: *s thus they are more hurt in their
feelings and their passions than in their interests. But this is amply
sufficient to endanger the maintenance of the Union. If kings and
peoples had only had their true interests in view ever since the
beginning of the world, the name of war would scarcely be known among
mankind.

r
[ The population of a country assuredly constitutes the first element
of its wealth. In the ten years (1820-1830) during which Virginia lost
two of its representatives in Congress, its population increased in the
proportion of 13.7 per cent.; that of Carolina in the proportion of
fifteen per cent.; and that of Georgia, 15.5 per cent. (See the
“American Almanac,” 1832, p. 162) But the population of Russia, which
increases more rapidly than that of any other European country, only
augments in ten years at the rate of 9.5 per cent.; in France, at the
rate of seven per cent.; and in Europe in general, at the rate of 4.7
per cent. (See “Malte Brun,” vol. vi. p. 95)]


s
[ It must be admitted, however, that the depreciation which has taken
place in the value of tobacco, during the last fifty years, has notably
diminished the opulence of the Southern planters: but this circumstance
is as independent of the will of their Northern brethren as it is of
their own.]


Thus the prosperity of the United States is the source of the most
serious dangers that threaten them, since it tends to create in some of
the confederate States that over-excitement which accompanies a rapid
increase of fortune; and to awaken in others those feelings of envy,
mistrust, and regret which usually attend upon the loss of it. The
Americans contemplate this extraordinary and hasty progress with
exultation; but they would be wiser to consider it with sorrow and
alarm. The Americans of the United States must inevitably become one of
the greatest nations in the world; their offset will cover almost the
whole of North America; the continent which they inhabit is their
dominion, and it cannot escape them. What urges them to take possession
of it so soon? Riches, power, and renown cannot fail to be theirs at
some future time, but they rush upon their fortune as if but a moment
remained for them to make it their own.

I think that I have demonstrated that the existence of the present
confederation depends entirely on the continued assent of all the
confederates; and, starting from this principle, I have inquired into
the causes which may induce the several States to separate from the
others. The Union may, however, perish in two different ways: one of
the confederate States may choose to retire from the compact, and so
forcibly to sever the federal tie; and it is to this supposition that
most of the remarks that I have made apply: or the authority of the
Federal Government may be progressively entrenched on by the
simultaneous tendency of the united republics to resume their
independence. The central power, successively stripped of all its
prerogatives, and reduced to impotence by tacit consent, would become
incompetent to fulfil its purpose; and the second Union would perish,
like the first, by a sort of senile inaptitude. The gradual weakening
of the federal tie, which may finally lead to the dissolution of the
Union, is a distinct circumstance, that may produce a variety of minor
consequences before it operates so violent a change. The confederation
might still subsist, although its Government were reduced to such a
degree of inanition as to paralyze the nation, to cause internal
anarchy, and to check the general prosperity of the country.

After having investigated the causes which may induce the
Anglo-Americans to disunite, it is important to inquire whether, if the
Union continues to subsist, their Government will extend or contract
its sphere of action, and whether it will become more energetic or more
weak.

The Americans are evidently disposed to look upon their future
condition with alarm. They perceive that in most of the nations of the
world the exercise of the rights of sovereignty tends to fall under the
control of a few individuals, and they are dismayed by the idea that
such will also be the case in their own country. Even the statesmen
feel, or affect to feel, these fears; for, in America, centralization
is by no means popular, and there is no surer means of courting the
majority than by inveighing against the encroachments of the central
power. The Americans do not perceive that the countries in which this
alarming tendency to centralization exists are inhabited by a single
people; whilst the fact of the Union being composed of different
confederate communities is sufficient to baffle all the inferences
which might be drawn from analogous circumstances. I confess that I am
inclined to consider the fears of a great number of Americans as purely
imaginary; and far from participating in their dread of the
consolidation of power in the hands of the Union, I think that the
Federal Government is visibly losing strength.

To prove this assertion I shall not have recourse to any remote
occurrences, but to circumstances which I have myself witnessed, and
which belong to our own time.

An attentive examination of what is going on in the United States will
easily convince us that two opposite tendencies exist in that country,
like two distinct currents flowing in contrary directions in the same
channel. The Union has now existed for forty-five years, and in the
course of that time a vast number of provincial prejudices, which were
at first hostile to its power, have died away. The patriotic feeling
which attached each of the Americans to his own native State is become
less exclusive; and the different parts of the Union have become more
intimately connected the better they have become acquainted with each
other. The post, *t that great instrument of intellectual intercourse,
now reaches into the backwoods; and steamboats have established daily
means of communication between the different points of the coast. An
inland navigation of unexampled rapidity conveys commodities up and
down the rivers of the country. *u And to these facilities of nature
and art may be added those restless cravings, that busy-mindedness, and
love of pelf, which are constantly urging the American into active
life, and bringing him into contact with his fellow-citizens. He
crosses the country in every direction; he visits all the various
populations of the land; and there is not a province in France in which
the natives are so well known to each other as the 13,000,000 of men
who cover the territory of the United States.

t
[ In 1832, the district of Michigan, which only contains 31,639
inhabitants, and is still an almost unexplored wilderness, possessed
940 miles of mail-roads. The territory of Arkansas, which is still more
uncultivated, was already intersected by 1,938 miles of mail-roads.
(See the report of the General Post Office, November 30, 1833.) The
postage of newspapers alone in the whole Union amounted to $254,796.]


u
[ In the course of ten years, from 1821 to 1831, 271 steamboats have
been launched upon the rivers which water the valley of the Mississippi
alone. In 1829 259 steamboats existed in the United States. (See
Legislative Documents, No. 140, p. 274.)]


But whilst the Americans intermingle, they grow in resemblance of each
other; the differences resulting from their climate, their origin, and
their institutions, diminish; and they all draw nearer and nearer to
the common type. Every year, thousands of men leave the North to settle
in different parts of the Union: they bring with them their faith,
their opinions, and their manners; and as they are more enlighthned
than the men amongst whom they are about to dwell, they soon rise to
the head of affairs, and they adapt society to their own advantage.
This continual emigration of the North to the South is peculiarly
favorable to the fusion of all the different provincial characters into
one national character. The civilization of the North appears to be the
common standard, to which the whole nation will one day be assimilated.

The commercial ties which unite the confederate States are strengthened
by the increasing manufactures of the Americans; and the union which
began to exist in their opinions, gradually forms a part of their
habits: the course of time has swept away the bugbear thoughts which
haunted the imaginations of the citizens in 1789. The federal power is
not become oppressive; it has not destroyed the independence of the
States; it has not subjected the confederates to monarchial
institutions; and the Union has not rendered the lesser States
dependent upon the larger ones; but the confederation has continued to
increase in population, in wealth, and in power. I am therefore
convinced that the natural obstacles to the continuance of the American
Union are not so powerful at the present time as they were in 1789; and
that the enemies of the Union are not so numerous.

Nevertheless, a careful examination of the history of the United States
for the last forty-five years will readily convince us that the federal
power is declining; nor is it difficult to explain the causes of this
phenomenon. *v When the Constitution of 1789 was promulgated, the
nation was a prey to anarchy; the Union, which succeeded this
confusion, excited much dread and much animosity; but it was warmly
supported because it satisfied an imperious want. Thus, although it was
more attacked than it is now, the federal power soon reached the
maximum of its authority, as is usually the case with a government
which triumphs after having braced its strength by the struggle. At
that time the interpretation of the Constitution seemed to extend,
rather than to repress, the federal sovereignty; and the Union offered,
in several respects, the appearance of a single and undivided people,
directed in its foreign and internal policy by a single Government. But
to attain this point the people had risen, to a certain extent, above
itself.

v
[ [Since 1861 the movement is certainly in the opposite direction, and
the federal power has largely increased, and tends to further
increase.]]


The Constitution had not destroyed the distinct sovereignty of the
States; and all communities, of whatever nature they may be, are
impelled by a secret propensity to assert their independence. This
propensity is still more decided in a country like America, in which
every village forms a sort of republic accustomed to conduct its own
affairs. It therefore cost the States an effort to submit to the
federal supremacy; and all efforts, however successful they may be,
necessarily subside with the causes in which they originated.

As the Federal Government consolidated its authority, America resumed
its rank amongst the nations, peace returned to its frontiers, and
public credit was restored; confusion was succeeded by a fixed state of
things, which was favorable to the full and free exercise of
industrious enterprise. It was this very prosperity which made the
Americans forget the cause to which it was attributable; and when once
the danger was passed, the energy and the patriotism which had enabled
them to brave it disappeared from amongst them. No sooner were they
delivered from the cares which oppressed them, than they easily
returned to their ordinary habits, and gave themselves up without
resistance to their natural inclinations. When a powerful Government no
longer appeared to be necessary, they once more began to think it
irksome. The Union encouraged a general prosperity, and the States were
not inclined to abandon the Union; but they desired to render the
action of the power which represented that body as light as possible.
The general principle of Union was adopted, but in every minor detail
there was an actual tendency to independence. The principle of
confederation was every day more easily admitted, and more rarely
applied; so that the Federal Government brought about its own decline,
whilst it was creating order and peace.

As soon as this tendency of public opinion began to be manifested
externally, the leaders of parties, who live by the passions of the
people, began to work it to their own advantage. The position of the
Federal Government then became exceedingly critical. Its enemies were
in possession of the popular favor; and they obtained the right of
conducting its policy by pledging themselves to lessen its influence.
From that time forwards the Government of the Union has invariably been
obliged to recede, as often as it has attempted to enter the lists with
the governments of the States. And whenever an interpretation of the
terms of the Federal Constitution has been called for, that
interpretation has most frequently been opposed to the Union, and
favorable to the States.

The Constitution invested the Federal Government with the right of
providing for the interests of the nation; and it had been held that no
other authority was so fit to superintend the “internal improvements”
which affected the prosperity of the whole Union; such, for instance,
as the cutting of canals. But the States were alarmed at a power,
distinct from their own, which could thus dispose of a portion of their
territory; and they were afraid that the central Government would, by
this means, acquire a formidable extent of patronage within their own
confines, and exercise a degree of influence which they intended to
reserve exclusively to their own agents. The Democratic party, which
has constantly been opposed to the increase of the federal authority,
then accused the Congress of usurpation, and the Chief Magistrate of
ambition. The central Government was intimidated by the opposition; and
it soon acknowledged its error, promising exactly to confine its
influence for the future within the circle which was prescribed to it.

The Constitution confers upon the Union the right of treating with
foreign nations. The Indian tribes, which border upon the frontiers of
the United States, had usually been regarded in this light. As long as
these savages consented to retire before the civilized settlers, the
federal right was not contested: but as soon as an Indian tribe
attempted to fix its dwelling upon a given spot, the adjacent States
claimed possession of the lands and the rights of sovereignty over the
natives. The central Government soon recognized both these claims; and
after it had concluded treaties with the Indians as independent
nations, it gave them up as subjects to the legislative tyranny of the
States. *w

w
[ See in the Legislative Documents, already quoted in speaking of the
Indians, the letter of the President of the United States to the
Cherokees, his correspondence on this subject with his agents, and his
messages to Congress.]


Some of the States which had been founded upon the coast of the
Atlantic, extended indefinitely to the West, into wild regions where no
European had ever penetrated. The States whose confines were
irrevocably fixed, looked with a jealous eye upon the unbounded regions
which the future would enable their neighbors to explore. The latter
then agreed, with a view to conciliate the others, and to facilitate
the act of union, to lay down their own boundaries, and to abandon all
the territory which lay beyond those limits to the confederation at
large. *x Thenceforward the Federal Government became the owner of all
the uncultivated lands which lie beyond the borders of the thirteen
States first confederated. It was invested with the right of parcelling
and selling them, and the sums derived from this source were
exclusively reserved to the public treasure of the Union, in order to
furnish supplies for purchasing tracts of country from the Indians, for
opening roads to the remote settlements, and for accelerating the
increase of civilization as much as possible. New States have, however,
been formed in the course of time, in the midst of those wilds which
were formerly ceded by the inhabitants of the shores of the Atlantic.
Congress has gone on to sell, for the profit of the nation at large,
the uncultivated lands which those new States contained. But the latter
at length asserted that, as they were now fully constituted, they ought
to enjoy the exclusive right of converting the produce of these sales
to their own use. As their remonstrances became more and more
threatening, Congress thought fit to deprive the Union of a portion of
the privileges which it had hitherto enjoyed; and at the end of 1832 it
passed a law by which the greatest part of the revenue derived from the
sale of lands was made over to the new western republics, although the
lands themselves were not ceded to them. *y

x
[ The first act of session was made by the State of New York in 1780;
Virginia, Massachusetts, Connecticut, South and North Carolina,
followed this example at different times, and lastly, the act of
cession of Georgia was made as recently as 1802.]


y
[ It is true that the President refused his assent to this law; but he
completely adopted it in principle. (See Message of December 8, 1833.)]


The slightest observation in the United States enables one to
appreciate the advantages which the country derives from the bank.
These advantages are of several kinds, but one of them is peculiarly
striking to the stranger. The banknotes of the United States are taken
upon the borders of the desert for the same value as at Philadelphia,
where the bank conducts its operations. *z

z
[ The present Bank of the United States was established in 1816, with a
capital of $35,000,000; its charter expires in 1836. Last year Congress
passed a law to renew it, but the President put his veto upon the bill.
The struggle is still going on with great violence on either side, and
the speedy fall of the bank may easily be foreseen. [It was soon
afterwards extinguished by General Jackson.]]


The Bank of the United States is nevertheless the object of great
animosity. Its directors have proclaimed their hostility to the
President: and they are accused, not without some show of probability,
of having abused their influence to thwart his election. The President
therefore attacks the establishment which they represent with all the
warmth of personal enmity; and he is encouraged in the pursuit of his
revenge by the conviction that he is supported by the secret
propensities of the majority. The bank may be regarded as the great
monetary tie of the Union, just as Congress is the great legislative
tie; and the same passions which tend to render the States independent
of the central power, contribute to the overthrow of the bank.

The Bank of the United States always holds a great number of the notes
issued by the provincial banks, which it can at any time oblige them to
convert into cash. It has itself nothing to fear from a similar demand,
as the extent of its resources enables it to meet all claims. But the
existence of the provincial banks is thus threatened, and their
operations are restricted, since they are only able to issue a quantity
of notes duly proportioned to their capital. They submit with
impatience to this salutary control. The newspapers which they have
bought over, and the President, whose interest renders him their
instrument, attack the bank with the greatest vehemence. They rouse the
local passions and the blind democratic instinct of the country to aid
their cause; and they assert that the bank directors form a permanent
aristocratic body, whose influence must ultimately be felt in the
Government, and must affect those principles of equality upon which
society rests in America.

The contest between the bank and its opponents is only an incident in
the great struggle which is going on in America between the provinces
and the central power; between the spirit of democratic independence
and the spirit of gradation and subordination. I do not mean that the
enemies of the bank are identically the same individuals who, on other
points, attack the Federal Government; but I assert that the attacks
directed against the bank of the United States originate in the same
propensities which militate against the Federal Government; and that
the very numerous opponents of the former afford a deplorable symptom
of the decreasing support of the latter.

The Union has never displayed so much weakness as in the celebrated
question of the tariff. *a The wars of the French Revolution and of
1812 had created manufacturing establishments in the North of the
Union, by cutting off all free communication between America and
Europe. When peace was concluded, and the channel of intercourse
reopened by which the produce of Europe was transmitted to the New
World, the Americans thought fit to establish a system of import
duties, for the twofold purpose of protecting their incipient
manufactures and of paying off the amount of the debt contracted during
the war. The Southern States, which have no manufactures to encourage,
and which are exclusively agricultural, soon complained of this
measure. Such were the simple facts, and I do not pretend to examine in
this place whether their complaints were well founded or unjust.

a
[ See principally for the details of this affair, the Legislative
Documents, 22d Congress, 2d Session, No. 30.]


As early as the year 1820, South Carolina declared, in a petition to
Congress, that the tariff was “unconstitutional, oppressive, and
unjust.” And the States of Georgia, Virginia, North Carolina, Alabama,
and Mississippi subsequently remonstrated against it with more or less
vigor. But Congress, far from lending an ear to these complaints,
raised the scale of tariff duties in the years 1824 and 1828, and
recognized anew the principle on which it was founded. A doctrine was
then proclaimed, or rather revived, in the South, which took the name
of Nullification.

I have shown in the proper place that the object of the Federal
Constitution was not to form a league, but to create a national
government. The Americans of the United States form a sole and
undivided people, in all the cases which are specified by that
Constitution; and upon these points the will of the nation is
expressed, as it is in all constitutional nations, by the voice of the
majority. When the majority has pronounced its decision, it is the duty
of the minority to submit. Such is the sound legal doctrine, and the
only one which agrees with the text of the Constitution, and the known
intention of those who framed it.

The partisans of Nullification in the South maintain, on the contrary,
that the intention of the Americans in uniting was not to reduce
themselves to the condition of one and the same people; that they meant
to constitute a league of independent States; and that each State,
consequently retains its entire sovereignty, if not de facto, at least
de jure; and has the right of putting its own construction upon the
laws of Congress, and of suspending their execution within the limits
of its own territory, if they are held to be unconstitutional and
unjust.

The entire doctrine of Nullification is comprised in a sentence uttered
by Vice-President Calhoun, the head of that party in the South, before
the Senate of the United States, in the year 1833: “The Constitution is
a compact to which the States were parties in their sovereign capacity;
now, whenever a compact is entered into by parties which acknowledge no
tribunal above their authority to decide in the last resort, each of
them has a right to judge for itself in relation to the nature, extent,
and obligations of the instrument.” It is evident that a similar
doctrine destroys the very basis of the Federal Constitution, and brings
back all the evils of the old confederation, from which the Americans
were supposed to have had a safe deliverance.

When South Carolina perceived that Congress turned a deaf ear to its
remonstrances, it threatened to apply the doctrine of nullification to
the federal tariff bill. Congress persisted in its former system; and
at length the storm broke out. In the course of 1832 the citizens of
South Carolina, *b named a national Convention, to consult upon the
extraordinary measures which they were called upon to take; and on
November 24th of the same year this Convention promulgated a law, under
the form of a decree, which annulled the federal law of the tariff,
forbade the levy of the imposts which that law commands, and refused to
recognize the appeal which might be made to the federal courts of law.
*c This decree was only to be put in execution in the ensuing month of
February, and it was intimated, that if Congress modified the tariff
before that period, South Carolina might be induced to proceed no
further with her menaces; and a vague desire was afterwards expressed
of submitting the question to an extraordinary assembly of all the
confederate States.

b
[ That is to say, the majority of the people; for the opposite party,
called the Union party, always formed a very strong and active
minority. Carolina may contain about 47,000 electors; 30,000 were in
favor of nullification, and 17,000 opposed to it.]


c
[ This decree was preceded by a report of the committee by which it was
framed, containing the explanation of the motives and object of the
law. The following passage occurs in it, p. 34:—“When the rights
reserved by the Constitution to the different States are deliberately
violated, it is the duty and the right of those States to interfere, in
order to check the progress of the evil; to resist usurpation, and to
maintain, within their respective limits, those powers and privileges
which belong to them as independent sovereign States. If they were
destitute of this right, they would not be sovereign. South Carolina
declares that she acknowledges no tribunal upon earth above her
authority. She has indeed entered into a solemn compact of union with
the other States; but she demands, and will exercise, the right of
putting her own construction upon it; and when this compact is violated
by her sister States, and by the Government which they have created,
she is determined to avail herself of the unquestionable right of
judging what is the extent of the infraction, and what are the measures
best fitted to obtain justice.”]




 Chapter XVIII: Future Condition Of Three Races—Part IX


In the meantime South Carolina armed her militia, and prepared for war.
But Congress, which had slighted its suppliant subjects, listened to
their complaints as soon as they were found to have taken up arms. *d A
law was passed, by which the tariff duties were to be progressively
reduced for ten years, until they were brought so low as not to exceed
the amount of supplies necessary to the Government. *e Thus Congress
completely abandoned the principle of the tariff; and substituted a
mere fiscal impost to a system of protective duties. *f The Government
of the Union, in order to conceal its defeat, had recourse to an
expedient which is very much in vogue with feeble governments. It
yielded the point de facto, but it remained inflexible upon the
principles in question; and whilst Congress was altering the tariff
law, it passed another bill, by which the President was invested with
extraordinary powers, enabling him to overcome by force a resistance
which was then no longer to be apprehended.

d
[ Congress was finally decided to take this step by the conduct of the
powerful State of Virginia, whose legislature offered to serve as
mediator between the Union and South Carolina. Hitherto the latter
State had appeared to be entirely abandoned, even by the States which
had joined in her remonstrances.]


e
[ This law was passed on March 2, 1833.]


f
[ This bill was brought in by Mr. Clay, and it passed in four days
through both Houses of Congress by an immense majority.]


But South Carolina did not consent to leave the Union in the enjoyment
of these scanty trophies of success: the same national Convention which
had annulled the tariff bill, met again, and accepted the proffered
concession; but at the same time it declared its unabated perseverance
in the doctrine of Nullification: and to prove what it said, it
annulled the law investing the President with extraordinary powers,
although it was very certain that the clauses of that law would never
be carried into effect.

Almost all the controversies of which I have been speaking have taken
place under the Presidency of General Jackson; and it cannot be denied
that in the question of the tariff he has supported the claims of the
Union with vigor and with skill. I am, however, of opinion that the
conduct of the individual who now represents the Federal Government may
be reckoned as one of the dangers which threaten its continuance.

Some persons in Europe have formed an opinion of the possible influence
of General Jackson upon the affairs of his country, which appears
highly extravagant to those who have seen more of the subject. We have
been told that General Jackson has won sundry battles, that he is an
energetic man, prone by nature and by habit to the use of force,
covetous of power, and a despot by taste. All this may perhaps be true;
but the inferences which have been drawn from these truths are
exceedingly erroneous. It has been imagined that General Jackson is
bent on establishing a dictatorship in America, on introducing a
military spirit, and on giving a degree of influence to the central
authority which cannot but be dangerous to provincial liberties. But in
America the time for similar undertakings, and the age for men of this
kind, is not yet come: if General Jackson had entertained a hope of
exercising his authority in this manner, he would infallibly have
forfeited his political station, and compromised his life; accordingly
he has not been so imprudent as to make any such attempt.

Far from wishing to extend the federal power, the President belongs to
the party which is desirous of limiting that power to the bare and
precise letter of the Constitution, and which never puts a construction
upon that act favorable to the Government of the Union; far from
standing forth as the champion of centralization, General Jackson is
the agent of all the jealousies of the States; and he was placed in the
lofty station he occupies by the passions of the people which are most
opposed to the central Government. It is by perpetually flattering
these passions that he maintains his station and his popularity.
General Jackson is the slave of the majority: he yields to its wishes,
its propensities, and its demands; say rather, that he anticipates and
forestalls them.

Whenever the governments of the States come into collision with that of
the Union, the President is generally the first to question his own
rights: he almost always outstrips the legislature; and when the extent
of the federal power is controverted, he takes part, as it were,
against himself; he conceals his official interests, and extinguishes
his own natural inclinations. Not indeed that he is naturally weak or
hostile to the Union; for when the majority decided against the claims
of the partisans of nullification, he put himself at its head, asserted
the doctrines which the nation held distinctly and energetically, and
was the first to recommend forcible measures; but General Jackson
appears to me, if I may use the American expressions, to be a
Federalist by taste, and a Republican by calculation.

General Jackson stoops to gain the favor of the majority, but when he
feels that his popularity is secure, he overthrows all obstacles in the
pursuit of the objects which the community approves, or of those which
it does not look upon with a jealous eye. He is supported by a power
with which his predecessors were unacquainted; and he tramples on his
personal enemies whenever they cross his path with a facility which no
former President ever enjoyed; he takes upon himself the responsibility
of measures which no one before him would have ventured to attempt: he
even treats the national representatives with disdain approaching to
insult; he puts his veto upon the laws of Congress, and frequently
neglects to reply to that powerful body. He is a favorite who sometimes
treats his master roughly. The power of General Jackson perpetually
increases; but that of the President declines; in his hands the Federal
Government is strong, but it will pass enfeebled into the hands of his
successor.

I am strangely mistaken if the Federal Government of the United States
be not constantly losing strength, retiring gradually from public
affairs, and narrowing its circle of action more and more. It is
naturally feeble, but it now abandons even its pretensions to strength.
On the other hand, I thought that I remarked a more lively sense of
independence, and a more decided attachment to provincial government in
the States. The Union is to subsist, but to subsist as a shadow; it is
to be strong in certain cases, and weak in all others; in time of
warfare, it is to be able to concentrate all the forces of the nation
and all the resources of the country in its hands; and in time of peace
its existence is to be scarcely perceptible: as if this alternate
debility and vigor were natural or possible.

I do not foresee anything for the present which may be able to check
this general impulse of public opinion; the causes in which it
originated do not cease to operate with the same effect. The change
will therefore go on, and it may be predicted that, unless some
extraordinary event occurs, the Government of the Union will grow
weaker and weaker every day.

I think, however, that the period is still remote at which the federal
power will be entirely extinguished by its inability to protect itself
and to maintain peace in the country. The Union is sanctioned by the
manners and desires of the people; its results are palpable, its
benefits visible. When it is perceived that the weakness of the Federal
Government compromises the existence of the Union, I do not doubt that
a reaction will take place with a view to increase its strength.

The Government of the United States is, of all the federal governments
which have hitherto been established, the one which is most naturally
destined to act. As long as it is only indirectly assailed by the
interpretation of its laws, and as long as its substance is not
seriously altered, a change of opinion, an internal crisis, or a war,
may restore all the vigor which it requires. The point which I have
been most anxious to put in a clear light is simply this: Many people,
especially in France, imagine that a change in opinion is going on in
the United States, which is favorable to a centralization of power in
the hands of the President and the Congress. I hold that a contrary
tendency may distinctly be observed. So far is the Federal Government
from acquiring strength, and from threatening the sovereignty of the
States, as it grows older, that I maintain it to be growing weaker and
weaker, and that the sovereignty of the Union alone is in danger. Such
are the facts which the present time discloses. The future conceals the
final result of this tendency, and the events which may check, retard,
or accelerate the changes I have described; but I do not affect to be
able to remove the veil which hides them from our sight.

Of The Republican Institutions Of The United States, And What Their
Chances Of Duration Are

The Union is accidental—The Republican institutions have more prospect
of permanence—A republic for the present the natural state of the
Anglo-Americans—Reason of this—In order to destroy it, all the laws
must be changed at the same time, and a great alteration take place in
manners—Difficulties experienced by the Americans in creating an
aristocracy.

The dismemberment of the Union, by the introduction of war into the
heart of those States which are now confederate, with standing armies,
a dictatorship, and a heavy taxation, might, eventually, compromise the
fate of the republican institutions. But we ought not to confound the
future prospects of the republic with those of the Union. The Union is
an accident, which will only last as long as circumstances are
favorable to its existence; but a republican form of government seems
to me to be the natural state of the Americans; which nothing but the
continued action of hostile causes, always acting in the same
direction, could change into a monarchy. The Union exists principally
in the law which formed it; one revolution, one change in public
opinion, might destroy it forever; but the republic has a much deeper
foundation to rest upon.

What is understood by a republican government in the United States is
the slow and quiet action of society upon itself. It is a regular state
of things really founded upon the enlightened will of the people. It is
a conciliatory government under which resolutions are allowed time to
ripen; and in which they are deliberately discussed, and executed with
mature judgment. The republicans in the United States set a high value
upon morality, respect religious belief, and acknowledge the existence
of rights. They profess to think that a people ought to be moral,
religious, and temperate, in proportion as it is free. What is called
the republic in the United States, is the tranquil rule of the
majority, which, after having had time to examine itself, and to give
proof of its existence, is the common source of all the powers of the
State. But the power of the majority is not of itself unlimited. In the
moral world humanity, justice, and reason enjoy an undisputed
supremacy; in the political world vested rights are treated with no
less deference. The majority recognizes these two barriers; and if it
now and then overstep them, it is because, like individuals, it has
passions, and, like them, it is prone to do what is wrong, whilst it
discerns what is right.

But the demagogues of Europe have made strange discoveries. A republic
is not, according to them, the rule of the majority, as has hitherto
been thought, but the rule of those who are strenuous partisans of the
majority. It is not the people who preponderates in this kind of
government, but those who are best versed in the good qualities of the
people. A happy distinction, which allows men to act in the name of
nations without consulting them, and to claim their gratitude whilst
their rights are spurned. A republican government, moreover, is the
only one which claims the right of doing whatever it chooses, and
despising what men have hitherto respected, from the highest moral
obligations to the vulgar rules of common-sense. It had been supposed,
until our time, that despotism was odious, under whatever form it
appeared. But it is a discovery of modern days that there are such
things as legitimate tyranny and holy injustice, provided they are
exercised in the name of the people.

The ideas which the Americans have adopted respecting the republican
form of government, render it easy for them to live under it, and
insure its duration. If, in their country, this form be often
practically bad, at least it is theoretically good; and, in the end,
the people always acts in conformity to it.

It was impossible at the foundation of the States, and it would still
be difficult, to establish a central administration in America. The
inhabitants are dispersed over too great a space, and separated by too
many natural obstacles, for one man to undertake to direct the details
of their existence. America is therefore pre-eminently the country of
provincial and municipal government. To this cause, which was plainly
felt by all the Europeans of the New World, the Anglo-Americans added
several others peculiar to themselves.

At the time of the settlement of the North American colonies, municipal
liberty had already penetrated into the laws as well as the manners of
the English; and the emigrants adopted it, not only as a necessary
thing, but as a benefit which they knew how to appreciate. We have
already seen the manner in which the colonies were founded: every
province, and almost every district, was peopled separately by men who
were strangers to each other, or who associated with very different
purposes. The English settlers in the United States, therefore, early
perceived that they were divided into a great number of small and
distinct communities which belonged to no common centre; and that it
was needful for each of these little communities to take care of its
own affairs, since there did not appear to be any central authority
which was naturally bound and easily enabled to provide for them. Thus,
the nature of the country, the manner in which the British colonies
were founded, the habits of the first emigrants, in short everything,
united to promote, in an extraordinary degree, municipal and provincial
liberties.

In the United States, therefore, the mass of the institutions of the
country is essentially republican; and in order permanently to destroy
the laws which form the basis of the republic, it would be necessary to
abolish all the laws at once. At the present day it would be even more
difficult for a party to succeed in founding a monarchy in the United
States than for a set of men to proclaim that France should
henceforward be a republic. Royalty would not find a system of
legislation prepared for it beforehand; and a monarchy would then
exist, really surrounded by republican institutions. The monarchical
principle would likewise have great difficulty in penetrating into the
manners of the Americans.

In the United States, the sovereignty of the people is not an isolated
doctrine bearing no relation to the prevailing manners and ideas of the
people: it may, on the contrary, be regarded as the last link of a
chain of opinions which binds the whole Anglo-American world. That
Providence has given to every human being the degree of reason
necessary to direct himself in the affairs which interest him
exclusively—such is the grand maxim upon which civil and political
society rests in the United States. The father of a family applies it
to his children; the master to his servants; the township to its
officers; the province to its townships; the State to its provinces;
the Union to the States; and when extended to the nation, it becomes
the doctrine of the sovereignty of the people.

Thus, in the United States, the fundamental principle of the republic
is the same which governs the greater part of human actions; republican
notions insinuate themselves into all the ideas, opinions, and habits
of the Americans, whilst they are formerly recognized by the
legislation: and before this legislation can be altered the whole
community must undergo very serious changes. In the United States, even
the religion of most of the citizens is republican, since it submits
the truths of the other world to private judgment: as in politics the
care of its temporal interests is abandoned to the good sense of the
people. Thus every man is allowed freely to take that road which he
thinks will lead him to heaven; just as the law permits every citizen
to have the right of choosing his government.

It is evident that nothing but a long series of events, all having the
same tendency, can substitute for this combination of laws, opinions,
and manners, a mass of opposite opinions, manners, and laws.

If republican principles are to perish in America, they can only yield
after a laborious social process, often interrupted, and as often
resumed; they will have many apparent revivals, and will not become
totally extinct until an entirely new people shall have succeeded to
that which now exists. Now, it must be admitted that there is no
symptom or presage of the approach of such a revolution. There is
nothing more striking to a person newly arrived in the United States,
than the kind of tumultuous agitation in which he finds political
society. The laws are incessantly changing, and at first sight it seems
impossible that a people so variable in its desires should avoid
adopting, within a short space of time, a completely new form of
government. Such apprehensions are, however, premature; the instability
which affects political institutions is of two kinds, which ought not
to be confounded: the first, which modifies secondary laws, is not
incompatible with a very settled state of society; the other shakes the
very foundations of the Constitution, and attacks the fundamental
principles of legislation; this species of instability is always
followed by troubles and revolutions, and the nation which suffers
under it is in a state of violent transition.

Experience shows that these two kinds of legislative instability have
no necessary connection; for they have been found united or separate,
according to times and circumstances. The first is common in the United
States, but not the second: the Americans often change their laws, but
the foundation of the Constitution is respected.

In our days the republican principle rules in America, as the
monarchical principle did in France under Louis XIV. The French of that
period were not only friends of the monarchy, but they thought it
impossible to put anything in its place; they received it as we receive
the rays of the sun and the return of the seasons. Amongst them the
royal power had neither advocates nor opponents. In like manner does
the republican government exist in America, without contention or
opposition; without proofs and arguments, by a tacit agreement, a sort
of consensus universalis. It is, however, my opinion that by changing
their administrative forms as often as they do, the inhabitants of the
United States compromise the future stability of their government.

It may be apprehended that men, perpetually thwarted in their designs
by the mutability of the legislation, will learn to look upon
republican institutions as an inconvenient form of society; the evil
resulting from the instability of the secondary enactments might then
raise a doubt as to the nature of the fundamental principles of the
Constitution, and indirectly bring about a revolution; but this epoch
is still very remote.

It may, however, be foreseen even now, that when the Americans lose
their republican institutions they will speedily arrive at a despotic
government, without a long interval of limited monarchy. Montesquieu
remarked, that nothing is more absolute than the authority of a prince
who immediately succeeds a republic, since the powers which had
fearlessly been intrusted to an elected magistrate are then transferred
to a hereditary sovereign. This is true in general, but it is more
peculiarly applicable to a democratic republic. In the United States,
the magistrates are not elected by a particular class of citizens, but
by the majority of the nation; they are the immediate representatives
of the passions of the multitude; and as they are wholly dependent upon
its pleasure, they excite neither hatred nor fear: hence, as I have
already shown, very little care has been taken to limit their
influence, and they are left in possession of a vast deal of arbitrary
power. This state of things has engendered habits which would outlive
itself; the American magistrate would retain his power, but he would
cease to be responsible for the exercise of it; and it is impossible to
say what bounds could then be set to tyranny.

Some of our European politicians expect to see an aristocracy arise in
America, and they already predict the exact period at which it will be
able to assume the reins of government. I have previously observed, and
I repeat my assertion, that the present tendency of American society
appears to me to become more and more democratic. Nevertheless, I do
not assert that the Americans will not, at some future time, restrict
the circle of political rights in their country, or confiscate those
rights to the advantage of a single individual; but I cannot imagine
that they will ever bestow the exclusive exercise of them upon a
privileged class of citizens, or, in other words, that they will ever
found an aristocracy.

An aristocratic body is composed of a certain number of citizens who,
without being very far removed from the mass of the people, are,
nevertheless, permanently stationed above it: a body which it is easy
to touch and difficult to strike; with which the people are in daily
contact, but with which they can never combine. Nothing can be imagined
more contrary to nature and to the secret propensities of the human
heart than a subjection of this kind; and men who are left to follow
their own bent will always prefer the arbitrary power of a king to the
regular administration of an aristocracy. Aristocratic institutions
cannot subsist without laying down the inequality of men as a
fundamental principle, as a part and parcel of the legislation,
affecting the condition of the human family as much as it affects that
of society; but these are things so repugnant to natural equity that
they can only be extorted from men by constraint.

I do not think a single people can be quoted, since human society began
to exist, which has, by its own free will and by its own exertions,
created an aristocracy within its own bosom. All the aristocracies of
the Middle Ages were founded by military conquest; the conqueror was
the noble, the vanquished became the serf. Inequality was then imposed
by force; and after it had been introduced into the manners of the
country it maintained its own authority, and was sanctioned by the
legislation. Communities have existed which were aristocratic from
their earliest origin, owing to circumstances anterior to that event,
and which became more democratic in each succeeding age. Such was the
destiny of the Romans, and of the barbarians after them. But a people,
having taken its rise in civilization and democracy, which should
gradually establish an inequality of conditions, until it arrived at
inviolable privileges and exclusive castes, would be a novelty in the
world; and nothing intimates that America is likely to furnish so
singular an example.

Reflection On The Causes Of The Commercial Prosperity Of The Of The
United States

The Americans destined by Nature to be a great maritime people—Extent
of their coasts—Depth of their ports—Size of their rivers—The
commercial superiority of the Anglo-Americans less attributable,
however, to physical circumstances than to moral and intellectual
causes—Reason of this opinion—Future destiny of the Anglo-Americans as
a commercial nation—The dissolution of the Union would not check the
maritime vigor of the States—Reason of this—Anglo-Americans will
naturally supply the wants of the inhabitants of South America—They
will become, like the English, the factors of a great portion of the
world.

The coast of the United States, from the Bay of Fundy to the Sabine
River in the Gulf of Mexico, is more than two thousand miles in extent.
These shores form an unbroken line, and they are all subject to the
same government. No nation in the world possesses vaster, deeper, or
more secure ports for shipping than the Americans.

The inhabitants of the United States constitute a great civilized
people, which fortune has placed in the midst of an uncultivated
country at a distance of three thousand miles from the central point of
civilization. America consequently stands in daily need of European
trade. The Americans will, no doubt, ultimately succeed in producing or
manufacturing at home most of the articles which they require; but the
two continents can never be independent of each other, so numerous are
the natural ties which exist between their wants, their ideas, their
habits, and their manners.

The Union produces peculiar commodities which are now become necessary
to us, but which cannot be cultivated, or can only be raised at an
enormous expense, upon the soil of Europe. The Americans only consume a
small portion of this produce, and they are willing to sell us the
rest. Europe is therefore the market of America, as America is the
market of Europe; and maritime commerce is no less necessary to enable
the inhabitants of the United States to transport their raw materials
to the ports of Europe, than it is to enable us to supply them with our
manufactured produce. The United States were therefore necessarily
reduced to the alternative of increasing the business of other maritime
nations to a great extent, if they had themselves declined to enter
into commerce, as the Spaniards of Mexico have hitherto done; or, in
the second place, of becoming one of the first trading powers of the
globe.

The Anglo-Americans have always displayed a very decided taste for the
sea. The Declaration of Independence broke the commercial restrictions
which united them to England, and gave a fresh and powerful stimulus to
their maritime genius. Ever since that time, the shipping of the Union
has increased in almost the same rapid proportion as the number of its
inhabitants. The Americans themselves now transport to their own shores
nine-tenths of the European produce which they consume. *g And they
also bring three-quarters of the exports of the New World to the
European consumer. *h The ships of the United States fill the docks of
Havre and of Liverpool; whilst the number of English and French vessels
which are to be seen at New York is comparatively small. *i

g
[ The total value of goods imported during the year which ended on
September 30, 1832, was $101,129,266. The value of the cargoes of
foreign vessels did not amount to $10,731,039, or about one-tenth of
the entire sum.]


h
[ The value of goods exported during the same year amounted to
$87,176,943; the value of goods exported by foreign vessels amounted to
$21,036,183, or about one quarter of the whole sum. (Williams’s
“Register,” 1833, p. 398.)]


i
[ The tonnage of the vessels which entered all the ports of the Union
in the years 1829, 1830, and 1831, amounted to 3,307,719 tons, of which
544,571 tons were foreign vessels; they stood, therefore, to the
American vessels in a ratio of about 16 to 100. (“National Calendar,”
1833, p. 304.) The tonnage of the English vessels which entered the
ports of London, Liverpool, and Hull, in the years 1820, 1826, and
1831, amounted to 443,800 tons. The foreign vessels which entered the
same ports during the same years amounted to 159,431 tons. The ratio
between them was, therefore, about 36 to 100. (“Companion to the
Almanac,” 1834, p. 169.) In the year 1832 the ratio between the foreign
and British ships which entered the ports of Great Britain was 29 to
100. [These statements relate to a condition of affairs which has
ceased to exist; the Civil War and the heavy taxation of the United
States entirely altered the trade and navigation of the country.]]


Thus, not only does the American merchant face the competition of his
own countrymen, but he even supports that of foreign nations in their
own ports with success. This is readily explained by the fact that the
vessels of the United States can cross the seas at a cheaper rate than
any other vessels in the world. As long as the mercantile shipping of
the United States preserves this superiority, it will not only retain
what it has acquired, but it will constantly increase in prosperity.




 Chapter XVIII: Future Condition Of Three Races—Part X


It is difficult to say for what reason the Americans can trade at a
lower rate than other nations; and one is at first led to attribute
this circumstance to the physical or natural advantages which are
within their reach; but this supposition is erroneous. The American
vessels cost almost as much to build as our own; *j they are not better
built, and they generally last for a shorter time. The pay of the
American sailor is more considerable than the pay on board European
ships; which is proved by the great number of Europeans who are to be
met with in the merchant vessels of the United States. But I am of
opinion that the true cause of their superiority must not be sought for
in physical advantages, but that it is wholly attributable to their
moral and intellectual qualities.

j
[ Materials are, generally speaking, less expensive in America than in
Europe, but the price of labor is much higher.]


The following comparison will illustrate my meaning. During the
campaigns of the Revolution the French introduced a new system of
tactics into the art of war, which perplexed the oldest generals, and
very nearly destroyed the most ancient monarchies in Europe. They
undertook (what had never before been attempted) to make shift without
a number of things which had always been held to be indispensable in
warfare; they required novel exertions on the part of their troops
which no civilized nations had ever thought of; they achieved great
actions in an incredibly short space of time; and they risked human
life without hesitation to obtain the object in view. The French had
less money and fewer men than their enemies; their resources were
infinitely inferior; nevertheless they were constantly victorious,
until their adversaries chose to imitate their example.

The Americans have introduced a similar system into their commercial
speculations; and they do for cheapness what the French did for
conquest. The European sailor navigates with prudence; he only sets
sail when the weather is favorable; if an unforseen accident befalls
him, he puts into port; at night he furls a portion of his canvas; and
when the whitening billows intimate the vicinity of land, he checks his
way, and takes an observation of the sun. But the American neglects
these precautions and braves these dangers. He weighs anchor in the
midst of tempestuous gales; by night and by day he spreads his sheets
to the wind; he repairs as he goes along such damage as his vessel may
have sustained from the storm; and when he at last approaches the term
of his voyage, he darts onward to the shore as if he already descried a
port. The Americans are often shipwrecked, but no trader crosses the
seas so rapidly. And as they perform the same distance in a shorter
time, they can perform it at a cheaper rate.

The European touches several times at different ports in the course of
a long voyage; he loses a good deal of precious time in making the
harbor, or in waiting for a favorable wind to leave it; and he pays
daily dues to be allowed to remain there. The American starts from
Boston to go to purchase tea in China; he arrives at Canton, stays
there a few days, and then returns. In less than two years he has
sailed as far as the entire circumference of the globe, and he has seen
land but once. It is true that during a voyage of eight or ten months
he has drunk brackish water and lived upon salt meat; that he has been
in a continual contest with the sea, with disease, and with a tedious
existence; but upon his return he can sell a pound of his tea for a
half-penny less than the English merchant, and his purpose is
accomplished.

I cannot better explain my meaning than by saying that the Americans
affect a sort of heroism in their manner of trading. But the European
merchant will always find it very difficult to imitate his American
competitor, who, in adopting the system which I have just described,
follows not only a calculation of his gain, but an impulse of his
nature.

The inhabitants of the United States are subject to all the wants and
all the desires which result from an advanced stage of civilization;
but as they are not surrounded by a community admirably adapted, like
that of Europe, to satisfy their wants, they are often obliged to
procure for themselves the various articles which education and habit
have rendered necessaries. In America it sometimes happens that the
same individual tills his field, builds his dwelling, contrives his
tools, makes his shoes, and weaves the coarse stuff of which his dress
is composed. This circumstance is prejudicial to the excellence of the
work; but it powerfully contributes to awaken the intelligence of the
workman. Nothing tends to materialize man, and to deprive his work of
the faintest trace of mind, more than extreme division of labor. In a
country like America, where men devoted to special occupations are
rare, a long apprenticeship cannot be required from anyone who embraces
a profession. The Americans, therefore, change their means of gaining a
livelihood very readily; and they suit their occupations to the
exigencies of the moment, in the manner most profitable to themselves.
Men are to be met with who have successively been barristers, farmers,
merchants, ministers of the gospel, and physicians. If the American be
less perfect in each craft than the European, at least there is
scarcely any trade with which he is utterly unacquainted. His capacity
is more general, and the circle of his intelligence is enlarged.

The inhabitants of the United States are never fettered by the axioms
of their profession; they escape from all the prejudices of their
present station; they are not more attached to one line of operation
than to another; they are not more prone to employ an old method than a
new one; they have no rooted habits, and they easily shake off the
influence which the habits of other nations might exercise upon their
minds from a conviction that their country is unlike any other, and
that its situation is without a precedent in the world. America is a
land of wonders, in which everything is in constant motion, and every
movement seems an improvement. The idea of novelty is there
indissolubly connected with the idea of amelioration. No natural
boundary seems to be set to the efforts of man; and what is not yet
done is only what he has not yet attempted to do.

This perpetual change which goes on in the United States, these
frequent vicissitudes of fortune, accompanied by such unforeseen
fluctuations in private and in public wealth, serve to keep the minds
of the citizens in a perpetual state of feverish agitation, which
admirably invigorates their exertions, and keeps them in a state of
excitement above the ordinary level of mankind. The whole life of an
American is passed like a game of chance, a revolutionary crisis, or a
battle. As the same causes are continually in operation throughout the
country, they ultimately impart an irresistible impulse to the national
character. The American, taken as a chance specimen of his countrymen,
must then be a man of singular warmth in his desires, enterprising,
fond of adventure, and, above all, of innovation. The same bent is
manifest in all that he does; he introduces it into his political laws,
his religious doctrines, his theories of social economy, and his
domestic occupations; he bears it with him in the depths of the
backwoods, as well as in the business of the city. It is this same
passion, applied to maritime commerce, which makes him the cheapest and
the quickest trader in the world.

As long as the sailors of the United States retain these inspiriting
advantages, and the practical superiority which they derive from them,
they will not only continue to supply the wants of the producers and
consumers of their own country, but they will tend more and more to
become, like the English, the factors of all other peoples. *k This
prediction has already begun to be realized; we perceive that the
American traders are introducing themselves as intermediate agents in
the commerce of several European nations; *l and America will offer a
still wider field to their enterprise.

k
[ It must not be supposed that English vessels are exclusively employed
in transporting foreign produce into England, or British produce to
foreign countries; at the present day the merchant shipping of England
may be regarded in the light of a vast system of public conveyances,
ready to serve all the producers of the world, and to open
communications between all peoples. The maritime genius of the
Americans prompts them to enter into competition with the English.]


l
[ Part of the commerce of the Mediterranean is already carried on by
American vessels.]


The great colonies which were founded in South America by the Spaniards
and the Portuguese have since become empires. Civil war and oppression
now lay waste those extensive regions. Population does not increase,
and the thinly scattered inhabitants are too much absorbed in the cares
of self-defense even to attempt any amelioration of their condition.
Such, however, will not always be the case. Europe has succeeded by her
own efforts in piercing the gloom of the Middle Ages; South America has
the same Christian laws and Christian manners as we have; she contains
all the germs of civilization which have grown amidst the nations of
Europe or their offsets, added to the advantages to be derived from our
example: why then should she always remain uncivilized? It is clear
that the question is simply one of time; at some future period, which
may be more or less remote, the inhabitants of South America will
constitute flourishing and enlightened nations.

But when the Spaniards and Portuguese of South America begin to feel
the wants common to all civilized nations, they will still be unable to
satisfy those wants for themselves; as the youngest children of
civilization, they must perforce admit the superiority of their elder
brethren. They will be agriculturists long before they succeed in
manufactures or commerce, and they will require the mediation of
strangers to exchange their produce beyond seas for those articles for
which a demand will begin to be felt.

It is unquestionable that the Americans of the North will one day
supply the wants of the Americans of the South. Nature has placed them
in contiguity, and has furnished the former with every means of knowing
and appreciating those demands, of establishing a permanent connection
with those States, and of gradually filling their markets. The
merchants of the United States could only forfeit these natural
advantages if he were very inferior to the merchant of Europe; to whom
he is, on the contrary, superior in several respects. The Americans of
the United States already exercise a very considerable moral influence
upon all the peoples of the New World. They are the source of
intelligence, and all the nations which inhabit the same continent are
already accustomed to consider them as the most enlightened, the most
powerful, and the most wealthy members of the great American family.
All eyes are therefore turned towards the Union; and the States of
which that body is composed are the models which the other communities
try to imitate to the best of their power; it is from the United States
that they borrow their political principles and their laws.

The Americans of the United States stand in precisely the same position
with regard to the peoples of South America as their fathers, the
English, occupy with regard to the Italians, the Spaniards, the
Portuguese, and all those nations of Europe which receive their
articles of daily consumption from England, because they are less
advanced in civilization and trade. England is at this time the natural
emporium of almost all the nations which are within its reach; the
American Union will perform the same part in the other hemisphere; and
every community which is founded, or which prospers in the New World,
is founded and prospers to the advantage of the Anglo-Americans.

If the Union were to be dissolved, the commerce of the States which now
compose it would undoubtedly be checked for a time; but this
consequence would be less perceptible than is generally supposed. It is
evident that, whatever may happen, the commercial States will remain
united. They are all contiguous to each other; they have identically
the same opinions, interests, and manners; and they are alone competent
to form a very great maritime power. Even if the South of the Union
were to become independent of the North, it would still require the
services of those States. I have already observed that the South is not
a commercial country, and nothing intimates that it is likely to become
so. The Americans of the South of the United States will therefore be
obliged, for a long time to come, to have recourse to strangers to
export their produce, and to supply them with the commodities which are
requisite to satisfy their wants. But the Northern States are
undoubtedly able to act as their intermediate agents cheaper than any
other merchants. They will therefore retain that employment, for
cheapness is the sovereign law of commerce. National claims and
national prejudices cannot resist the influence of cheapness. Nothing
can be more virulent than the hatred which exists between the Americans
of the United States and the English. But notwithstanding these
inimical feelings, the Americans derive the greater part of their
manufactured commodities from England, because England supplies them at
a cheaper rate than any other nation. Thus the increasing prosperity of
America turns, notwithstanding the grudges of the Americans, to the
advantage of British manufactures.

Reason shows and experience proves that no commercial prosperity can be
durable if it cannot be united, in case of need, to naval force. This
truth is as well understood in the United States as it can be anywhere
else: the Americans are already able to make their flag respected; in a
few years they will be able to make it feared. I am convinced that the
dismemberment of the Union would not have the effect of diminishing the
naval power of the Americans, but that it would powerfully contribute
to increase it. At the present time the commercial States are connected
with others which have not the same interests, and which frequently
yield an unwilling consent to the increase of a maritime power by which
they are only indirectly benefited. If, on the contrary, the commercial
States of the Union formed one independent nation, commerce would
become the foremost of their national interests; they would
consequently be willing to make very great sacrifices to protect their
shipping, and nothing would prevent them from pursuing their designs
upon this point.

Nations, as well as men, almost always betray the most prominent
features of their future destiny in their earliest years. When I
contemplate the ardor with which the Anglo-Americans prosecute
commercial enterprise, the advantages which befriend them, and the
success of their undertakings, I cannot refrain from believing that
they will one day become the first maritime power of the globe. They
are born to rule the seas, as the Romans were to conquer the world.




 Conclusion


I have now nearly reached the close of my inquiry; hitherto, in
speaking of the future destiny of the United States, I have endeavored
to divide my subject into distinct portions, in order to study each of
them with more attention. My present object is to embrace the whole
from one single point; the remarks I shall make will be less detailed,
but they will be more sure. I shall perceive each object less
distinctly, but I shall descry the principal facts with more certainty.
A traveller who has just left the walls of an immense city, climbs the
neighboring hill; as he goes father off he loses sight of the men whom
he has so recently quitted; their dwellings are confused in a dense
mass; he can no longer distinguish the public squares, and he can
scarcely trace out the great thoroughfares; but his eye has less
difficulty in following the boundaries of the city, and for the first
time he sees the shape of the vast whole. Such is the future destiny of
the British race in North America to my eye; the details of the
stupendous picture are overhung with shade, but I conceive a clear idea
of the entire subject.

The territory now occupied or possessed by the United States of America
forms about one-twentieth part of the habitable earth. But extensive as
these confines are, it must not be supposed that the Anglo-American
race will always remain within them; indeed, it has already far
overstepped them.

There was once a time at which we also might have created a great
French nation in the American wilds, to counterbalance the influence of
the English upon the destinies of the New World. France formerly
possessed a territory in North America, scarcely less extensive than
the whole of Europe. The three greatest rivers of that continent then
flowed within her dominions. The Indian tribes which dwelt between the
mouth of the St. Lawrence and the delta of the Mississippi were
unaccustomed to any other tongue but ours; and all the European
settlements scattered over that immense region recalled the traditions
of our country. Louisbourg, Montmorency, Duquesne, St. Louis,
Vincennes, New Orleans (for such were the names they bore) are words
dear to France and familiar to our ears.

But a concourse of circumstances, which it would be tedious to
enumerate, *m have deprived us of this magnificent inheritance.
Wherever the French settlers were numerically weak and partially
established, they have disappeared: those who remain are collected on a
small extent of country, and are now subject to other laws. The 400,000
French inhabitants of Lower Canada constitute, at the present time, the
remnant of an old nation lost in the midst of a new people. A foreign
population is increasing around them unceasingly and on all sides,
which already penetrates amongst the ancient masters of the country,
predominates in their cities and corrupts their language. This
population is identical with that of the United States; it is therefore
with truth that I asserted that the British race is not confined within
the frontiers of the Union, since it already extends to the northeast.

m
[ The foremost of these circumstances is, that nations which are
accustomed to free institutions and municipal government are better
able than any others to found prosperous colonies. The habit of
thinking and governing for oneself is indispensable in a new country,
where success necessarily depends, in a great measure, upon the
individual exertions of the settlers.]


To the northwest nothing is to be met with but a few insignificant
Russian settlements; but to the southwest, Mexico presents a barrier to
the Anglo-Americans. Thus, the Spaniards and the Anglo-Americans are,
properly speaking, the only two races which divide the possession of
the New World. The limits of separation between them have been settled
by a treaty; but although the conditions of that treaty are exceedingly
favorable to the Anglo-Americans, I do not doubt that they will shortly
infringe this arrangement. Vast provinces, extending beyond the
frontiers of the Union towards Mexico, are still destitute of
inhabitants. The natives of the United States will forestall the
rightful occupants of these solitary regions. They will take possession
of the soil, and establish social institutions, so that when the legal
owner arrives at length, he will find the wilderness under cultivation,
and strangers quietly settled in the midst of his inheritance. *n

n
[ [This was speedily accomplished, and ere long both Texas and
California formed part of the United States. The Russian settlements
were acquired by purchase.]]


The lands of the New World belong to the first occupant, and they are
the natural reward of the swiftest pioneer. Even the countries which
are already peopled will have some difficulty in securing themselves
from this invasion. I have already alluded to what is taking place in
the province of Texas. The inhabitants of the United States are
perpetually migrating to Texas, where they purchase land; and although
they conform to the laws of the country, they are gradually founding
the empire of their own language and their own manners. The province of
Texas is still part of the Mexican dominions, but it will soon contain
no Mexicans; the same thing has occurred whenever the Anglo-Americans
have come into contact with populations of a different origin.

It cannot be denied that the British race has acquired an amazing
preponderance over all the other European races in the New World; and
that it is very superior to them in civilization, in industry, and in
power. As long as it is only surrounded by desert or thinly peopled
countries, as long as it encounters no dense populations upon its
route, through which it cannot work its way, it will assuredly continue
to spread. The lines marked out by treaties will not stop it; but it
will everywhere transgress these imaginary barriers.

The geographical position of the British race in the New World is
peculiarly favorable to its rapid increase. Above its northern
frontiers the icy regions of the Pole extend; and a few degrees below
its southern confines lies the burning climate of the Equator. The
Anglo-Americans are, therefore, placed in the most temperate and
habitable zone of the continent.

It is generally supposed that the prodigious increase of population in
the United States is posterior to their Declaration of Independence.
But this is an error: the population increased as rapidly under the
colonial system as it does at the present day; that is to say, it
doubled in about twenty-two years. But this proportion which is now
applied to millions, was then applied to thousands of inhabitants; and
the same fact which was scarcely noticeable a century ago, is now
evident to every observer.

The British subjects in Canada, who are dependent on a king, augment
and spread almost as rapidly as the British settlers of the United
States, who live under a republican government. During the war of
independence, which lasted eight years, the population continued to
increase without intermission in the same ratio. Although powerful
Indian nations allied with the English existed at that time upon the
western frontiers, the emigration westward was never checked. Whilst
the enemy laid waste the shores of the Atlantic, Kentucky, the western
parts of Pennsylvania, and the States of Vermont and of Maine were
filling with inhabitants. Nor did the unsettled state of the
Constitution, which succeeded the war, prevent the increase of the
population, or stop its progress across the wilds. Thus, the difference
of laws, the various conditions of peace and war, of order and of
anarchy, have exercised no perceptible influence upon the gradual
development of the Anglo-Americans. This may be readily understood; for
the fact is, that no causes are sufficiently general to exercise a
simultaneous influence over the whole of so extensive a territory. One
portion of the country always offers a sure retreat from the calamities
which afflict another part; and however great may be the evil, the
remedy which is at hand is greater still.

It must not, then, be imagined that the impulse of the British race in
the New World can be arrested. The dismemberment of the Union, and the
hostilities which might ensure, the abolition of republican
institutions, and the tyrannical government which might succeed it, may
retard this impulse, but they cannot prevent it from ultimately
fulfilling the destinies to which that race is reserved. No power upon
earth can close upon the emigrants that fertile wilderness which offers
resources to all industry, and a refuge from all want. Future events,
of whatever nature they may be, will not deprive the Americans of their
climate or of their inland seas, of their great rivers or of their
exuberant soil. Nor will bad laws, revolutions, and anarchy be able to
obliterate that love of prosperity and that spirit of enterprise which
seem to be the distinctive characteristics of their race, or to
extinguish that knowledge which guides them on their way.

Thus, in the midst of the uncertain future, one event at least is sure.
At a period which may be said to be near (for we are speaking of the
life of a nation), the Anglo-Americans will alone cover the immense
space contained between the polar regions and the tropics, extending
from the coasts of the Atlantic to the shores of the Pacific Ocean. The
territory which will probably be occupied by the Anglo-Americans at
some future time, may be computed to equal three-quarters of Europe in
extent. *o The climate of the Union is upon the whole preferable to
that of Europe, and its natural advantages are not less great; it is
therefore evident that its population will at some future time be
proportionate to our own. Europe, divided as it is between so many
different nations, and torn as it has been by incessant wars and the
barbarous manners of the Middle Ages, has notwithstanding attained a
population of 410 inhabitants to the square league. *p What cause can
prevent the United States from having as numerous a population in time?

o
[ The United States already extend over a territory equal to one-half
of Europe. The area of Europe is 500,000 square leagues, and its
population 205,000,000 of inhabitants. (“Malte Brun,” liv. 114. vol.
vi. p. 4.)


[This computation is given in French leagues, which were in use when
the author wrote. Twenty years later, in 1850, the superficial area of
the United States had been extended to 3,306,865 square miles of
territory, which is about the area of Europe.]]

p
[ See “Malte Brun,” liv. 116, vol. vi. p. 92.]


Many ages must elapse before the divers offsets of the British race in
America cease to present the same homogeneous characteristics: and the
time cannot be foreseen at which a permanent inequality of conditions
will be established in the New World. Whatever differences may arise,
from peace or from war, from freedom or oppression, from prosperity or
want, between the destinies of the different descendants of the great
Anglo-American family, they will at least preserve an analogous social
condition, and they will hold in common the customs and the opinions to
which that social condition has given birth.

In the Middle Ages, the tie of religion was sufficiently powerful to
imbue all the different populations of Europe with the same
civilization. The British of the New World have a thousand other
reciprocal ties; and they live at a time when the tendency to equality
is general amongst mankind. The Middle Ages were a period when
everything was broken up; when each people, each province, each city,
and each family, had a strong tendency to maintain its distinct
individuality. At the present time an opposite tendency seems to
prevail, and the nations seem to be advancing to unity. Our means of
intellectual intercourse unite the most remote parts of the earth; and
it is impossible for men to remain strangers to each other, or to be
ignorant of the events which are taking place in any corner of the
globe. The consequence is that there is less difference, at the present
day, between the Europeans and their descendants in the New World, than
there was between certain towns in the thirteenth century which were
only separated by a river. If this tendency to assimilation brings
foreign nations closer to each other, it must a fortiori prevent the
descendants of the same people from becoming aliens to each other.

The time will therefore come when one hundred and fifty millions of men
will be living in North America, *q equal in condition, the progeny of
one race, owing their origin to the same cause, and preserving the same
civilization, the same language, the same religion, the same habits,
the same manners, and imbued with the same opinions, propagated under
the same forms. The rest is uncertain, but this is certain; and it is a
fact new to the world—a fact fraught with such portentous consequences
as to baffle the efforts even of the imagination.

q
[ This would be a population proportionate to that of Europe, taken at
a mean rate of 410 inhabitants to the square league.]


There are, at the present time, two great nations in the world which
seem to tend towards the same end, although they started from different
points: I allude to the Russians and the Americans. Both of them have
grown up unnoticed; and whilst the attention of mankind was directed
elsewhere, they have suddenly assumed a most prominent place amongst
the nations; and the world learned their existence and their greatness
at almost the same time.

All other nations seem to have nearly reached their natural limits, and
only to be charged with the maintenance of their power; but these are
still in the act of growth; *r all the others are stopped, or continue
to advance with extreme difficulty; these are proceeding with ease and
with celerity along a path to which the human eye can assign no term.
The American struggles against the natural obstacles which oppose him;
the adversaries of the Russian are men; the former combats the
wilderness and savage life; the latter, civilization with all its
weapons and its arts: the conquests of the one are therefore gained by
the ploughshare; those of the other by the sword. The Anglo-American
relies upon personal interest to accomplish his ends, and gives free
scope to the unguided exertions and common-sense of the citizens; the
Russian centres all the authority of society in a single arm: the
principal instrument of the former is freedom; of the latter servitude.
Their starting-point is different, and their courses are not the same;
yet each of them seems to be marked out by the will of Heaven to sway
the destinies of half the globe.

r
[ Russia is the country in the Old World in which population increases
most rapidly in proportion.]




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEMOCRACY IN AMERICA — VOLUME 1 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Democracy in America — Volume 2
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Democracy in America — Volume 2

Author: Alexis de Tocqueville

Translator: Henry Reeve

Release date: January 21, 2006 [eBook #816]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by David Reed and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEMOCRACY IN AMERICA — VOLUME 2 ***




Produced by David Reed and David Widger





DEMOCRACY IN AMERICA

By Alexis De Tocqueville


Translated by Henry Reeve





Book Two: Influence Of Democracy On Progress Of Opinion In
the United States.





De Tocqueville's Preface To The Second Part

The Americans live in a democratic state of society, which has naturally
suggested to them certain laws and a certain political character. This
same state of society has, moreover, engendered amongst them a
multitude of feelings and opinions which were unknown amongst the elder
aristocratic communities of Europe: it has destroyed or modified all the
relations which before existed, and established others of a novel kind.
The--aspect of civil society has been no less affected by these changes
than that of the political world. The former subject has been treated
of in the work on the Democracy of America, which I published five years
ago; to examine the latter is the object of the present book; but these
two parts complete each other, and form one and the same work.

I must at once warn the reader against an error which would be extremely
prejudicial to me. When he finds that I attribute so many different
consequences to the principle of equality, he may thence infer that I
consider that principle to be the sole cause of all that takes place in
the present age: but this would be to impute to me a very narrow view. A
multitude of opinions, feelings, and propensities are now in existence,
which owe their origin to circumstances unconnected with or even
contrary to the principle of equality. Thus if I were to select the
United States as an example, I could easily prove that the nature of the
country, the origin of its inhabitants, the religion of its founders,
their acquired knowledge, and their former habits, have exercised, and
still exercise, independently of democracy, a vast influence upon the
thoughts and feelings of that people. Different causes, but no less
distinct from the circumstance of the equality of conditions, might be
traced in Europe, and would explain a great portion of the occurrences
taking place amongst us.

I acknowledge the existence of all these different causes, and their
power, but my subject does not lead me to treat of them. I have not
undertaken to unfold the reason of all our inclinations and all our
notions: my only object is to show in what respects the principle of
equality has modified both the former and the latter.

Some readers may perhaps be astonished that--firmly persuaded as I
am that the democratic revolution which we are witnessing is an
irresistible fact against which it would be neither desirable nor wise
to struggle--I should often have had occasion in this book to address
language of such severity to those democratic communities which this
revolution has brought into being. My answer is simply, that it is
because I am not an adversary of democracy, that I have sought to speak
of democracy in all sincerity.

Men will not accept truth at the hands of their enemies, and truth is
seldom offered to them by their friends: for this reason I have spoken
it. I was persuaded that many would take upon themselves to announce the
new blessings which the principle of equality promises to mankind, but
that few would dare to point out from afar the dangers with which
it threatens them. To those perils therefore I have turned my chief
attention, and believing that I had discovered them clearly, I have not
had the cowardice to leave them untold.

I trust that my readers will find in this Second Part that impartiality
which seems to have been remarked in the former work. Placed as I am in
the midst of the conflicting opinions between which we are divided,
I have endeavored to suppress within me for a time the favorable
sympathies or the adverse emotions with which each of them inspires
me. If those who read this book can find a single sentence intended to
flatter any of the great parties which have agitated my country, or any
of those petty factions which now harass and weaken it, let such readers
raise their voices to accuse me.

The subject I have sought to embrace is immense, for it includes the
greater part of the feelings and opinions to which the new state of
society has given birth. Such a subject is doubtless above my strength,
and in treating it I have not succeeded in satisfying myself. But, if
I have not been able to reach the goal which I had in view, my readers
will at least do me the justice to acknowledge that I have conceived and
followed up my undertaking in a spirit not unworthy of success.

A. De T.

March, 1840




Section I: Influence of Democracy on the Action of Intellect in The
United States.




Chapter I: Philosophical Method Among the Americans

I think that in no country in the civilized world is less attention
paid to philosophy than in the United States. The Americans have no
philosophical school of their own; and they care but little for all
the schools into which Europe is divided, the very names of which are
scarcely known to them. Nevertheless it is easy to perceive that almost
all the inhabitants of the United States conduct their understanding in
the same manner, and govern it by the same rules; that is to say,
that without ever having taken the trouble to define the rules of a
philosophical method, they are in possession of one, common to the whole
people. To evade the bondage of system and habit, of family maxims,
class opinions, and, in some degree, of national prejudices; to accept
tradition only as a means of information, and existing facts only as a
lesson used in doing otherwise, and doing better; to seek the reason
of things for one's self, and in one's self alone; to tend to results
without being bound to means, and to aim at the substance through the
form;--such are the principal characteristics of what I shall call the
philosophical method of the Americans. But if I go further, and if I
seek amongst these characteristics that which predominates over and
includes almost all the rest, I discover that in most of the operations
of the mind, each American appeals to the individual exercise of his own
understanding alone. America is therefore one of the countries in the
world where philosophy is least studied, and where the precepts of
Descartes are best applied. Nor is this surprising. The Americans do not
read the works of Descartes, because their social condition deters them
from speculative studies; but they follow his maxims because this very
social condition naturally disposes their understanding to adopt them.
In the midst of the continual movement which agitates a democratic
community, the tie which unites one generation to another is relaxed
or broken; every man readily loses the trace of the ideas of his
forefathers or takes no care about them. Nor can men living in this
state of society derive their belief from the opinions of the class to
which they belong, for, so to speak, there are no longer any classes, or
those which still exist are composed of such mobile elements, that
their body can never exercise a real control over its members. As to the
influence which the intelligence of one man has on that of another, it
must necessarily be very limited in a country where the citizens, placed
on the footing of a general similitude, are all closely seen by each
other; and where, as no signs of incontestable greatness or superiority
are perceived in any one of them, they are constantly brought back to
their own reason as the most obvious and proximate source of truth. It
is not only confidence in this or that man which is then destroyed, but
the taste for trusting the ipse dixit of any man whatsoever. Everyone
shuts himself up in his own breast, and affects from that point to judge
the world.

The practice which obtains amongst the Americans of fixing the standard
of their judgment in themselves alone, leads them to other habits of
mind. As they perceive that they succeed in resolving without assistance
all the little difficulties which their practical life presents, they
readily conclude that everything in the world may be explained, and that
nothing in it transcends the limits of the understanding. Thus they fall
to denying what they cannot comprehend; which leaves them but little
faith for whatever is extraordinary, and an almost insurmountable
distaste for whatever is supernatural. As it is on their own testimony
that they are accustomed to rely, they like to discern the object which
engages their attention with extreme clearness; they therefore strip off
as much as possible all that covers it, they rid themselves of whatever
separates them from it, they remove whatever conceals it from sight,
in order to view it more closely and in the broad light of day. This
disposition of the mind soon leads them to contemn forms, which they
regard as useless and inconvenient veils placed between them and the
truth.

The Americans then have not required to extract their philosophical
method from books; they have found it in themselves. The same thing may
be remarked in what has taken place in Europe. This same method has
only been established and made popular in Europe in proportion as the
condition of society has become more equal, and men have grown more like
each other. Let us consider for a moment the connection of the periods
in which this change may be traced. In the sixteenth century the
Reformers subjected some of the dogmas of the ancient faith to the
scrutiny of private judgment; but they still withheld from it the
judgment of all the rest. In the seventeenth century, Bacon in the
natural sciences, and Descartes in the study of philosophy in the strict
sense of the term, abolished recognized formulas, destroyed the
empire of tradition, and overthrew the authority of the schools. The
philosophers of the eighteenth century, generalizing at length the same
principle, undertook to submit to the private judgment of each man all
the objects of his belief.

Who does not perceive that Luther, Descartes, and Voltaire employed
the same method, and that they differed only in the greater or less use
which they professed should be made of it? Why did the Reformers confine
themselves so closely within the circle of religious ideas? Why did
Descartes, choosing only to apply his method to certain matters, though
he had made it fit to be applied to all, declare that men might judge
for themselves in matters philosophical but not in matters political?
How happened it that in the eighteenth century those general
applications were all at once drawn from this same method, which
Descartes and his predecessors had either not perceived or had rejected?
To what, lastly, is the fact to be attributed, that at this period
the method we are speaking of suddenly emerged from the schools, to
penetrate into society and become the common standard of intelligence;
and that, after it had become popular among the French, it has been
ostensibly adopted or secretly followed by all the nations of Europe?

The philosophical method here designated may have been engendered in
the sixteenth century--it may have been more accurately defined and more
extensively applied in the seventeenth; but neither in the one nor in
the other could it be commonly adopted. Political laws, the condition
of society, and the habits of mind which are derived from these causes,
were as yet opposed to it. It was discovered at a time when men were
beginning to equalize and assimilate their conditions. It could only be
generally followed in ages when those conditions had at length become
nearly equal, and men nearly alike.

The philosophical method of the eighteenth century is then not only
French, but it is democratic; and this explains why it was so readily
admitted throughout Europe, where it has contributed so powerfully to
change the face of society. It is not because the French have changed
their former opinions, and altered their former manners, that they have
convulsed the world; but because they were the first to generalize and
bring to light a philosophical method, by the assistance of which it
became easy to attack all that was old, and to open a path to all that
was new.

If it be asked why, at the present day, this same method is more
rigorously followed and more frequently applied by the French than by
the Americans, although the principle of equality be no less complete,
and of more ancient date, amongst the latter people, the fact may be
attributed to two circumstances, which it is essential to have clearly
understood in the first instance. It must never be forgotten that
religion gave birth to Anglo-American society. In the United States
religion is therefore commingled with all the habits of the nation and
all the feelings of patriotism; whence it derives a peculiar force.
To this powerful reason another of no less intensity may be added: in
American religion has, as it were, laid down its own limits. Religious
institutions have remained wholly distinct from political institutions,
so that former laws have been easily changed whilst former belief has
remained unshaken. Christianity has therefore retained a strong hold on
the public mind in America; and, I would more particularly remark, that
its sway is not only that of a philosophical doctrine which has been
adopted upon inquiry, but of a religion which is believed without
discussion. In the United States Christian sects are infinitely
diversified and perpetually modified; but Christianity itself is a fact
so irresistibly established, that no one undertakes either to attack or
to defend it. The Americans, having admitted the principal doctrines of
the Christian religion without inquiry, are obliged to accept in like
manner a great number of moral truths originating in it and connected
with it. Hence the activity of individual analysis is restrained within
narrow limits, and many of the most important of human opinions are
removed from the range of its influence.

The second circumstance to which I have alluded is the following: the
social condition and the constitution of the Americans are democratic,
but they have not had a democratic revolution. They arrived upon the
soil they occupy in nearly the condition in which we see them at the
present day; and this is of very considerable importance.

There are no revolutions which do not shake existing belief, enervate
authority, and throw doubts over commonly received ideas. The effect of
all revolutions is therefore, more or less, to surrender men to their
own guidance, and to open to the mind of every man a void and almost
unlimited range of speculation. When equality of conditions succeeds
a protracted conflict between the different classes of which the elder
society was composed, envy, hatred, and uncharitableness, pride, and
exaggerated self-confidence are apt to seize upon the human heart,
and plant their sway there for a time. This, independently of equality
itself, tends powerfully to divide men--to lead them to mistrust the
judgment of others, and to seek the light of truth nowhere but in their
own understandings. Everyone then attempts to be his own sufficient
guide, and makes it his boast to form his own opinions on all subjects.
Men are no longer bound together by ideas, but by interests; and it
would seem as if human opinions were reduced to a sort of intellectual
dust, scattered on every side, unable to collect, unable to cohere.

Thus, that independence of mind which equality supposes to exist, is
never so great, nor ever appears so excessive, as at the time when
equality is beginning to establish itself, and in the course of that
painful labor by which it is established. That sort of intellectual
freedom which equality may give ought, therefore, to be very carefully
distinguished from the anarchy which revolution brings. Each of these
two things must be severally considered, in order not to conceive
exaggerated hopes or fears of the future.

I believe that the men who will live under the new forms of society will
make frequent use of their private judgment; but I am far from thinking
that they will often abuse it. This is attributable to a cause of more
general application to all democratic countries, and which, in the
long run, must needs restrain in them the independence of individual
speculation within fixed, and sometimes narrow, limits. I shall proceed
to point out this cause in the next chapter.




Chapter II: Of The Principal Source Of Belief Among Democratic Nations

At different periods dogmatical belief is more or less abundant. It
arises in different ways, and it may change its object or its form; but
under no circumstances will dogmatical belief cease to exist, or, in
other words, men will never cease to entertain some implicit opinions
without trying them by actual discussion. If everyone undertook to form
his own opinions and to seek for truth by isolated paths struck out by
himself alone, it is not to be supposed that any considerable number of
men would ever unite in any common belief. But obviously without such
common belief no society can prosper--say rather no society can subsist;
for without ideas held in common, there is no common action, and without
common action, there may still be men, but there is no social body. In
order that society should exist, and, a fortiori, that a society should
prosper, it is required that all the minds of the citizens should be
rallied and held together by certain predominant ideas; and this cannot
be the case, unless each of them sometimes draws his opinions from the
common source, and consents to accept certain matters of belief at the
hands of the community.

If I now consider man in his isolated capacity, I find that dogmatical
belief is not less indispensable to him in order to live alone, than it
is to enable him to co-operate with his fellow-creatures. If man were
forced to demonstrate to himself all the truths of which he makes
daily use, his task would never end. He would exhaust his strength
in preparatory exercises, without advancing beyond them. As, from the
shortness of his life, he has not the time, nor, from the limits of his
intelligence, the capacity, to accomplish this, he is reduced to take
upon trust a number of facts and opinions which he has not had either
the time or the power to verify himself, but which men of greater
ability have sought out, or which the world adopts. On this groundwork
he raises for himself the structure of his own thoughts; nor is he led
to proceed in this manner by choice so much as he is constrained by the
inflexible law of his condition. There is no philosopher of such great
parts in the world, but that he believes a million of things on the
faith of other people, and supposes a great many more truths than he
demonstrates. This is not only necessary but desirable. A man who should
undertake to inquire into everything for himself, could devote to each
thing but little time and attention. His task would keep his mind in
perpetual unrest, which would prevent him from penetrating to the depth
of any truth, or of grappling his mind indissolubly to any conviction.
His intellect would be at once independent and powerless. He must
therefore make his choice from amongst the various objects of human
belief, and he must adopt many opinions without discussion, in order
to search the better into that smaller number which he sets apart for
investigation. It is true that whoever receives an opinion on the word
of another, does so far enslave his mind; but it is a salutary servitude
which allows him to make a good use of freedom.

A principle of authority must then always occur, under all
circumstances, in some part or other of the moral and intellectual
world. Its place is variable, but a place it necessarily has. The
independence of individual minds may be greater, or it may be less:
unbounded it cannot be. Thus the question is, not to know whether any
intellectual authority exists in the ages of democracy, but simply where
it resides and by what standard it is to be measured.

I have shown in the preceding chapter how the equality of conditions
leads men to entertain a sort of instinctive incredulity of the
supernatural, and a very lofty and often exaggerated opinion of the
human understanding. The men who live at a period of social equality are
not therefore easily led to place that intellectual authority to which
they bow either beyond or above humanity. They commonly seek for the
sources of truth in themselves, or in those who are like themselves.
This would be enough to prove that at such periods no new religion could
be established, and that all schemes for such a purpose would be not
only impious but absurd and irrational. It may be foreseen that a
democratic people will not easily give credence to divine missions; that
they will turn modern prophets to a ready jest; and they that will seek
to discover the chief arbiter of their belief within, and not beyond,
the limits of their kind.

When the ranks of society are unequal, and men unlike each other in
condition, there are some individuals invested with all the power of
superior intelligence, learning, and enlightenment, whilst the multitude
is sunk in ignorance and prejudice. Men living at these aristocratic
periods are therefore naturally induced to shape their opinions by the
superior standard of a person or a class of persons, whilst they are
averse to recognize the infallibility of the mass of the people.

The contrary takes place in ages of equality. The nearer the citizens
are drawn to the common level of an equal and similar condition, the
less prone does each man become to place implicit faith in a certain man
or a certain class of men. But his readiness to believe the multitude
increases, and opinion is more than ever mistress of the world. Not only
is common opinion the only guide which private judgment retains amongst
a democratic people, but amongst such a people it possesses a power
infinitely beyond what it has elsewhere. At periods of equality men have
no faith in one another, by reason of their common resemblance; but this
very resemblance gives them almost unbounded confidence in the judgment
of the public; for it would not seem probable, as they are all endowed
with equal means of judging, but that the greater truth should go with
the greater number.

When the inhabitant of a democratic country compares himself
individually with all those about him, he feels with pride that he is
the equal of any one of them; but when he comes to survey the totality
of his fellows, and to place himself in contrast to so huge a body,
he is instantly overwhelmed by the sense of his own insignificance and
weakness. The same equality which renders him independent of each of his
fellow-citizens taken severally, exposes him alone and unprotected to
the influence of the greater number. The public has therefore among a
democratic people a singular power, of which aristocratic nations could
never so much as conceive an idea; for it does not persuade to certain
opinions, but it enforces them, and infuses them into the faculties by a
sort of enormous pressure of the minds of all upon the reason of each.

In the United States the majority undertakes to supply a multitude of
ready-made opinions for the use of individuals, who are thus relieved
from the necessity of forming opinions of their own. Everybody there
adopts great numbers of theories, on philosophy, morals, and politics,
without inquiry, upon public trust; and if we look to it very narrowly,
it will be perceived that religion herself holds her sway there, much
less as a doctrine of revelation than as a commonly received opinion.
The fact that the political laws of the Americans are such that the
majority rules the community with sovereign sway, materially increases
the power which that majority naturally exercises over the mind. For
nothing is more customary in man than to recognize superior wisdom in
the person of his oppressor. This political omnipotence of the majority
in the United States doubtless augments the influence which public
opinion would obtain without it over the mind of each member of the
community; but the foundations of that influence do not rest upon it.
They must be sought for in the principle of equality itself, not in the
more or less popular institutions which men living under that condition
may give themselves. The intellectual dominion of the greater number
would probably be less absolute amongst a democratic people governed
by a king than in the sphere of a pure democracy, but it will always be
extremely absolute; and by whatever political laws men are governed in
the ages of equality, it may be foreseen that faith in public
opinion will become a species of religion there, and the majority its
ministering prophet.

Thus intellectual authority will be different, but it will not be
diminished; and far from thinking that it will disappear, I augur that
it may readily acquire too much preponderance, and confine the action
of private judgment within narrower limits than are suited either to
the greatness or the happiness of the human race. In the principle of
equality I very clearly discern two tendencies; the one leading the mind
of every man to untried thoughts, the other inclined to prohibit him
from thinking at all. And I perceive how, under the dominion of certain
laws, democracy would extinguish that liberty of the mind to which a
democratic social condition is favorable; so that, after having broken
all the bondage once imposed on it by ranks or by men, the human mind
would be closely fettered to the general will of the greatest number.

If the absolute power of the majority were to be substituted by
democratic nations, for all the different powers which checked or
retarded overmuch the energy of individual minds, the evil would
only have changed its symptoms. Men would not have found the means of
independent life; they would simply have invented (no easy task) a new
dress for servitude. There is--and I cannot repeat it too often--there
is in this matter for profound reflection for those who look on freedom
as a holy thing, and who hate not only the despot, but despotism. For
myself, when I feel the hand of power lie heavy on my brow, I care but
little to know who oppresses me; and I am not the more disposed to pass
beneath the yoke, because it is held out to me by the arms of a million
of men.




Chapter III: Why The Americans Display More Readiness And More Taste For
General Ideas Than Their Forefathers, The English.

The Deity does not regard the human race collectively. He surveys at one
glance and severally all the beings of whom mankind is composed, and he
discerns in each man the resemblances which assimilate him to all his
fellows, and the differences which distinguish him from them. God,
therefore, stands in no need of general ideas; that is to say, he is
never sensible of the necessity of collecting a considerable number
of analogous objects under the same form for greater convenience in
thinking. Such is, however, not the case with man. If the human mind
were to attempt to examine and pass a judgment on all the individual
cases before it, the immensity of detail would soon lead it astray
and bewilder its discernment: in this strait, man has recourse to
an imperfect but necessary expedient, which at once assists and
demonstrates his weakness. Having superficially considered a certain
number of objects, and remarked their resemblance, he assigns to them a
common name, sets them apart, and proceeds onwards.

General ideas are no proof of the strength, but rather of the
insufficiency of the human intellect; for there are in nature no
beings exactly alike, no things precisely identical, nor any rules
indiscriminately and alike applicable to several objects at once. The
chief merit of general ideas is, that they enable the human mind to
pass a rapid judgment on a great many objects at once; but, on the other
hand, the notions they convey are never otherwise than incomplete, and
they always cause the mind to lose as much in accuracy as it gains
in comprehensiveness. As social bodies advance in civilization, they
acquire the knowledge of new facts, and they daily lay hold almost
unconsciously of some particular truths. The more truths of this kind a
man apprehends, the more general ideas is he naturally led to conceive.
A multitude of particular facts cannot be seen separately, without at
last discovering the common tie which connects them. Several individuals
lead to the perception of the species; several species to that of the
genus. Hence the habit and the taste for general ideas will always
be greatest amongst a people of ancient cultivation and extensive
knowledge.

But there are other reasons which impel men to generalize their ideas,
or which restrain them from it.

The Americans are much more addicted to the use of general ideas than
the English, and entertain a much greater relish for them: this appears
very singular at first sight, when it is remembered that the two nations
have the same origin, that they lived for centuries under the same laws,
and that they still incessantly interchange their opinions and their
manners. This contrast becomes much more striking still, if we fix our
eyes on our own part of the world, and compare together the two most
enlightened nations which inhabit it. It would seem as if the mind of
the English could only tear itself reluctantly and painfully away from
the observation of particular facts, to rise from them to their causes;
and that it only generalizes in spite of itself. Amongst the French, on
the contrary, the taste for general ideas would seem to have grown to
so ardent a passion, that it must be satisfied on every occasion. I am
informed, every morning when I wake, that some general and eternal law
has just been discovered, which I never heard mentioned before. There is
not a mediocre scribbler who does not try his hand at discovering truths
applicable to a great kingdom, and who is very ill pleased with himself
if he does not succeed in compressing the human race into the compass
of an article. So great a dissimilarity between two very enlightened
nations surprises me. If I again turn my attention to England, and
observe the events which have occurred there in the last half-century,
I think I may affirm that a taste for general ideas increases in that
country in proportion as its ancient constitution is weakened.

The state of civilization is therefore insufficient by itself to explain
what suggests to the human mind the love of general ideas, or diverts it
from them. When the conditions of men are very unequal, and inequality
itself is the permanent state of society, individual men gradually
become so dissimilar that each class assumes the aspect of a distinct
race: only one of these classes is ever in view at the same instant; and
losing sight of that general tie which binds them all within the vast
bosom of mankind, the observation invariably rests not on man, but on
certain men. Those who live in this aristocratic state of society never,
therefore, conceive very general ideas respecting themselves, and that
is enough to imbue them with an habitual distrust of such ideas, and
an instinctive aversion of them. He, on the contrary, who inhabits a
democratic country, sees around him, one very hand, men differing but
little from each other; he cannot turn his mind to any one portion of
mankind, without expanding and dilating his thought till it embrace the
whole. All the truths which are applicable to himself, appear to him
equally and similarly applicable to each of his fellow-citizens and
fellow-men. Having contracted the habit of generalizing his ideas in
the study which engages him most, and interests him more than others,
he transfers the same habit to all his pursuits; and thus it is that
the craving to discover general laws in everything, to include a great
number of objects under the same formula, and to explain a mass of facts
by a single cause, becomes an ardent, and sometimes an undiscerning,
passion in the human mind.

Nothing shows the truth of this proposition more clearly than the
opinions of the ancients respecting their slaves. The most profound and
capacious minds of Rome and Greece were never able to reach the idea, at
once so general and so simple, of the common likeness of men, and of the
common birthright of each to freedom: they strove to prove that slavery
was in the order of nature, and that it would always exist. Nay, more,
everything shows that those of the ancients who had passed from the
servile to the free condition, many of whom have left us excellent
writings, did themselves regard servitude in no other light.

All the great writers of antiquity belonged to the aristocracy
of masters, or at least they saw that aristocracy established and
uncontested before their eyes. Their mind, after it had expanded itself
in several directions, was barred from further progress in this one; and
the advent of Jesus Christ upon earth was required to teach that all the
members of the human race are by nature equal and alike.

In the ages of equality all men are independent of each other, isolated
and weak. The movements of the multitude are not permanently guided
by the will of any individuals; at such times humanity seems always to
advance of itself. In order, therefore, to explain what is passing in
the world, man is driven to seek for some great causes, which, acting
in the same manner on all our fellow-creatures, thus impel them all
involuntarily to pursue the same track. This again naturally leads the
human mind to conceive general ideas, and superinduces a taste for them.

I have already shown in what way the equality of conditions leads every
man to investigate truths for himself. It may readily be perceived that
a method of this kind must insensibly beget a tendency to general ideas
in the human mind. When I repudiate the traditions of rank, profession,
and birth; when I escape from the authority of example, to seek out, by
the single effort of my reason, the path to be followed, I am inclined
to derive the motives of my opinions from human nature itself; which
leads me necessarily, and almost unconsciously, to adopt a great number
of very general notions.

All that I have here said explains the reasons for which the English
display much less readiness and taste or the generalization of ideas
than their American progeny, and still less again than their French
neighbors; and likewise the reason for which the English of the present
day display more of these qualities than their forefathers did. The
English have long been a very enlightened and a very aristocratic
nation; their enlightened condition urged them constantly to generalize,
and their aristocratic habits confined them to particularize. Hence
arose that philosophy, at once bold and timid, broad and narrow,
which has hitherto prevailed in England, and which still obstructs and
stagnates in so many minds in that country.

Independently of the causes I have pointed out in what goes before,
others may be discerned less apparent, but no less efficacious, which
engender amongst almost every democratic people a taste, and frequently
a passion, for general ideas. An accurate distinction must be taken
between ideas of this kind. Some are the result of slow, minute, and
conscientious labor of the mind, and these extend the sphere of human
knowledge; others spring up at once from the first rapid exercise of the
wits, and beget none but very superficial and very uncertain notions.
Men who live in ages of equality have a great deal of curiosity and very
little leisure; their life is so practical, so confused, so excited, so
active, that but little time remains to them for thought. Such men are
prone to general ideas because they spare them the trouble of studying
particulars; they contain, if I may so speak, a great deal in a little
compass, and give, in a little time, a great return. If then, upon a
brief and inattentive investigation, a common relation is thought to be
detected between certain obtects, inquiry is not pushed any further; and
without examining in detail how far these different objects differ or
agree, they are hastily arranged under one formulary, in order to pass
to another subject.

One of the distinguishing characteristics of a democratic period is the
taste all men have at such ties for easy success and present enjoyment.
This occurs in the pursuits of the intellect as well as in all others.
Most of those who live at a time of equality are full of an ambition at
once aspiring and relaxed: they would fain succeed brilliantly and at
once, but they would be dispensed from great efforts to obtain success.
These conflicting tendencies lead straight to the research of general
ideas, by aid of which they flatter themselves that they can figure very
importantly at a small expense, and draw the attention of the public
with very little trouble. And I know not whether they be wrong in
thinking thus. For their readers are as much averse to investigating
anything to the bottom as they can be themselves; and what is generally
sought in the productions of the mind is easy pleasure and information
without labor.

If aristocratic nations do not make sufficient use of general ideas,
and frequently treat them with inconsiderate disdain, it is true, on
the other hand, that a democratic people is ever ready to carry ideas of
this kind to excess, and to espouse the with injudicious warmth.




Chapter IV: Why The Americans Have Never Been So Eager As The French For
General Ideas In Political Matters

I observed in the last chapter, that the Americans show a less decided
taste for general ideas than the French; this is more especially true in
political matters. Although the Americans infuse into their legislation
infinitely more general ideas than the English, and although they pay
much more attention than the latter people to the adjustment of the
practice of affairs to theory, no political bodies in the United
States have ever shown so warm an attachment to general ideas as the
Constituent Assembly and the Convention in France. At no time has the
American people laid hold on ideas of this kind with the passionate
energy of the French people in the eighteenth century, or displayed the
same blind confidence in the value and absolute truth of any theory.
This difference between the Americans and the French originates in
several causes, but principally in the following one. The Americans form
a democratic people, which has always itself directed public affairs.
The French are a democratic people, who, for a long time, could only
speculate on the best manner of conducting them. The social condition of
France led that people to conceive very general ideas on the subject
of government, whilst its political constitution prevented it from
correcting those ideas by experiment, and from gradually detecting their
insufficiency; whereas in America the two things constantly balance and
correct each other.

It may seem, at first sight, that this is very much opposed to what I
have said before, that democratic nations derive their love of theory
from the excitement of their active life. A more attentive examination
will show that there is nothing contradictory in the proposition. Men
living in democratic countries eagerly lay hold of general ideas because
they have but little leisure, and because these ideas spare them the
trouble of studying particulars. This is true; but it is only to be
understood to apply to those matters which are not the necessary and
habitual subjects of their thoughts. Mercantile men will take up very
eagerly, and without any very close scrutiny, all the general ideas on
philosophy, politics, science, or the arts, which may be presented to
them; but for such as relate to commerce, they will not receive them
without inquiry, or adopt them without reserve. The same thing applies
to statesmen with regard to general ideas in politics. If, then, there
be a subject upon which a democratic people is peculiarly liable to
abandon itself, blindly and extravagantly, to general ideas, the best
corrective that can be used will be to make that subject a part of
the daily practical occupation of that people. The people will then be
compelled to enter upon its details, and the details will teach them the
weak points of the theory. This remedy may frequently be a painful one,
but its effect is certain.

Thus it happens, that the democratic institutions which compel every
citizen to take a practical part in the government, moderate that
excessive taste for general theories in politics which the principle of
equality suggests.




Chapter V: Of The Manner In Which Religion In The United States Avails
Itself Of Democratic Tendencies

I have laid it down in a preceding chapter that men cannot do without
dogmatical belief; and even that it is very much to be desired that such
belief should exist amongst them. I now add, that of all the kinds of
dogmatical belief the most desirable appears to me to be dogmatical
belief in matters of religion; and this is a very clear inference, even
from no higher consideration than the interests of this world. There is
hardly any human action, however particular a character be assigned
to it, which does not originate in some very general idea men have
conceived of the Deity, of his relation to mankind, of the nature of
their own souls, and of their duties to their fellow-creatures. Nor can
anything prevent these ideas from being the common spring from which
everything else emanates. Men are therefore immeasurably interested in
acquiring fixed ideas of God, of the soul, and of their common duties
to their Creator and to their fellow-men; for doubt on these first
principles would abandon all their actions to the impulse of chance,
and would condemn them to live, to a certain extent, powerless and
undisciplined.

This is then the subject on which it is most important for each of us to
entertain fixed ideas; and unhappily it is also the subject on which
it is most difficult for each of us, left to himself, to settle his
opinions by the sole force of his reason. None but minds singularly free
from the ordinary anxieties of life--minds at once penetrating, subtle,
and trained by thinking--can even with the assistance of much time and
care, sound the depth of these most necessary truths. And, indeed, we
see that these philosophers are themselves almost always enshrouded in
uncertainties; that at every step the natural light which illuminates
their path grows dimmer and less secure; and that, in spite of all their
efforts, they have as yet only discovered a small number of conflicting
notions, on which the mind of man has been tossed about for thousands of
years, without either laying a firmer grasp on truth, or finding novelty
even in its errors. Studies of this nature are far above the average
capacity of men; and even if the majority of mankind were capable of
such pursuits, it is evident that leisure to cultivate them would still
be wanting. Fixed ideas of God and human nature are indispensable to the
daily practice of men's lives; but the practice of their lives prevents
them from acquiring such ideas.

The difficulty appears to me to be without a parallel. Amongst the
sciences there are some which are useful to the mass of mankind, and
which are within its reach; others can only be approached by the few,
and are not cultivated by the many, who require nothing beyond their
more remote applications: but the daily practice of the science I speak
of is indispensable to all, although the study of it is inaccessible to
the far greater number.

General ideas respecting God and human nature are therefore the ideas
above all others which it is most suitable to withdraw from the habitual
action of private judgment, and in which there is most to gain and least
to lose by recognizing a principle of authority. The first object and
one of the principal advantages of religions, is to furnish to each of
these fundamental questions a solution which is at once clear, precise,
intelligible to the mass of mankind, and lasting. There are religions
which are very false and very absurd; but it may be affirmed, that any
religion which remains within the circle I have just traced, without
aspiring to go beyond it (as many religions have attempted to do, for
the purpose of enclosing on every side the free progress of the human
mind), imposes a salutary restraint on the intellect; and it must be
admitted that, if it do not save men in another world, such religion is
at least very conducive to their happiness and their greatness in this.
This is more especially true of men living in free countries. When
the religion of a people is destroyed, doubt gets hold of the highest
portions of the intellect, and half paralyzes all the rest of its
powers. Every man accustoms himself to entertain none but confused
and changing notions on the subjects most interesting to his
fellow-creatures and himself. His opinions are ill-defended and easily
abandoned: and, despairing of ever resolving by himself the hardest
problems of the destiny of man, he ignobly submits to think no more
about them. Such a condition cannot but enervate the soul, relax the
springs of the will, and prepare a people for servitude. Nor does it
only happen, in such a case, that they allow their freedom to be wrested
from them; they frequently themselves surrender it. When there is no
longer any principle of authority in religion any more than in
politics, men are speedily frightened at the aspect of this unbounded
independence. The constant agitation of all surrounding things alarms
and exhausts them. As everything is at sea in the sphere of the
intellect, they determine at least that the mechanism of society should
be firm and fixed; and as they cannot resume their ancient belief, they
assume a master.

For my own part, I doubt whether man can ever support at the same time
complete religious independence and entire public freedom. And I am
inclined to think, that if faith be wanting in him, he must serve; and
if he be free, he must believe.

Perhaps, however, this great utility of religions is still more obvious
amongst nations where equality of conditions prevails than amongst
others. It must be acknowledged that equality, which brings great
benefits into the world, nevertheless suggests to men (as will be shown
hereafter) some very dangerous propensities. It tends to isolate them
from each other, to concentrate every man's attention upon himself; and
it lays open the soul to an inordinate love of material gratification.
The greatest advantage of religion is to inspire diametrically contrary
principles. There is no religion which does not place the object of
man's desires above and beyond the treasures of earth, and which does
not naturally raise his soul to regions far above those of the senses.
Nor is there any which does not impose on man some sort of duties to
his kind, and thus draws him at times from the contemplation of himself.
This occurs in religions the most false and dangerous. Religious nations
are therefore naturally strong on the very point on which democratic
nations are weak; which shows of what importance it is for men to
preserve their religion as their conditions become more equal.

I have neither the right nor the intention of examining the supernatural
means which God employs to infuse religious belief into the heart of
man. I am at this moment considering religions in a purely human point
of view: my object is to inquire by what means they may most easily
retain their sway in the democratic ages upon which we are entering. It
has been shown that, at times of general cultivation and equality,
the human mind does not consent to adopt dogmatical opinions without
reluctance, and feels their necessity acutely in spiritual matters only.
This proves, in the first place, that at such times religions ought,
more cautiously than at any other, to confine themselves within their
own precincts; for in seeking to extend their power beyond religious
matters, they incur a risk of not being believed at all. The circle
within which they seek to bound the human intellect ought therefore to
be carefully traced, and beyond its verge the mind should be left in
entire freedom to its own guidance. Mahommed professed to derive from
Heaven, and he has inserted in the Koran, not only a body of religious
doctrines, but political maxims, civil and criminal laws, and theories
of science. The gospel, on the contrary, only speaks of the general
relations of men to God and to each other--beyond which it inculcates
and imposes no point of faith. This alone, besides a thousand other
reasons, would suffice to prove that the former of these religions will
never long predominate in a cultivated and democratic age, whilst the
latter is destined to retain its sway at these as at all other periods.

But in continuation of this branch of the subject, I find that in
order for religions to maintain their authority, humanly speaking, in
democratic ages, they must not only confine themselves strictly within
the circle of spiritual matters: their power also depends very much
on the nature of the belief they inculcate, on the external forms they
assume, and on the obligations they impose. The preceding observation,
that equality leads men to very general and very extensive notions, is
principally to be understood as applied to the question of religion. Men
living in a similar and equal condition in the world readily conceive
the idea of the one God, governing every man by the same laws, and
granting to every man future happiness on the same conditions. The idea
of the unity of mankind constantly leads them back to the idea of the
unity of the Creator; whilst, on the contrary, in a state of society
where men are broken up into very unequal ranks, they are apt to devise
as many deities as there are nations, castes, classes, or families, and
to trace a thousand private roads to heaven.

It cannot be denied that Christianity itself has felt, to a certain
extent, the influence which social and political conditions exercise
on religious opinions. At the epoch at which the Christian religion
appeared upon earth, Providence, by whom the world was doubtless
prepared for its coming, had gathered a large portion of the human race,
like an immense flock, under the sceptre of the Caesars. The men of whom
this multitude was composed were distinguished by numerous differences;
but they had thus much in common, that they all obeyed the same laws,
and that every subject was so weak and insignificant in relation to the
imperial potentate, that all appeared equal when their condition
was contrasted with his. This novel and peculiar state of mankind
necessarily predisposed men to listen to the general truths which
Christianity teaches, and may serve to explain the facility and rapidity
with which they then penetrated into the human mind. The counterpart of
this state of things was exhibited after the destruction of the
empire. The Roman world being then as it were shattered into a thousand
fragments, each nation resumed its pristine individuality. An infinite
scale of ranks very soon grew up in the bosom of these nations; the
different races were more sharply defined, and each nation was divided
by castes into several peoples. In the midst of this common effort,
which seemed to be urging human society to the greatest conceivable
amount of voluntary subdivision, Christianity did not lose sight of
the leading general ideas which it had brought into the world. But it
appeared, nevertheless, to lend itself, as much as was possible, to
those new tendencies to which the fractional distribution of mankind
had given birth. Men continued to worship an only God, the Creator and
Preserver of all things; but every people, every city, and, so to speak,
every man, thought to obtain some distinct privilege, and win the favor
of an especial patron at the foot of the Throne of Grace. Unable
to subdivide the Deity, they multiplied and improperly enhanced the
importance of the divine agents. The homage due to saints and angels
became an almost idolatrous worship amongst the majority of the
Christian world; and apprehensions might be entertained for a moment
lest the religion of Christ should retrograde towards the superstitions
which it had subdued. It seems evident, that the more the barriers are
removed which separate nation from nation amongst mankind, and citizen
from citizen amongst a people, the stronger is the bent of the human
mind, as if by its own impulse, towards the idea of an only and
all-powerful Being, dispensing equal laws in the same manner to every
man. In democratic ages, then, it is more particularly important not
to allow the homage paid to secondary agents to be confounded with the
worship due to the Creator alone.

Another truth is no less clear--that religions ought to assume fewer
external observances in democratic periods than at any others. In
speaking of philosophical method among the Americans, I have shown that
nothing is more repugnant to the human mind in an age of equality than
the idea of subjection to forms. Men living at such times are impatient
of figures; to their eyes symbols appear to be the puerile artifice
which is used to conceal or to set off truths, which should more
naturally be bared to the light of open day: they are unmoved by
ceremonial observances, and they are predisposed to attach a secondary
importance to the details of public worship. Those whose care it is to
regulate the external forms of religion in a democratic age should pay
a close attention to these natural propensities of the human mind, in
order not unnecessarily to run counter to them. I firmly believe in the
necessity of forms, which fix the human mind in the contemplation of
abstract truths, and stimulate its ardor in the pursuit of them, whilst
they invigorate its powers of retaining them steadfastly. Nor do I
suppose that it is possible to maintain a religion without external
observances; but, on the other hand, I am persuaded that, in the ages
upon which we are entering, it would be peculiarly dangerous to multiply
them beyond measure; and that they ought rather to be limited to as much
as is absolutely necessary to perpetuate the doctrine itself, which is
the substance of religions of which the ritual is only the form. *a
A religion which should become more minute, more peremptory, and more
surcharged with small observances at a time in which men are becoming
more equal, would soon find itself reduced to a band of fanatical
zealots in the midst of an infidel people.

[Footnote a: In all religions there are some ceremonies which are
inherent in the substance of the faith itself, and in these nothing
should, on any account, be changed. This is especially the case with
Roman Catholicism, in which the doctrine and the form are frequently so
closely united as to form one point of belief.]

I anticipate the objection, that as all religions have general and
eternal truths for their object, they cannot thus shape themselves
to the shifting spirit of every age without forfeiting their claim
to certainty in the eyes of mankind. To this I reply again, that the
principal opinions which constitute belief, and which theologians
call articles of faith, must be very carefully distinguished from the
accessories connected with them. Religions are obliged to hold fast to
the former, whatever be the peculiar spirit of the age; but they should
take good care not to bind themselves in the same manner to the
latter at a time when everything is in transition, and when the mind,
accustomed to the moving pageant of human affairs, reluctantly endures
the attempt to fix it to any given point. The fixity of external and
secondary things can only afford a chance of duration when civil society
is itself fixed; under any other circumstances I hold it to be perilous.

We shall have occasion to see that, of all the passions which originate
in, or are fostered by, equality, there is one which it renders
peculiarly intense, and which it infuses at the same time into the heart
of every man: I mean the love of well-being. The taste for well-being
is the prominent and indelible feature of democratic ages. It may be
believed that a religion which should undertake to destroy so deep
seated a passion, would meet its own destruction thence in the end; and
if it attempted to wean men entirely from the contemplation of the good
things of this world, in order to devote their faculties exclusively to
the thought of another, it may be foreseen that the soul would at length
escape from its grasp, to plunge into the exclusive enjoyment of present
and material pleasures. The chief concern of religions is to purify,
to regulate, and to restrain the excessive and exclusive taste for
well-being which men feel at periods of equality; but they would err in
attempting to control it completely or to eradicate it. They will not
succeed in curing men of the love of riches: but they may still persuade
men to enrich themselves by none but honest means.

This brings me to a final consideration, which comprises, as it were,
all the others. The more the conditions of men are equalized and
assimilated to each other, the more important is it for religions,
whilst they carefully abstain from the daily turmoil of secular affairs,
not needlessly to run counter to the ideas which generally prevail, and
the permanent interests which exist in the mass of the people. For as
public opinion grows to be more and more evidently the first and most
irresistible of existing powers, the religious principle has no external
support strong enough to enable it long to resist its attacks. This
is not less true of a democratic people, ruled by a despot, than in a
republic. In ages of equality, kings may often command obedience,
but the majority always commands belief: to the majority, therefore,
deference is to be paid in whatsoever is not contrary to the faith.

I showed in my former volumes how the American clergy stand aloof from
secular affairs. This is the most obvious, but it is not the only,
example of their self-restraint. In America religion is a distinct
sphere, in which the priest is sovereign, but out of which he takes
care never to go. Within its limits he is the master of the mind;
beyond them, he leaves men to themselves, and surrenders them to the
independence and instability which belong to their nature and their
age. I have seen no country in which Christianity is clothed with fewer
forms, figures, and observances than in the United States; or where
it presents more distinct, more simple, or more general notions to the
mind. Although the Christians of America are divided into a multitude of
sects, they all look upon their religion in the same light. This applies
to Roman Catholicism as well as to the other forms of belief. There
are no Romish priests who show less taste for the minute individual
observances for extraordinary or peculiar means of salvation, or who
cling more to the spirit, and less to the letter of the law, than the
Roman Catholic priests of the United States. Nowhere is that doctrine of
the Church, which prohibits the worship reserved to God alone from
being offered to the saints, more clearly inculcated or more generally
followed. Yet the Roman Catholics of America are very submissive and
very sincere.

Another remark is applicable to the clergy of every communion. The
American ministers of the gospel do not attempt to draw or to fix all
the thoughts of man upon the life to come; they are willing to surrender
a portion of his heart to the cares of the present; seeming to consider
the goods of this world as important, although as secondary, objects.
If they take no part themselves in productive labor, they are at least
interested in its progression, and ready to applaud its results; and
whilst they never cease to point to the other world as the great object
of the hopes and fears of the believer, they do not forbid him honestly
to court prosperity in this. Far from attempting to show that these
things are distinct and contrary to one another, they study rather to
find out on what point they are most nearly and closely connected.

All the American clergy know and respect the intellectual supremacy
exercised by the majority; they never sustain any but necessary
conflicts with it. They take no share in the altercations of parties,
but they readily adopt the general opinions of their country and their
age; and they allow themselves to be borne away without opposition in
the current of feeling and opinion by which everything around them is
carried along. They endeavor to amend their contemporaries, but they do
not quit fellowship with them. Public opinion is therefore never hostile
to them; it rather supports and protects them; and their belief owes its
authority at the same time to the strength which is its own, and to that
which they borrow from the opinions of the majority. Thus it is that, by
respecting all democratic tendencies not absolutely contrary to herself,
and by making use of several of them for her own purposes, religion
sustains an advantageous struggle with that spirit of individual
independence which is her most dangerous antagonist.




Chapter VI: Of The Progress Of Roman Catholicism In The United States

America is the most democratic country in the world, and it is at the
same time (according to reports worthy of belief) the country in which
the Roman Catholic religion makes most progress. At first sight this is
surprising. Two things must here be accurately distinguished: equality
inclines men to wish to form their own opinions; but, on the other hand,
it imbues them with the taste and the idea of unity, simplicity,
and impartiality in the power which governs society. Men living in
democratic ages are therefore very prone to shake off all religious
authority; but if they consent to subject themselves to any authority
of this kind, they choose at least that it should be single and uniform.
Religious powers not radiating from a common centre are naturally
repugnant to their minds; and they almost as readily conceive that there
should be no religion, as that there should be several. At the present
time, more than in any preceding one, Roman Catholics are seen to lapse
into infidelity, and Protestants to be converted to Roman Catholicism.
If the Roman Catholic faith be considered within the pale of the church,
it would seem to be losing ground; without that pale, to be gaining it.
Nor is this circumstance difficult of explanation. The men of our
days are naturally disposed to believe; but, as soon as they have any
religion, they immediately find in themselves a latent propensity which
urges them unconsciously towards Catholicism. Many of the doctrines and
the practices of the Romish Church astonish them; but they feel a secret
admiration for its discipline, and its great unity attracts them.
If Catholicism could at length withdraw itself from the political
animosities to which it has given rise, I have hardly any doubt but that
the same spirit of the age, which appears to be so opposed to it, would
become so favorable as to admit of its great and sudden advancement.
One of the most ordinary weaknesses of the human intellect is to seek to
reconcile contrary principles, and to purchase peace at the expense
of logic. Thus there have ever been, and will ever be, men who, after
having submitted some portion of their religious belief to the principle
of authority, will seek to exempt several other parts of their faith
from its influence, and to keep their minds floating at random between
liberty and obedience. But I am inclined to believe that the number of
these thinkers will be less in democratic than in other ages; and that
our posterity will tend more and more to a single division into two
parts--some relinquishing Christianity entirely, and others returning to
the bosom of the Church of Rome.




Chapter VII: Of The Cause Of A Leaning To Pantheism Amongst Democratic
Nations

I shall take occasion hereafter to show under what form the
preponderating taste of a democratic people for very general ideas
manifests itself in politics; but I would point out, at the present
stage of my work, its principal effect on philosophy. It cannot be
denied that pantheism has made great progress in our age. The writings
of a part of Europe bear visible marks of it: the Germans introduce it
into philosophy, and the French into literature. Most of the works of
imagination published in France contain some opinions or some tinge
caught from pantheistical doctrines, or they disclose some tendency to
such doctrines in their authors. This appears to me not only to proceed
from an accidental, but from a permanent cause.

When the conditions of society are becoming more equal, and each
individual man becomes more like all the rest, more weak and more
insignificant, a habit grows up of ceasing to notice the citizens to
consider only the people, and of overlooking individuals to think only
of their kind. At such times the human mind seeks to embrace a multitude
of different objects at once; and it constantly strives to succeed in
connecting a variety of consequences with a single cause. The idea
of unity so possesses itself of man, and is sought for by him so
universally, that if he thinks he has found it, he readily yields
himself up to repose in that belief. Nor does he content himself with
the discovery that nothing is in the world but a creation and a Creator;
still embarrassed by this primary division of things, he seeks to expand
and to simplify his conception by including God and the universe in one
great whole. If there be a philosophical system which teaches that all
things material and immaterial, visible and invisible, which the world
contains, are only to be considered as the several parts of an immense
Being, which alone remains unchanged amidst the continual change and
ceaseless transformation of all that constitutes it, we may readily
infer that such a system, although it destroy the individuality of
man--nay, rather because it destroys that individuality--will have
secret charms for men living in democracies. All their habits of
thought prepare them to conceive it, and predispose them to adopt it.
It naturally attracts and fixes their imagination; it fosters the pride,
whilst it soothes the indolence, of their minds. Amongst the different
systems by whose aid philosophy endeavors to explain the universe, I
believe pantheism to be one of those most fitted to seduce the human
mind in democratic ages. Against it all who abide in their attachment to
the true greatness of man should struggle and combine.




Chapter VIII: The Principle Of Equality Suggests To The Americans The
Idea Of The Indefinite Perfectibility Of Man

Equality suggests to the human mind several ideas which would not have
originated from any other source, and it modifies almost all those
previously entertained. I take as an example the idea of human
perfectibility, because it is one of the principal notions that the
intellect can conceive, and because it constitutes of itself a great
philosophical theory, which is every instant to be traced by its
consequences in the practice of human affairs. Although man has many
points of resemblance with the brute creation, one characteristic is
peculiar to himself--he improves: they are incapable of improvement.
Mankind could not fail to discover this difference from its earliest
period. The idea of perfectibility is therefore as old as the world;
equality did not give birth to it, although it has imparted to it a
novel character.

When the citizens of a community are classed according to their rank,
their profession, or their birth, and when all men are constrained to
follow the career which happens to open before them, everyone thinks
that the utmost limits of human power are to be discerned in proximity
to himself, and none seeks any longer to resist the inevitable law of
his destiny. Not indeed that an aristocratic people absolutely contests
man's faculty of self-improvement, but they do not hold it to be
indefinite; amelioration they conceive, but not change: they imagine
that the future condition of society may be better, but not essentially
different; and whilst they admit that mankind has made vast strides
in improvement, and may still have some to make, they assign to it
beforehand certain impassable limits. Thus they do not presume that they
have arrived at the supreme good or at absolute truth (what people
or what man was ever wild enough to imagine it?) but they cherish a
persuasion that they have pretty nearly reached that degree of greatness
and knowledge which our imperfect nature admits of; and as nothing
moves about them they are willing to fancy that everything is in its fit
place. Then it is that the legislator affects to lay down eternal laws;
that kings and nations will raise none but imperishable monuments; and
that the present generation undertakes to spare generations to come the
care of regulating their destinies.

In proportion as castes disappear and the classes of society
approximate--as manners, customs, and laws vary, from the tumultuous
intercourse of men--as new facts arise--as new truths are brought
to light--as ancient opinions are dissipated, and others take their
place--the image of an ideal perfection, forever on the wing, presents
itself to the human mind. Continual changes are then every instant
occurring under the observation of every man: the position of some
is rendered worse; and he learns but too well, that no people and
no individual, how enlightened soever they may be, can lay claim to
infallibility;--the condition of others is improved; whence he infers
that man is endowed with an indefinite faculty of improvement. His
reverses teach him that none may hope to have discovered absolute
good--his success stimulates him to the never-ending pursuit of
it. Thus, forever seeking--forever falling, to rise again--often
disappointed, but not discouraged--he tends unceasingly towards that
unmeasured greatness so indistinctly visible at the end of the long
track which humanity has yet to tread. It can hardly be believed
how many facts naturally flow from the philosophical theory of the
indefinite perfectibility of man, or how strong an influence it
exercises even on men who, living entirely for the purposes of action
and not of thought, seem to conform their actions to it, without knowing
anything about it. I accost an American sailor, and I inquire why the
ships of his country are built so as to last but for a short time;
he answers without hesitation that the art of navigation is every day
making such rapid progress, that the finest vessel would become almost
useless if it lasted beyond a certain number of years. In these words,
which fell accidentally and on a particular subject from a man of rude
attainments, I recognize the general and systematic idea upon which a
great people directs all its concerns.

Aristocratic nations are naturally too apt to narrow the scope of human
perfectibility; democratic nations to expand it beyond compass.




Chapter IX: The Example Of The Americans Does Not Prove That A
Democratic People Can Have No Aptitude And No Taste For Science,
Literature, Or Art

It must be acknowledged that amongst few of the civilized nations of
our time have the higher sciences made less progress than in the United
States; and in few have great artists, fine poets, or celebrated writers
been more rare. Many Europeans, struck by this fact, have looked upon it
as a natural and inevitable result of equality; and they have supposed
that if a democratic state of society and democratic institutions were
ever to prevail over the whole earth, the human mind would gradually
find its beacon-lights grow dim, and men would relapse into a period of
darkness. To reason thus is, I think, to confound several ideas which
it is important to divide and to examine separately: it is to mingle,
unintentionally, what is democratic with what is only American.

The religion professed by the first emigrants, and bequeathed by them
to their descendants, simple in its form of worship, austere and
almost harsh in its principles, and hostile to external symbols and to
ceremonial pomp, is naturally unfavorable to the fine arts, and only
yields a reluctant sufferance to the pleasures of literature. The
Americans are a very old and a very enlightened people, who have fallen
upon a new and unbounded country, where they may extend themselves at
pleasure, and which they may fertilize without difficulty. This state
of things is without a parallel in the history of the world. In America,
then, every one finds facilities, unknown elsewhere, for making or
increasing his fortune. The spirit of gain is always on the stretch, and
the human mind, constantly diverted from the pleasures of imagination
and the labors of the intellect, is there swayed by no impulse but the
pursuit of wealth. Not only are manufacturing and commercial classes to
be found in the United States, as they are in all other countries; but
what never occurred elsewhere, the whole community is simultaneously
engaged in productive industry and commerce. I am convinced that, if
the Americans had been alone in the world, with the freedom and the
knowledge acquired by their forefathers, and the passions which are
their own, they would not have been slow to discover that progress
cannot long be made in the application of the sciences without
cultivating the theory of them; that all the arts are perfected by one
another: and, however absorbed they might have been by the pursuit
of the principal object of their desires, they would speedily have
admitted, that it is necessary to turn aside from it occasionally, in
order the better to attain it in the end.

The taste for the pleasures of the mind is moreover so natural to the
heart of civilized man, that amongst the polite nations, which are least
disposed to give themselves up to these pursuits, a certain number of
citizens are always to be found who take part in them. This intellectual
craving, when once felt, would very soon have been satisfied. But at the
very time when the Americans were naturally inclined to require nothing
of science but its special applications to the useful arts and the means
of rendering life comfortable, learned and literary Europe was engaged
in exploring the common sources of truth, and in improving at the same
time all that can minister to the pleasures or satisfy the wants of man.
At the head of the enlightened nations of the Old World the inhabitants
of the United States more particularly distinguished one, to which they
were closely united by a common origin and by kindred habits. Amongst
this people they found distinguished men of science, artists of skill,
writers of eminence, and they were enabled to enjoy the treasures of the
intellect without requiring to labor in amassing them. I cannot consent
to separate America from Europe, in spite of the ocean which intervenes.
I consider the people of the United States as that portion of the
English people which is commissioned to explore the wilds of the New
World; whilst the rest of the nation, enjoying more leisure and less
harassed by the drudgery of life, may devote its energies to thought,
and enlarge in all directions the empire of the mind. The position of
the Americans is therefore quite exceptional, and it may be believed
that no democratic people will ever be placed in a similar one. Their
strictly Puritanical origin--their exclusively commercial habits--even
the country they inhabit, which seems to divert their minds from the
pursuit of science, literature, and the arts--the proximity of Europe,
which allows them to neglect these pursuits without relapsing into
barbarism--a thousand special causes, of which I have only been able to
point out the most important--have singularly concurred to fix the mind
of the American upon purely practical objects. His passions, his wants,
his education, and everything about him seem to unite in drawing the
native of the United States earthward: his religion alone bids him turn,
from time to time, a transient and distracted glance to heaven. Let us
cease then to view all democratic nations under the mask of the American
people, and let us attempt to survey them at length with their own
proper features.

It is possible to conceive a people not subdivided into any castes or
scale of ranks; in which the law, recognizing no privileges, should
divide inherited property into equal shares; but which, at the same
time, should be without knowledge and without freedom. Nor is this an
empty hypothesis: a despot may find that it is his interest to render
his subjects equal and to leave them ignorant, in order more easily to
keep them slaves. Not only would a democratic people of this kind show
neither aptitude nor taste for science, literature, or art, but it would
probably never arrive at the possession of them. The law of descent
would of itself provide for the destruction of fortunes at each
succeeding generation; and new fortunes would be acquired by none. The
poor man, without either knowledge or freedom, would not so much as
conceive the idea of raising himself to wealth; and the rich man
would allow himself to be degraded to poverty, without a notion of
self-defence. Between these two members of the community complete and
invincible equality would soon be established.

No one would then have time or taste to devote himself to the pursuits
or pleasures of the intellect; but all men would remain paralyzed by
a state of common ignorance and equal servitude. When I conceive a
democratic society of this kind, I fancy myself in one of those low,
close, and gloomy abodes, where the light which breaks in from without
soon faints and fades away. A sudden heaviness overpowers me, and I
grope through the surrounding darkness, to find the aperture which will
restore me to daylight and the air.

But all this is not applicable to men already enlightened who retain
their freedom, after having abolished from amongst them those peculiar
and hereditary rights which perpetuated the tenure of property in the
hands of certain individuals or certain bodies. When men living in a
democratic state of society are enlightened, they readily discover that
they are confined and fixed within no limits which constrain them to
take up with their present fortune. They all therefore conceive the idea
of increasing it; if they are free, they all attempt it, but all do
not succeed in the same manner. The legislature, it is true, no
longer grants privileges, but they are bestowed by nature. As natural
inequality is very great, fortunes become unequal as soon as every man
exerts all his faculties to get rich. The law of descent prevents the
establishment of wealthy families; but it does not prevent the existence
of wealthy individuals. It constantly brings back the members of the
community to a common level, from which they as constantly escape:
and the inequality of fortunes augments in proportion as knowledge is
diffused and liberty increased.

A sect which arose in our time, and was celebrated for its talents and
its extravagance, proposed to concentrate all property into the hands of
a central power, whose function it should afterwards be to parcel it
out to individuals, according to their capacity. This would have been a
method of escaping from that complete and eternal equality which seems
to threaten democratic society. But it would be a simpler and less
dangerous remedy to grant no privilege to any, giving to all equal
cultivation and equal independence, and leaving everyone to determine
his own position. Natural inequality will very soon make way for itself,
and wealth will spontaneously pass into the hands of the most capable.

Free and democratic communities, then, will always contain a
considerable number of people enjoying opulence or competency. The
wealthy will not be so closely linked to each other as the members of
the former aristocratic class of society: their propensities will be
different, and they will scarcely ever enjoy leisure as secure or as
complete: but they will be far more numerous than those who belonged to
that class of society could ever be. These persons will not be strictly
confined to the cares of practical life, and they will still be able,
though in different degrees, to indulge in the pursuits and pleasures of
the intellect. In those pleasures they will indulge; for if it be true
that the human mind leans on one side to the narrow, the practical,
and the useful, it naturally rises on the other to the infinite, the
spiritual, and the beautiful. Physical wants confine it to the earth;
but, as soon as the tie is loosened, it will unbend itself again.

Not only will the number of those who can take an interest in the
productions of the mind be enlarged, but the taste for intellectual
enjoyment will descend, step by step, even to those who, in aristocratic
societies, seem to have neither time nor ability to in indulge in them.
When hereditary wealth, the privileges of rank, and the prerogatives of
birth have ceased to be, and when every man derives his strength from
himself alone, it becomes evident that the chief cause of disparity
between the fortunes of men is the mind. Whatever tends to invigorate,
to extend, or to adorn the mind, instantly rises to great value. The
utility of knowledge becomes singularly conspicuous even to the eyes of
the multitude: those who have no taste for its charms set store upon its
results, and make some efforts to acquire it. In free and enlightened
democratic ages, there is nothing to separate men from each other or
to retain them in their peculiar sphere; they rise or sink with extreme
rapidity. All classes live in perpetual intercourse from their great
proximity to each other. They communicate and intermingle every
day--they imitate and envy one other: this suggests to the people many
ideas, notions, and desires which it would never have entertained if the
distinctions of rank had been fixed and society at rest. In such
nations the servant never considers himself as an entire stranger to
the pleasures and toils of his master, nor the poor man to those of the
rich; the rural population assimilates itself to that of the towns, and
the provinces to the capital. No one easily allows himself to be reduced
to the mere material cares of life; and the humblest artisan casts
at times an eager and a furtive glance into the higher regions of the
intellect. People do not read with the same notions or in the same
manner as they do in an aristocratic community; but the circle of
readers is unceasingly expanded, till it includes all the citizens.

As soon as the multitude begins to take an interest in the labors of the
mind, it finds out that to excel in some of them is a powerful method of
acquiring fame, power, or wealth. The restless ambition which equality
begets instantly takes this direction as it does all others. The number
of those who cultivate science, letters, and the arts, becomes immense.
The intellectual world starts into prodigious activity: everyone
endeavors to open for himself a path there, and to draw the eyes of the
public after him. Something analogous occurs to what happens in society
in the United States, politically considered. What is done is often
imperfect, but the attempts are innumerable; and, although the results
of individual effort are commonly very small, the total amount is always
very large.

It is therefore not true to assert that men living in democratic ages
are naturally indifferent to science, literature, and the arts: only it
must be acknowledged that they cultivate them after their own
fashion, and bring to the task their own peculiar qualifications and
deficiencies.




Chapter X: Why The Americans Are More Addicted To Practical Than To
Theoretical Science

If a democratic state of society and democratic institutions do not
stop the career of the human mind, they incontestably guide it in one
direction in preference to another. Their effects, thus circumscribed,
are still exceedingly great; and I trust I may be pardoned if I pause
for a moment to survey them. We had occasion, in speaking of the
philosophical method of the American people, to make several remarks
which must here be turned to account.

Equality begets in man the desire of judging of everything for himself:
it gives him, in all things, a taste for the tangible and the real,
a contempt for tradition and for forms. These general tendencies are
principally discernible in the peculiar subject of this chapter. Those
who cultivate the sciences amongst a democratic people are always afraid
of losing their way in visionary speculation. They mistrust systems;
they adhere closely to facts and the study of facts with their own
senses. As they do not easily defer to the mere name of any fellow-man,
they are never inclined to rest upon any man's authority; but, on the
contrary, they are unremitting in their efforts to point out the weaker
points of their neighbors' opinions. Scientific precedents have very
little weight with them; they are never long detained by the subtilty
of the schools, nor ready to accept big words for sterling coin; they
penetrate, as far as they can, into the principal parts of the subject
which engages them, and they expound them in the vernacular tongue.
Scientific pursuits then follow a freer and a safer course, but a less
lofty one.

The mind may, as it appears to me, divide science into three parts. The
first comprises the most theoretical principles, and those more abstract
notions whose application is either unknown or very remote. The second
is composed of those general truths which still belong to pure theory,
but lead, nevertheless, by a straight and short road to practical
results. Methods of application and means of execution make up the
third. Each of these different portions of science may be separately
cultivated, although reason and experience show that none of them can
prosper long, if it be absolutely cut off from the two others.

In America the purely practical part of science is admirably understood,
and careful attention is paid to the theoretical portion which is
immediately requisite to application. On this head the Americans always
display a clear, free, original, and inventive power of mind. But
hardly anyone in the United States devotes himself to the essentially
theoretical and abstract portion of human knowledge. In this respect
the Americans carry to excess a tendency which is, I think, discernible,
though in a less degree, amongst all democratic nations.

Nothing is more necessary to the culture of the higher sciences, or of
the more elevated departments of science, than meditation; and nothing
is less suited to meditation than the structure of democratic society.
We do not find there, as amongst an aristocratic people, one class which
clings to a state of repose because it is well off; and another which
does not venture to stir because it despairs of improving its condition.
Everyone is actively in motion: some in quest of power, others of
gain. In the midst of this universal tumult--this incessant conflict of
jarring interests--this continual stride of men after fortune--where is
that calm to be found which is necessary for the deeper combinations
of the intellect? How can the mind dwell upon any single point, when
everything whirls around it, and man himself is swept and beaten onwards
by the heady current which rolls all things in its course? But the
permanent agitation which subsists in the bosom of a peaceable and
established democracy, must be distinguished from the tumultuous and
revolutionary movements which almost always attend the birth and growth
of democratic society. When a violent revolution occurs amongst a highly
civilized people, it cannot fail to give a sudden impulse to their
feelings and their opinions. This is more particularly true of
democratic revolutions, which stir up all the classes of which a people
is composed, and beget, at the same time, inordinate ambition in the
breast of every member of the community. The French made most surprising
advances in the exact sciences at the very time at which they were
finishing the destruction of the remains of their former feudal society;
yet this sudden fecundity is not to be attributed to democracy, but to
the unexampled revolution which attended its growth. What happened at
that period was a special incident, and it would be unwise to regard
it as the test of a general principle. Great revolutions are not
more common amongst democratic nations than amongst others: I am even
inclined to believe that they are less so. But there prevails amongst
those populations a small distressing motion--a sort of incessant
jostling of men--which annoys and disturbs the mind, without exciting
or elevating it. Men who live in democratic communities not only seldom
indulge in meditation, but they naturally entertain very little esteem
for it. A democratic state of society and democratic institutions plunge
the greater part of men in constant active life; and the habits of
mind which are suited to an active life, are not always suited to a
contemplative one. The man of action is frequently obliged to content
himself with the best he can get, because he would never accomplish
his purpose if he chose to carry every detail to perfection. He has
perpetually occasion to rely on ideas which he has not had leisure
to search to the bottom; for he is much more frequently aided by the
opportunity of an idea than by its strict accuracy; and, in the long
run, he risks less in making use of some false principles, than in
spending his time in establishing all his principles on the basis of
truth. The world is not led by long or learned demonstrations; a rapid
glance at particular incidents, the daily study of the fleeting passions
of the multitude, the accidents of the time, and the art of turning them
to account, decide all its affairs.

In the ages in which active life is the condition of almost everyone,
men are therefore generally led to attach an excessive value to the
rapid bursts and superficial conceptions of the intellect; and, on
the other hand, to depreciate below their true standard its slower and
deeper labors. This opinion of the public influences the judgment of the
men who cultivate the sciences; they are persuaded that they may succeed
in those pursuits without meditation, or deterred from such pursuits as
demand it.

There are several methods of studying the sciences. Amongst a multitude
of men you will find a selfish, mercantile, and trading taste for
the discoveries of the mind, which must not be confounded with that
disinterested passion which is kindled in the heart of the few. A desire
to utilize knowledge is one thing; the pure desire to know is another.
I do not doubt that in a few minds and far between, an ardent,
inexhaustible love of truth springs up, self-supported, and living in
ceaseless fruition without ever attaining the satisfaction which it
seeks. This ardent love it is--this proud, disinterested love of what is
true--which raises men to the abstract sources of truth, to draw their
mother-knowledge thence. If Pascal had had nothing in view but some
large gain, or even if he had been stimulated by the love of fame alone,
I cannot conceive that he would ever have been able to rally all the
powers of his mind, as he did, for the better discovery of the most
hidden things of the Creator. When I see him, as it were, tear his soul
from the midst of all the cares of life to devote it wholly to these
researches, and, prematurely snapping the links which bind the frame to
life, die of old age before forty, I stand amazed, and I perceive that
no ordinary cause is at work to produce efforts so extra-ordinary.

The future will prove whether these passions, at once so rare and so
productive, come into being and into growth as easily in the midst of
democratic as in aristocratic communities. For myself, I confess that
I am slow to believe it. In aristocratic society, the class which gives
the tone to opinion, and has the supreme guidance of affairs, being
permanently and hereditarily placed above the multitude, naturally
conceives a lofty idea of itself and of man. It loves to invent for
him noble pleasures, to carve out splendid objects for his ambition.
Aristocracies often commit very tyrannical and very inhuman actions;
but they rarely entertain grovelling thoughts; and they show a kind of
haughty contempt of little pleasures, even whilst they indulge in
them. The effect is greatly to raise the general pitch of society. In
aristocratic ages vast ideas are commonly entertained of the dignity,
the power, and the greatness of man. These opinions exert their
influence on those who cultivate the sciences, as well as on the rest
of the community. They facilitate the natural impulse of the mind to the
highest regions of thought, and they naturally prepare it to conceive
a sublime--nay, almost a divine--love of truth. Men of science at such
periods are consequently carried away by theory; and it even happens
that they frequently conceive an inconsiderate contempt for the
practical part of learning. "Archimedes," says Plutarch, "was of so
lofty a spirit, that he never condescended to write any treatise on the
manner of constructing all these engines of offence and defence. And as
he held this science of inventing and putting together engines, and all
arts generally speaking which tended to any useful end in practice, to
be vile, low, and mercenary, he spent his talents and his studious hours
in writing of those things only whose beauty and subtilty had in them
no admixture of necessity." Such is the aristocratic aim of science; in
democratic nations it cannot be the same.

The greater part of the men who constitute these nations are extremely
eager in the pursuit of actual and physical gratification. As they are
always dissatisfied with the position which they occupy, and are always
free to leave it, they think of nothing but the means of changing their
fortune, or of increasing it. To minds thus predisposed, every new
method which leads by a shorter road to wealth, every machine which
spares labor, every instrument which diminishes the cost of production,
every discovery which facilitates pleasures or augments them, seems to
be the grandest effort of the human intellect. It is chiefly from
these motives that a democratic people addicts itself to scientific
pursuits--that it understands, and that it respects them. In
aristocratic ages, science is more particularly called upon to furnish
gratification to the mind; in democracies, to the body. You may be sure
that the more a nation is democratic, enlightened, and free, the greater
will be the number of these interested promoters of scientific genius,
and the more will discoveries immediately applicable to productive
industry confer gain, fame, and even power on their authors. For in
democracies the working class takes a part in public affairs; and public
honors, as well as pecuniary remuneration, may be awarded to those who
deserve them. In a community thus organized it may easily be conceived
that the human mind may be led insensibly to the neglect of theory; and
that it is urged, on the contrary, with unparalleled vehemence to the
applications of science, or at least to that portion of theoretical
science which is necessary to those who make such applications. In vain
will some innate propensity raise the mind towards the loftier spheres
of the intellect; interest draws it down to the middle zone. There it
may develop all its energy and restless activity, there it may engender
all its wonders. These very Americans, who have not discovered one of
the general laws of mechanics, have introduced into navigation an engine
which changes the aspect of the world.

Assuredly I do not content that the democratic nations of our time are
destined to witness the extinction of the transcendent luminaries of
man's intelligence, nor even that no new lights will ever start into
existence. At the age at which the world has now arrived, and amongst so
many cultivated nations, perpetually excited by the fever of productive
industry, the bonds which connect the different parts of science
together cannot fail to strike the observation; and the taste for
practical science itself, if it be enlightened, ought to lead men not to
neglect theory. In the midst of such numberless attempted applications
of so many experiments, repeated every day, it is almost impossible that
general laws should not frequently be brought to light; so that great
discoveries would be frequent, though great inventors be rare. I
believe, moreover, in the high calling of scientific minds. If the
democratic principle does not, on the one hand, induce men to cultivate
science for its own sake, on the other it enormously increases the
number of those who do cultivate it. Nor is it credible that, from
amongst so great a multitude no speculative genius should from time to
time arise, inflamed by the love of truth alone. Such a one, we may be
sure, would dive into the deepest mysteries of nature, whatever be
the spirit of his country or his age. He requires no assistance in his
course--enough that he be not checked in it.

All that I mean to say is this:--permanent inequality of conditions
leads men to confine themselves to the arrogant and sterile research
of abstract truths; whilst the social condition and the institutions
of democracy prepare them to seek the immediate and useful practical
results of the sciences. This tendency is natural and inevitable: it is
curious to be acquainted with it, and it may be necessary to point
it out. If those who are called upon to guide the nations of our time
clearly discerned from afar off these new tendencies, which will soon
be irresistible, they would understand that, possessing education
and freedom, men living in democratic ages cannot fail to improve the
industrial part of science; and that henceforward all the efforts of
the constituted authorities ought to be directed to support the highest
branches of learning, and to foster the nobler passion for science
itself. In the present age the human mind must be coerced into
theoretical studies; it runs of its own accord to practical
applications; and, instead of perpetually referring it to the minute
examination of secondary effects, it is well to divert it from them
sometimes, in order to raise it up to the contemplation of primary
causes. Because the civilization of ancient Rome perished in consequence
of the invasion of the barbarians, we are perhaps too apt to think that
civilization cannot perish in any other manner. If the light by which we
are guided is ever extinguished, it will dwindle by degrees, and expire
of itself. By dint of close adherence to mere applications, principles
would be lost sight of; and when the principles were wholly forgotten,
the methods derived from them would be ill-pursued. New methods could
no longer be invented, and men would continue to apply, without
intelligence, and without art, scientific processes no longer
understood.

When Europeans first arrived in China, three hundred years ago,
they found that almost all the arts had reached a certain degree of
perfection there; and they were surprised that a people which had
attained this point should not have gone beyond it. At a later period
they discovered some traces of the higher branches of science which were
lost. The nation was absorbed in productive industry: the greater part
of its scientific processes had been preserved, but science itself no
longer existed there. This served to explain the strangely motionless
state in which they found the minds of this people. The Chinese, in
following the track of their forefathers, had forgotten the reasons by
which the latter had been guided. They still used the formula, without
asking for its meaning: they retained the instrument, but they no longer
possessed the art of altering or renewing it. The Chinese, then, had
lost the power of change; for them to improve was impossible. They
were compelled, at all times and in all points, to imitate their
predecessors, lest they should stray into utter darkness, by deviating
for an instant from the path already laid down for them. The source of
human knowledge was all but dry; and though the stream still ran on, it
could neither swell its waters nor alter its channel. Notwithstanding
this, China had subsisted peaceably for centuries. The invaders who had
conquered the country assumed the manners of the inhabitants, and
order prevailed there. A sort of physical prosperity was everywhere
discernible: revolutions were rare, and war was, so to speak, unknown.

It is then a fallacy to flatter ourselves with the reflection that the
barbarians are still far from us; for if there be some nations which
allow civilization to be torn from their grasp, there are others who
trample it themselves under their feet.




Chapter XI: Of The Spirit In Which The Americans Cultivate The Arts

It would be to waste the time of my readers and my own if I strove
to demonstrate how the general mediocrity of fortunes, the absence of
superfluous wealth, the universal desire of comfort, and the constant
efforts by which everyone attempts to procure it, make the taste for the
useful predominate over the love of the beautiful in the heart of man.
Democratic nations, amongst which all these things exist, will therefore
cultivate the arts which serve to render life easy, in preference to
those whose object is to adorn it. They will habitually prefer the
useful to the beautiful, and they will require that the beautiful should
be useful. But I propose to go further; and after having pointed out
this first feature, to sketch several others.

It commonly happens that in the ages of privilege the practice of
almost all the arts becomes a privilege; and that every profession is
a separate walk, upon which it is not allowable for everyone to enter.
Even when productive industry is free, the fixed character which
belongs to aristocratic nations gradually segregates all the persons who
practise the same art, till they form a distinct class, always composed
of the same families, whose members are all known to each other, and
amongst whom a public opinion of their own and a species of corporate
pride soon spring up. In a class or guild of this kind, each artisan has
not only his fortune to make, but his reputation to preserve. He is not
exclusively swayed by his own interest, or even by that of his customer,
but by that of the body to which he belongs; and the interest of that
body is, that each artisan should produce the best possible workmanship.
In aristocratic ages, the object of the arts is therefore to manufacture
as well as possible--not with the greatest despatch, or at the lowest
rate.

When, on the contrary, every profession is open to all--when a multitude
of persons are constantly embracing and abandoning it--and when its
several members are strangers to each other, indifferent, and from their
numbers hardly seen amongst themselves; the social tie is destroyed,
and each workman, standing alone, endeavors simply to gain the greatest
possible quantity of money at the least possible cost. The will of the
customer is then his only limit. But at the same time a corresponding
revolution takes place in the customer also. In countries in which
riches as well as power are concentrated and retained in the hands of
the few, the use of the greater part of this world's goods belongs to a
small number of individuals, who are always the same. Necessity, public
opinion, or moderate desires exclude all others from the enjoyment
of them. As this aristocratic class remains fixed at the pinnacle of
greatness on which it stands, without diminution or increase, it is
always acted upon by the same wants and affected by them in the same
manner. The men of whom it is composed naturally derive from their
superior and hereditary position a taste for what is extremely well made
and lasting. This affects the general way of thinking of the nation in
relation to the arts. It often occurs, among such a people, that even
the peasant will rather go without the object he covets, than procure it
in a state of imperfection. In aristocracies, then, the handicraftsmen
work for only a limited number of very fastidious customers: the
profit they hope to make depends principally on the perfection of their
workmanship.

Such is no longer the case when, all privileges being abolished, ranks
are intermingled, and men are forever rising or sinking upon the ladder
of society. Amongst a democratic people a number of citizens always
exist whose patrimony is divided and decreasing. They have contracted,
under more prosperous circumstances, certain wants, which remain after
the means of satisfying such wants are gone; and they are anxiously
looking out for some surreptitious method of providing for them. On the
other hand, there are always in democracies a large number of men whose
fortune is upon the increase, but whose desires grow much faster than
their fortunes: and who gloat upon the gifts of wealth in anticipation,
long before they have means to command them. Such men eager to find some
short cut to these gratifications, already almost within their reach.
From the combination of these causes the result is, that in democracies
there are always a multitude of individuals whose wants are above their
means, and who are very willing to take up with imperfect satisfaction
rather than abandon the object of their desires.

The artisan readily understands these passions, for he himself partakes
in them: in an aristocracy he would seek to sell his workmanship at a
high price to the few; he now conceives that the more expeditious way of
getting rich is to sell them at a low price to all. But there are only
two ways of lowering the price of commodities. The first is to discover
some better, shorter, and more ingenious method of producing them: the
second is to manufacture a larger quantity of goods, nearly similar,
but of less value. Amongst a democratic population, all the intellectual
faculties of the workman are directed to these two objects: he strives
to invent methods which may enable him not only to work better, but
quicker and cheaper; or, if he cannot succeed in that, to diminish the
intrinsic qualities of the thing he makes, without rendering it wholly
unfit for the use for which it is intended. When none but the wealthy
had watches, they were almost all very good ones: few are now made which
are worth much, but everybody has one in his pocket. Thus the democratic
principle not only tends to direct the human mind to the useful arts,
but it induces the artisan to produce with greater rapidity a quantity
of imperfect commodities, and the consumer to content himself with these
commodities.

Not that in democracies the arts are incapable of producing very
commendable works, if such be required. This may occasionally be the
case, if customers appear who are ready to pay for time and trouble.
In this rivalry of every kind of industry--in the midst of this immense
competition and these countless experiments, some excellent workmen are
formed who reach the utmost limits of their craft. But they have rarely
an opportunity of displaying what they can do; they are scrupulously
sparing of their powers; they remain in a state of accomplished
mediocrity, which condemns itself, and, though it be very well able
to shoot beyond the mark before it, aims only at what it hits. In
aristocracies, on the contrary, workmen always do all they can; and
when they stop, it is because they have reached the limit of their
attainments.

When I arrive in a country where I find some of the finest productions
of the arts, I learn from this fact nothing of the social condition or
of the political constitution of the country. But if I perceive that
the productions of the arts are generally of an inferior quality, very
abundant and very cheap, I am convinced that, amongst the people where
this occurs, privilege is on the decline, and that ranks are beginning
to intermingle, and will soon be confounded together.

The handicraftsmen of democratic ages endeavor not only to bring their
useful productions within the reach of the whole community, but they
strive to give to all their commodities attractive qualities which they
do not in reality possess. In the confusion of all ranks everyone hopes
to appear what he is not, and makes great exertions to succeed in this
object. This sentiment indeed, which is but too natural to the heart of
man, does not originate in the democratic principle; but that principle
applies it to material objects. To mimic virtue is of every age; but the
hypocrisy of luxury belongs more particularly to the ages of democracy.

To satisfy these new cravings of human vanity the arts have recourse to
every species of imposture: and these devices sometimes go so far as to
defeat their own purpose. Imitation diamonds are now made which may be
easily mistaken for real ones; as soon as the art of fabricating false
diamonds shall have reached so high a degree of perfection that they
cannot be distinguished from real ones, it is probable that both one and
the other will be abandoned, and become mere pebbles again.

This leads me to speak of those arts which are called the fine arts, by
way of distinction. I do not believe that it is a necessary effect of a
democratic social condition and of democratic institutions to diminish
the number of men who cultivate the fine arts; but these causes exert
a very powerful influence on the manner in which these arts are
cultivated. Many of those who had already contracted a taste for the
fine arts are impoverished: on the other hand, many of those who are not
yet rich begin to conceive that taste, at least by imitation; and the
number of consumers increases, but opulent and fastidious consumers
become more scarce. Something analogous to what I have already
pointed out in the useful arts then takes place in the fine arts;
the productions of artists are more numerous, but the merit of each
production is diminished. No longer able to soar to what is great, they
cultivate what is pretty and elegant; and appearance is more attended
to than reality. In aristocracies a few great pictures are produced;
in democratic countries, a vast number of insignificant ones. In the
former, statues are raised of bronze; in the latter, they are modelled
in plaster.

When I arrived for the first time at New York, by that part of the
Atlantic Ocean which is called the Narrows, I was surprised to perceive
along the shore, at some distance from the city, a considerable number
of little palaces of white marble, several of which were built after the
models of ancient architecture. When I went the next day to inspect more
closely the building which had particularly attracted my notice, I found
that its walls were of whitewashed brick, and its columns of painted
wood. All the edifices which I had admired the night before were of the
same kind.

The social condition and the institutions of democracy impart, moreover,
certain peculiar tendencies to all the imitative arts, which it is easy
to point out. They frequently withdraw them from the delineation of the
soul to fix them exclusively on that of the body: and they substitute
the representation of motion and sensation for that of sentiment and
thought: in a word, they put the real in the place of the ideal. I doubt
whether Raphael studied the minutest intricacies of the mechanism of the
human body as thoroughly as the draughtsmen of our own time. He did not
attach the same importance to rigorous accuracy on this point as they
do, because he aspired to surpass nature. He sought to make of man
something which should be superior to man, and to embellish beauty's
self. David and his scholars were, on the contrary, as good anatomists
as they were good painters. They wonderfully depicted the models which
they had before their eyes, but they rarely imagined anything beyond
them: they followed nature with fidelity: whilst Raphael sought for
something better than nature. They have left us an exact portraiture
of man; but he discloses in his works a glimpse of the Divinity. This
remark as to the manner of treating a subject is no less applicable to
the choice of it. The painters of the Middle Ages generally sought far
above themselves, and away from their own time, for mighty subjects,
which left to their imagination an unbounded range. Our painters
frequently employ their talents in the exact imitation of the details
of private life, which they have always before their eyes; and they are
forever copying trivial objects, the originals of which are only too
abundant in nature.




Chapter XII: Why The Americans Raise Some Monuments So Insignificant,
And Others So Important

I have just observed, that in democratic ages monuments of the arts tend
to become more numerous and less important. I now hasten to point out
the exception to this rule. In a democratic community individuals are
very powerless; but the State which represents them all, and contains
them all in its grasp, is very powerful. Nowhere do citizens appear so
insignificant as in a democratic nation; nowhere does the nation itself
appear greater, or does the mind more easily take in a wide general
survey of it. In democratic communities the imagination is compressed
when men consider themselves; it expands indefinitely when they think
of the State. Hence it is that the same men who live on a small scale in
narrow dwellings, frequently aspire to gigantic splendor in the erection
of their public monuments.

The Americans traced out the circuit of an immense city on the site
which they intended to make their capital, but which, up to the present
time, is hardly more densely peopled than Pontoise, though, according
to them, it will one day contain a million of inhabitants. They have
already rooted up trees for ten miles round, lest they should interfere
with the future citizens of this imaginary metropolis. They have erected
a magnificent palace for Congress in the centre of the city, and have
given it the pompous name of the Capitol. The several States of the
Union are every day planning and erecting for themselves prodigious
undertakings, which would astonish the engineers of the great European
nations. Thus democracy not only leads men to a vast number of
inconsiderable productions; it also leads them to raise some monuments
on the largest scale: but between these two extremes there is a blank.
A few scattered remains of enormous buildings can therefore teach us
nothing of the social condition and the institutions of the people by
whom they were raised. I may add, though the remark leads me to step
out of my subject, that they do not make us better acquainted with its
greatness, its civilization, and its real prosperity. Whensoever a power
of any kind shall be able to make a whole people co-operate in a single
undertaking, that power, with a little knowledge and a great deal of
time, will succeed in obtaining something enormous from the co-operation
of efforts so multiplied. But this does not lead to the conclusion that
the people was very happy, very enlightened, or even very strong.

The Spaniards found the City of Mexico full of magnificent temples
and vast palaces; but that did not prevent Cortes from conquering the
Mexican Empire with 600 foot soldiers and sixteen horses. If the Romans
had been better acquainted with the laws of hydraulics, they would not
have constructed all the aqueducts which surround the ruins of their
cities--they would have made a better use of their power and their
wealth. If they had invented the steam-engine, perhaps they would not
have extended to the extremities of their empire those long artificial
roads which are called Roman roads. These things are at once the
splendid memorials of their ignorance and of their greatness. A people
which should leave no other vestige of its track than a few leaden pipes
in the earth and a few iron rods upon its surface, might have been more
the master of nature than the Romans.




Chapter XIII: Literary Characteristics Of Democratic Ages

When a traveller goes into a bookseller's shop in the United States,
and examines the American books upon the shelves, the number of works
appears extremely great; whilst that of known authors appears, on the
contrary, to be extremely small. He will first meet with a number
of elementary treatises, destined to teach the rudiments of human
knowledge. Most of these books are written in Europe; the Americans
reprint them, adapting them to their own country. Next comes an enormous
quantity of religious works, Bibles, sermons, edifying anecdotes,
controversial divinity, and reports of charitable societies; lastly,
appears the long catalogue of political pamphlets. In America, parties
do not write books to combat each others' opinions, but pamphlets which
are circulated for a day with incredible rapidity, and then expire. In
the midst of all these obscure productions of the human brain are to be
found the more remarkable works of that small number of authors, whose
names are, or ought to be, known to Europeans.

Although America is perhaps in our days the civilized country in
which literature is least attended to, a large number of persons are
nevertheless to be found there who take an interest in the productions
of the mind, and who make them, if not the study of their lives, at
least the charm of their leisure hours. But England supplies these
readers with the larger portion of the books which they require. Almost
all important English books are republished in the United States. The
literary genius of Great Britain still darts its rays into the recesses
of the forests of the New World. There is hardly a pioneer's hut which
does not contain a few odd volumes of Shakespeare. I remember that I
read the feudal play of Henry V for the first time in a loghouse.

Not only do the Americans constantly draw upon the treasures of English
literature, but it may be said with truth that they find the literature
of England growing on their own soil. The larger part of that small
number of men in the United States who are engaged in the composition of
literary works are English in substance, and still more so in form.
Thus they transport into the midst of democracy the ideas and literary
fashions which are current amongst the aristocratic nation they have
taken for their model. They paint with colors borrowed from foreign
manners; and as they hardly ever represent the country they were born
in as it really is, they are seldom popular there. The citizens of the
United States are themselves so convinced that it is not for them that
books are published, that before they can make up their minds upon the
merit of one of their authors, they generally wait till his fame has
been ratified in England, just as in pictures the author of an original
is held to be entitled to judge of the merit of a copy. The inhabitants
of the United States have then at present, properly speaking, no
literature. The only authors whom I acknowledge as American are the
journalists. They indeed are not great writers, but they speak the
language of their countrymen, and make themselves heard by them. Other
authors are aliens; they are to the Americans what the imitators of the
Greeks and Romans were to us at the revival of learning--an object of
curiosity, not of general sympathy. They amuse the mind, but they do not
act upon the manners of the people.

I have already said that this state of things is very far from
originating in democracy alone, and that the causes of it must be sought
for in several peculiar circumstances independent of the democratic
principle. If the Americans, retaining the same laws and social
condition, had had a different origin, and had been transported
into another country, I do not question that they would have had
a literature. Even as they now are, I am convinced that they will
ultimately have one; but its character will be different from that which
marks the American literary productions of our time, and that character
will be peculiarly its own. Nor is it impossible to trace this character
beforehand.

I suppose an aristocratic people amongst whom letters are cultivated;
the labors of the mind, as well as the affairs of state, are conducted
by a ruling class in society. The literary as well as the political
career is almost entirely confined to this class, or to those nearest
to it in rank. These premises suffice to give me a key to all the rest.
When a small number of the same men are engaged at the same time upon
the same objects, they easily concert with one another, and agree upon
certain leading rules which are to govern them each and all. If the
object which attracts the attention of these men is literature, the
productions of the mind will soon be subjected by them to precise
canons, from which it will no longer be allowable to depart. If these
men occupy a hereditary position in the country, they will be naturally
inclined, not only to adopt a certain number of fixed rules for
themselves, but to follow those which their forefathers laid down for
their own guidance; their code will be at once strict and traditional.
As they are not necessarily engrossed by the cares of daily life--as
they have never been so, any more than their fathers were before
them--they have learned to take an interest, for several generations
back, in the labors of the mind. They have learned to understand
literature as an art, to love it in the end for its own sake, and to
feel a scholar-like satisfaction in seeing men conform to its rules. Nor
is this all: the men of whom I speak began and will end their lives in
easy or in affluent circumstances; hence they have naturally conceived
a taste for choice gratifications, and a love of refined and delicate
pleasures. Nay more, a kind of indolence of mind and heart, which they
frequently contract in the midst of this long and peaceful enjoyment
of so much welfare, leads them to put aside, even from their pleasures,
whatever might be too startling or too acute. They had rather be amused
than intensely excited; they wish to be interested, but not to be
carried away.

Now let us fancy a great number of literary performances executed by the
men, or for the men, whom I have just described, and we shall readily
conceive a style of literature in which everything will be regular and
prearranged. The slightest work will be carefully touched in its least
details; art and labor will be conspicuous in everything; each kind of
writing will have rules of its own, from which it will not be allowed to
swerve, and which distinguish it from all others. Style will be thought
of almost as much importance as thought; and the form will be no less
considered than the matter: the diction will be polished, measured,
and uniform. The tone of the mind will be always dignified, seldom very
animated; and writers will care more to perfect what they produce than
to multiply their productions. It will sometimes happen that the members
of the literary class, always living amongst themselves and writing for
themselves alone, will lose sight of the rest of the world, which will
infect them with a false and labored style; they will lay down minute
literary rules for their exclusive use, which will insensibly lead them
to deviate from common-sense, and finally to transgress the bounds of
nature. By dint of striving after a mode of parlance different from
the vulgar, they will arrive at a sort of aristocratic jargon, which is
hardly less remote from pure language than is the coarse dialect of the
people. Such are the natural perils of literature amongst aristocracies.
Every aristocracy which keeps itself entirely aloof from the people
becomes impotent--a fact which is as true in literature as it is in
politics. *a

[Footnote a: All this is especially true of the aristocratic countries
which have been long and peacefully subject to a monarchical government.
When liberty prevails in an aristocracy, the higher ranks are constantly
obliged to make use of the lower classes; and when they use, they
approach them. This frequently introduces something of a democratic
spirit into an aristocratic community. There springs up, moreover, in a
privileged body, governing with energy and an habitually bold policy, a
taste for stir and excitement which must infallibly affect all literary
performances.]

Let us now turn the picture and consider the other side of it; let us
transport ourselves into the midst of a democracy, not unprepared by
ancient traditions and present culture to partake in the pleasures of
the mind. Ranks are there intermingled and confounded; knowledge and
power are both infinitely subdivided, and, if I may use the expression,
scattered on every side. Here then is a motley multitude, whose
intellectual wants are to be supplied. These new votaries of the
pleasures of the mind have not all received the same education; they
do not possess the same degree of culture as their fathers, nor any
resemblance to them--nay, they perpetually differ from themselves,
for they live in a state of incessant change of place, feelings,
and fortunes. The mind of each member of the community is therefore
unattached to that of his fellow-citizens by tradition or by common
habits; and they have never had the power, the inclination, nor the
time to concert together. It is, however, from the bosom of this
heterogeneous and agitated mass that authors spring; and from the same
source their profits and their fame are distributed. I can without
difficulty understand that, under these circumstances, I must expect
to meet in the literature of such a people with but few of those strict
conventional rules which are admitted by readers and by writers in
aristocratic ages. If it should happen that the men of some one period
were agreed upon any such rules, that would prove nothing for the
following period; for amongst democratic nations each new generation is
a new people. Amongst such nations, then, literature will not easily
be subjected to strict rules, and it is impossible that any such rules
should ever be permanent.

In democracies it is by no means the case that all the men who cultivate
literature have received a literary education; and most of those who
have some tinge of belles-lettres are either engaged in politics, or in
a profession which only allows them to taste occasionally and by stealth
the pleasures of the mind. These pleasures, therefore, do not constitute
the principal charm of their lives; but they are considered as a
transient and necessary recreation amidst the serious labors of life.
Such man can never acquire a sufficiently intimate knowledge of the art
of literature to appreciate its more delicate beauties; and the minor
shades of expression must escape them. As the time they can devote to
letters is very short, they seek to make the best use of the whole of
it. They prefer books which may be easily procured, quickly read, and
which require no learned researches to be understood. They ask for
beauties, self-proffered and easily enjoyed; above all, they must have
what is unexpected and new. Accustomed to the struggle, the crosses, and
the monotony of practical life, they require rapid emotions, startling
passages--truths or errors brilliant enough to rouse them up, and to
plunge them at once, as if by violence, into the midst of a subject.

Why should I say more? or who does not understand what is about to
follow, before I have expressed it? Taken as a whole, literature
in democratic ages can never present, as it does in the periods of
aristocracy, an aspect of order, regularity, science, and art; its form
will, on the contrary, ordinarily be slighted, sometimes despised. Style
will frequently be fantastic, incorrect, overburdened, and loose--almost
always vehement and bold. Authors will aim at rapidity of execution,
more than at perfection of detail. Small productions will be more
common than bulky books; there will be more wit than erudition, more
imagination than profundity; and literary performances will bear marks
of an untutored and rude vigor of thought--frequently of great variety
and singular fecundity. The object of authors will be to astonish rather
than to please, and to stir the passions more than to charm the taste.
Here and there, indeed, writers will doubtless occur who will choose
a different track, and who will, if they are gifted with superior
abilities, succeed in finding readers, in spite of their defects or
their better qualities; but these exceptions will be rare, and even
the authors who shall so depart from the received practice in the main
subject of their works, will always relapse into it in some lesser
details.

I have just depicted two extreme conditions: the transition by which a
nation passes from the former to the latter is not sudden but gradual,
and marked with shades of very various intensity. In the passage which
conducts a lettered people from the one to the other, there is almost
always a moment at which the literary genius of democratic nations has
its confluence with that of aristocracies, and both seek to establish
their joint sway over the human mind. Such epochs are transient, but
very brilliant: they are fertile without exuberance, and animated
without confusion. The French literature of the eighteenth century may
serve as an example.

I should say more than I mean if I were to assert that the literature of
a nation is always subordinate to its social condition and its political
constitution. I am aware that, independently of these causes, there
are several others which confer certain characteristics on literary
productions; but these appear to me to be the chief. The relations which
exist between the social and political condition of a people and the
genius of its authors are always very numerous: whoever knows the one is
never completely ignorant of the other.




Chapter XIV: The Trade Of Literature

Democracy not only infuses a taste for letters among the trading
classes, but introduces a trading spirit into literature. In
aristocracies, readers are fastidious and few in number; in democracies,
they are far more numerous and far less difficult to please. The
consequence is, that among aristocratic nations, no one can hope to
succeed without immense exertions, and that these exertions may bestow
a great deal of fame, but can never earn much money; whilst among
democratic nations, a writer may flatter himself that he will obtain at
a cheap rate a meagre reputation and a large fortune. For this
purpose he need not be admired; it is enough that he is liked. The
ever-increasing crowd of readers, and their continual craving for
something new, insure the sale of books which nobody much esteems.

In democratic periods the public frequently treat authors as kings do
their courtiers; they enrich, and they despise them. What more is needed
by the venal souls which are born in courts, or which are worthy to live
there? Democratic literature is always infested with a tribe of writers
who look upon letters as a mere trade: and for some few great authors
who adorn it you may reckon thousands of idea-mongers.




Chapter XV: The Study Of Greek And Latin Literature Peculiarly Useful In
Democratic Communities

What was called the People in the most democratic republics of
antiquity, was very unlike what we designate by that term. In Athens,
all the citizens took part in public affairs; but there were only 20,000
citizens to more than 350,000 inhabitants. All the rest were slaves, and
discharged the greater part of those duties which belong at the present
day to the lower or even to the middle classes. Athens, then, with her
universal suffrage, was after all merely an aristocratic republic in
which all the nobles had an equal right to the government. The struggle
between the patricians and plebeians of Rome must be considered in
the same light: it was simply an intestine feud between the elder and
younger branches of the same family. All the citizens belonged, in fact,
to the aristocracy, and partook of its character.

It is moreover to be remarked, that amongst the ancients books were
always scarce and dear; and that very great difficulties impeded their
publication and circulation. These circumstances concentrated literary
tastes and habits amongst a small number of men, who formed a small
literary aristocracy out of the choicer spirits of the great political
aristocracy. Accordingly nothing goes to prove that literature was ever
treated as a trade amongst the Greeks and Romans.

These peoples, which not only constituted aristocracies, but very
polished and free nations, of course imparted to their literary
productions the defects and the merits which characterize the literature
of aristocratic ages. And indeed a very superficial survey of the
literary remains of the ancients will suffice to convince us, that if
those writers were sometimes deficient in variety, or fertility in their
subjects, or in boldness, vivacity, or power of generalization in
their thoughts, they always displayed exquisite care and skill in their
details. Nothing in their works seems to be done hastily or at random:
every line is written for the eye of the connoisseur, and is shaped
after some conception of ideal beauty. No literature places those fine
qualities, in which the writers of democracies are naturally deficient,
in bolder relief than that of the ancients; no literature, therefore,
ought to be more studied in democratic ages. This study is better suited
than any other to combat the literary defects inherent in those ages; as
for their more praiseworthy literary qualities, they will spring up of
their own accord, without its being necessary to learn to acquire them.

It is important that this point should be clearly understood. A
particular study may be useful to the literature of a people, without
being appropriate to its social and political wants. If men were to
persist in teaching nothing but the literature of the dead languages in
a community where everyone is habitually led to make vehement exertions
to augment or to maintain his fortune, the result would be a very
polished, but a very dangerous, race of citizens. For as their social
and political condition would give them every day a sense of wants which
their education would never teach them to supply, they would perturb the
State, in the name of the Greeks and Romans, instead of enriching it by
their productive industry.

It is evident that in democratic communities the interest of
individuals, as well as the security of the commonwealth, demands that
the education of the greater number should be scientific, commercial,
and industrial, rather than literary. Greek and Latin should not be
taught in all schools; but it is important that those who by their
natural disposition or their fortune are destined to cultivate letters
or prepared to relish them, should find schools where a complete
knowledge of ancient literature may be acquired, and where the true
scholar may be formed. A few excellent universities would do more
towards the attainment of this object than a vast number of bad grammar
schools, where superfluous matters, badly learned, stand in the way of
sound instruction in necessary studies.

All who aspire to literary excellence in democratic nations, ought
frequently to refresh themselves at the springs of ancient literature:
there is no more wholesome course for the mind. Not that I hold the
literary productions of the ancients to be irreproachable; but I
think that they have some especial merits, admirably calculated to
counterbalance our peculiar defects. They are a prop on the side on
which we are in most danger of falling.




Chapter XVI: The Effect Of Democracy On Language

If the reader has rightly understood what I have already said on
the subject of literature in general, he will have no difficulty in
comprehending that species of influence which a democratic social
condition and democratic institutions may exercise over language itself,
which is the chief instrument of thought.

American authors may truly be said to live more in England than in their
own country; since they constantly study the English writers, and take
them every day for their models. But such is not the case with the bulk
of the population, which is more immediately subjected to the peculiar
causes acting upon the United States. It is not then to the written, but
to the spoken language that attention must be paid, if we would detect
the modifications which the idiom of an aristocratic people may undergo
when it becomes the language of a democracy.

Englishmen of education, and more competent judges than I can be myself
of the nicer shades of expression, have frequently assured me that
the language of the educated classes in the United States is notably
different from that of the educated classes in Great Britain. They
complain not only that the Americans have brought into use a number of
new words--the difference and the distance between the two countries
might suffice to explain that much--but that these new words are more
especially taken from the jargon of parties, the mechanical arts, or the
language of trade. They assert, in addition to this, that old English
words are often used by the Americans in new acceptations; and lastly,
that the inhabitants of the United States frequently intermingle their
phraseology in the strangest manner, and sometimes place words together
which are always kept apart in the language of the mother-country. These
remarks, which were made to me at various times by persons who appeared
to be worthy of credit, led me to reflect upon the subject; and my
reflections brought me, by theoretical reasoning, to the same point at
which my informants had arrived by practical observation.

In aristocracies, language must naturally partake of that state of
repose in which everything remains. Few new words are coined, because
few new things are made; and even if new things were made, they would
be designated by known words, whose meaning has been determined by
tradition. If it happens that the human mind bestirs itself at length,
or is roused by light breaking in from without, the novel expressions
which are introduced are characterized by a degree of learning,
intelligence, and philosophy, which shows that they do not originate
in a democracy. After the fall of Constantinople had turned the tide of
science and literature towards the west, the French language was almost
immediately invaded by a multitude of new words, which had all Greek
or Latin roots. An erudite neologism then sprang up in France which was
confined to the educated classes, and which produced no sensible effect,
or at least a very gradual one, upon the people. All the nations of
Europe successively exhibited the same change. Milton alone introduced
more than six hundred words into the English language, almost all
derived from the Latin, the Greek, or the Hebrew. The constant agitation
which prevails in a democratic community tends unceasingly, on the
contrary, to change the character of the language, as it does the aspect
of affairs. In the midst of this general stir and competition of minds,
a great number of new ideas are formed, old ideas are lost, or reappear,
or are subdivided into an infinite variety of minor shades. The
consequence is, that many words must fall into desuetude, and others
must be brought into use.

Democratic nations love change for its own sake; and this is seen in
their language as much as in their politics. Even when they do not
need to change words, they sometimes feel a wish to transform them. The
genius of a democratic people is not only shown by the great number of
words they bring into use, but also by the nature of the ideas these new
words represent. Amongst such a people the majority lays down the law
in language as well as in everything else; its prevailing spirit is as
manifest in that as in other respects. But the majority is more engaged
in business than in study--in political and commercial interests than in
philosophical speculation or literary pursuits. Most of the words coined
or adopted for its use will therefore bear the mark of these habits;
they will mainly serve to express the wants of business, the passions of
party, or the details of the public administration. In these departments
the language will constantly spread, whilst on the other hand it will
gradually lose ground in metaphysics and theology.

As to the source from which democratic nations are wont to derive their
new expressions, and the manner in which they go to work to coin them,
both may easily be described. Men living in democratic countries know
but little of the language which was spoken at Athens and at Rome,
and they do not care to dive into the lore of antiquity to find the
expression they happen to want. If they have sometimes recourse to
learned etymologies, vanity will induce them to search at the roots of
the dead languages; but erudition does not naturally furnish them with
its resources. The most ignorant, it sometimes happens, will use them
most. The eminently democratic desire to get above their own sphere will
often lead them to seek to dignify a vulgar profession by a Greek or
Latin name. The lower the calling is, and the more remote from learning,
the more pompous and erudite is its appellation. Thus the French
rope-dancers have transformed themselves into acrobates and funambules.

In the absence of knowledge of the dead languages, democratic
nations are apt to borrow words from living tongues; for their mutual
intercourse becomes perpetual, and the inhabitants of different
countries imitate each other the more readily as they grow more like
each other every day.

But it is principally upon their own languages that democratic nations
attempt to perpetrate innovations. From time to time they resume
forgotten expressions in their vocabulary, which they restore to use; or
they borrow from some particular class of the community a term peculiar
to it, which they introduce with a figurative meaning into the language
of daily life. Many expressions which originally belonged to the
technical language of a profession or a party, are thus drawn into
general circulation.

The most common expedient employed by democratic nations to make an
innovation in language consists in giving some unwonted meaning to
an expression already in use. This method is very simple, prompt, and
convenient; no learning is required to use it aright, and ignorance
itself rather facilitates the practice; but that practice is most
dangerous to the language. When a democratic people doubles the meaning
of a word in this way, they sometimes render the signification which it
retains as ambiguous as that which it acquires. An author begins by a
slight deflection of a known expression from its primitive meaning, and
he adapts it, thus modified, as well as he can to his subject. A second
writer twists the sense of the expression in another way; a third takes
possession of it for another purpose; and as there is no common appeal
to the sentence of a permanent tribunal which may definitely settle the
signification of the word, it remains in an ambiguous condition. The
consequence is that writers hardly ever appear to dwell upon a single
thought, but they always seem to point their aim at a knot of ideas,
leaving the reader to judge which of them has been hit. This is a
deplorable consequence of democracy. I had rather that the language
should be made hideous with words imported from the Chinese, the
Tartars, or the Hurons, than that the meaning of a word in our own
language should become indeterminate. Harmony and uniformity are
only secondary beauties in composition; many of these things are
conventional, and, strictly speaking, it is possible to forego them; but
without clear phraseology there is no good language.

The principle of equality necessarily introduces several other changes
into language. In aristocratic ages, when each nation tends to stand
aloof from all others and likes to have distinct characteristics of its
own, it often happens that several peoples which have a common origin
become nevertheless estranged from each other, so that, without ceasing
to understand the same language, they no longer all speak it in the same
manner. In these ages each nation is divided into a certain number of
classes, which see but little of each other, and do not intermingle.
Each of these classes contracts, and invariably retains, habits of
mind peculiar to itself, and adopts by choice certain words and certain
terms, which afterwards pass from generation to generation, like their
estates. The same idiom then comprises a language of the poor and a
language of the rich--a language of the citizen and a language of the
nobility--a learned language and a vulgar one. The deeper the divisions,
and the more impassable the barriers of society become, the more must
this be the case. I would lay a wager, that amongst the castes of India
there are amazing variations of language, and that there is almost
as much difference between the language of the pariah and that of the
Brahmin as there is in their dress. When, on the contrary, men, being no
longer restrained by ranks, meet on terms of constant intercourse--when
castes are destroyed, and the classes of society are recruited and
intermixed with each other, all the words of a language are mingled.
Those which are unsuitable to the greater number perish; the remainder
form a common store, whence everyone chooses pretty nearly at random.
Almost all the different dialects which divided the idioms of European
nations are manifestly declining; there is no patois in the New World,
and it is disappearing every day from the old countries.

The influence of this revolution in social conditions is as much felt
in style as it is in phraseology. Not only does everyone use the same
words, but a habit springs up of using them without discrimination. The
rules which style had set up are almost abolished: the line ceases to
be drawn between expressions which seem by their very nature vulgar, and
other which appear to be refined. Persons springing from different ranks
of society carry the terms and expressions they are accustomed to use
with them, into whatever circumstances they may pass; thus the origin
of words is lost like the origin of individuals, and there is as much
confusion in language as there is in society.

I am aware that in the classification of words there are rules which do
not belong to one form of society any more than to another, but which
are derived from the nature of things. Some expressions and phrases
are vulgar, because the ideas they are meant to express are low in
themselves; others are of a higher character, because the objects they
are intended to designate are naturally elevated. No intermixture of
ranks will ever efface these differences. But the principle of equality
cannot fail to root out whatever is merely conventional and arbitrary
in the forms of thought. Perhaps the necessary classification which
I pointed out in the last sentence will always be less respected by a
democratic people than by any other, because amongst such a people
there are no men who are permanently disposed by education, culture, and
leisure to study the natural laws of language, and who cause those laws
to be respected by their own observance of them.

I shall not quit this topic without touching on a feature of democratic
languages, which is perhaps more characteristic of them than any other.
It has already been shown that democratic nations have a taste, and
sometimes a passion, for general ideas, and that this arises from their
peculiar merits and defects. This liking for general ideas is displayed
in democratic languages by the continual use of generic terms or
abstract expressions, and by the manner in which they are employed.
This is the great merit and the great imperfection of these languages.
Democratic nations are passionately addicted to generic terms or
abstract expressions, because these modes of speech enlarge thought,
and assist the operations of the mind by enabling it to include several
objects in a small compass. A French democratic writer will be apt
to say capacites in the abstract for men of capacity, and without
particularizing the objects to which their capacity is applied: he will
talk about actualities to designate in one word the things passing
before his eyes at the instant; and he will comprehend under the term
eventualities whatever may happen in the universe, dating from the moment
at which he speaks. Democratic writers are perpetually coining words of
this kind, in which they sublimate into further abstraction the abstract
terms of the language. Nay, more, to render their mode of speech more
succinct, they personify the subject of these abstract terms, and make
it act like a real entity. Thus they would say in French, "La force des
choses veut que les capacites gouvernent."

I cannot better illustrate what I mean than by my own example. I have
frequently used the word "equality" in an absolute sense--nay, I have
personified equality in several places; thus I have said that equality
does such and such things, or refrains from doing others. It may be
affirmed that the writers of the age of Louis XIV would not have used
these expressions: they would never have thought of using the word
"equality" without applying it to some particular object; and they would
rather have renounced the term altogether than have consented to make a
living personage of it.

These abstract terms which abound in democratic languages, and which are
used on every occasion without attaching them to any particular fact,
enlarge and obscure the thoughts they are intended to convey; they
render the mode of speech more succinct, and the idea contained in
it less clear. But with regard to language, democratic nations prefer
obscurity to labor. I know not indeed whether this loose style has not
some secret charm for those who speak and write amongst these nations.
As the men who live there are frequently left to the efforts of their
individual powers of mind, they are almost always a prey to doubt; and
as their situation in life is forever changing, they are never held fast
to any of their opinions by the certain tenure of their fortunes. Men
living in democratic countries are, then, apt to entertain unsettled
ideas, and they require loose expressions to convey them. As they never
know whether the idea they express to-day will be appropriate to the new
position they may occupy to-morrow, they naturally acquire a liking for
abstract terms. An abstract term is like a box with a false bottom: you
may put in it what ideas you please, and take them out again without
being observed.

Amongst all nations, generic and abstract terms form the basis of
language. I do not, therefore, affect to expel these terms from
democratic languages; I simply remark that men have an especial
tendency, in the ages of democracy, to multiply words of this kind--to
take them always by themselves in their most abstract acceptation, and
to use them on all occasions, even when the nature of the discourse does
not require them.




Chapter XVII: Of Some Of The Sources Of Poetry Amongst Democratic
Nations

Various different significations have been given to the word "poetry."
It would weary my readers if I were to lead them into a discussion as to
which of these definitions ought to be selected: I prefer telling them
at once that which I have chosen. In my opinion, poetry is the search
and the delineation of the ideal. The poet is he who, by suppressing a
part of what exists, by adding some imaginary touches to the picture,
and by combining certain real circumstances, but which do not in fact
concurrently happen, completes and extends the work of nature. Thus the
object of poetry is not to represent what is true, but to adorn it,
and to present to the mind some loftier imagery. Verse, regarded as the
ideal beauty of language, may be eminently poetical; but verse does not,
of itself, constitute poetry.

I now proceed to inquire whether, amongst the actions, the sentiments,
and the opinions of democratic nations, there are any which lead to a
conception of ideal beauty, and which may for this reason be
considered as natural sources of poetry. It must in the first place, be
acknowledged that the taste for ideal beauty, and the pleasure derived
from the expression of it, are never so intense or so diffused amongst a
democratic as amongst an aristocratic people. In aristocratic nations it
sometimes happens that the body goes on to act as it were spontaneously,
whilst the higher faculties are bound and burdened by repose. Amongst
these nations the people will very often display poetic tastes, and
sometimes allow their fancy to range beyond and above what surrounds
them. But in democracies the love of physical gratification, the notion
of bettering one's condition, the excitement of competition, the charm
of anticipated success, are so many spurs to urge men onwards in the
active professions they have embraced, without allowing them to deviate
for an instant from the track. The main stress of the faculties is to
this point. The imagination is not extinct; but its chief function is to
devise what may be useful, and to represent what is real.

The principle of equality not only diverts men from the description of
ideal beauty--it also diminishes the number of objects to be described.
Aristocracy, by maintaining society in a fixed position, is favorable
to the solidity and duration of positive religions, as well as to the
stability of political institutions. It not only keeps the human mind
within a certain sphere of belief, but it predisposes the mind to adopt
one faith rather than another. An aristocratic people will always be
prone to place intermediate powers between God and man. In this respect
it may be said that the aristocratic element is favorable to poetry.
When the universe is peopled with supernatural creatures, not palpable
to the senses but discovered by the mind, the imagination ranges
freely, and poets, finding a thousand subjects to delineate, also find
a countless audience to take an interest in their productions. In
democratic ages it sometimes happens, on the contrary, that men are as
much afloat in matters of belief as they are in their laws. Scepticism
then draws the imagination of poets back to earth, and confines them to
the real and visible world. Even when the principle of equality does
not disturb religious belief, it tends to simplify it, and to divert
attention from secondary agents, to fix it principally on the Supreme
Power. Aristocracy naturally leads the human mind to the contemplation
of the past, and fixes it there. Democracy, on the contrary, gives men
a sort of instinctive distaste for what is ancient. In this respect
aristocracy is far more favorable to poetry; for things commonly grow
larger and more obscure as they are more remote; and for this twofold
reason they are better suited to the delineation of the ideal.

After having deprived poetry of the past, the principle of equality
robs it in part of the present. Amongst aristocratic nations there are a
certain number of privileged personages, whose situation is, as it were,
without and above the condition of man; to these, power, wealth, fame,
wit, refinement, and distinction in all things appear peculiarly to
belong. The crowd never sees them very closely, or does not watch them
in minute details; and little is needed to make the description of such
men poetical. On the other hand, amongst the same people, you will meet
with classes so ignorant, low, and enslaved, that they are no less fit
objects for poetry from the excess of their rudeness and wretchedness,
than the former are from their greatness and refinement. Besides, as
the different classes of which an aristocratic community is composed
are widely separated, and imperfectly acquainted with each other, the
imagination may always represent them with some addition to, or some
subtraction from, what they really are. In democratic communities, where
men are all insignificant and very much alike, each man instantly sees
all his fellows when he surveys himself. The poets of democratic ages
can never, therefore, take any man in particular as the subject of a
piece; for an object of slender importance, which is distinctly seen
on all sides, will never lend itself to an ideal conception. Thus the
principle of equality; in proportion as it has established itself in
the world, has dried up most of the old springs of poetry. Let us now
attempt to show what new ones it may disclose.

When scepticism had depopulated heaven, and the progress of equality
had reduced each individual to smaller and better known proportions, the
poets, not yet aware of what they could substitute for the great themes
which were departing together with the aristocracy, turned their eyes
to inanimate nature. As they lost sight of gods and heroes, they set
themselves to describe streams and mountains. Thence originated in
the last century, that kind of poetry which has been called, by way
of distinction, the descriptive. Some have thought that this sort of
delineation, embellished with all the physical and inanimate objects
which cover the earth, was the kind of poetry peculiar to democratic
ages; but I believe this to be an error, and that it only belongs to a
period of transition.

I am persuaded that in the end democracy diverts the imagination from
all that is external to man, and fixes it on man alone. Democratic
nations may amuse themselves for a while with considering the
productions of nature; but they are only excited in reality by a survey
of themselves. Here, and here alone, the true sources of poetry amongst
such nations are to be found; and it may be believed that the poets who
shall neglect to draw their inspirations hence, will lose all sway over
the minds which they would enchant, and will be left in the end with
none but unimpassioned spectators of their transports. I have shown how
the ideas of progression and of the indefinite perfectibility of the
human race belong to democratic ages. Democratic nations care but little
for what has been, but they are haunted by visions of what will be; in
this direction their unbounded imagination grows and dilates beyond all
measure. Here then is the wildest range open to the genius of poets,
which allows them to remove their performances to a sufficient distance
from the eye. Democracy shuts the past against the poet, but opens
the future before him. As all the citizens who compose a democratic
community are nearly equal and alike, the poet cannot dwell upon any one
of them; but the nation itself invites the exercise of his powers. The
general similitude of individuals, which renders any one of them taken
separately an improper subject of poetry, allows poets to include them
all in the same imagery, and to take a general survey of the people
itself. Democractic nations have a clearer perception than any others of
their own aspect; and an aspect so imposing is admirably fitted to the
delineation of the ideal.

I readily admit that the Americans have no poets; I cannot allow that
they have no poetic ideas. In Europe people talk a great deal of the
wilds of America, but the Americans themselves never think about them:
they are insensible to the wonders of inanimate nature, and they may be
said not to perceive the mighty forests which surround them till they
fall beneath the hatchet. Their eyes are fixed upon another sight: the
American people views its own march across these wilds--drying swamps,
turning the course of rivers, peopling solitudes, and subduing nature.
This magnificent image of themselves does not meet the gaze of the
Americans at intervals only; it may be said to haunt every one of them
in his least as well as in his most important actions, and to be always
flitting before his mind. Nothing conceivable is so petty, so insipid,
so crowded with paltry interests, in one word so anti-poetic, as the
life of a man in the United States. But amongst the thoughts which it
suggests there is always one which is full of poetry, and that is the
hidden nerve which gives vigor to the frame.

In aristocratic ages each people, as well as each individual, is prone
to stand separate and aloof from all others. In democratic ages, the
extreme fluctuations of men and the impatience of their desires keep
them perpetually on the move; so that the inhabitants of different
countries intermingle, see, listen to, and borrow from each other's
stores. It is not only then the members of the same community who grow
more alike; communities are themselves assimilated to one another,
and the whole assemblage presents to the eye of the spectator one vast
democracy, each citizen of which is a people. This displays the aspect
of mankind for the first time in the broadest light. All that belongs
to the existence of the human race taken as a whole, to its vicissitudes
and to its future, becomes an abundant mine of poetry. The poets who
lived in aristocratic ages have been eminently successful in their
delineations of certain incidents in the life of a people or a man;
but none of them ever ventured to include within his performances the
destinies of mankind--a task which poets writing in democratic ages may
attempt. At that same time at which every man, raising his eyes above
his country, begins at length to discern mankind at large, the Divinity
is more and more manifest to the human mind in full and entire majesty.
If in democratic ages faith in positive religions be often shaken, and
the belief in intermediate agents, by whatever name they are called, be
overcast; on the other hand men are disposed to conceive a far broader
idea of Providence itself, and its interference in human affairs assumes
a new and more imposing appearance to their eyes. Looking at the human
race as one great whole, they easily conceive that its destinies are
regulated by the same design; and in the actions of every individual
they are led to acknowledge a trace of that universal and eternal plan
on which God rules our race. This consideration may be taken as another
prolific source of poetry which is opened in democratic ages. Democratic
poets will always appear trivial and frigid if they seek to invest gods,
demons, or angels, with corporeal forms, and if they attempt to draw
them down from heaven to dispute the supremacy of earth. But if they
strive to connect the great events they commemorate with the general
providential designs which govern the universe, and, without showing the
finger of the Supreme Governor, reveal the thoughts of the Supreme Mind,
their works will be admired and understood, for the imagination of their
contemporaries takes this direction of its own accord.

It may be foreseen in the like manner that poets living in democratic
ages will prefer the delineation of passions and ideas to that of
persons and achievements. The language, the dress, and the daily actions
of men in democracies are repugnant to ideal conceptions. These things
are not poetical in themselves; and, if it were otherwise, they would
cease to be so, because they are too familiar to all those to whom the
poet would speak of them. This forces the poet constantly to search
below the external surface which is palpable to the senses, in order to
read the inner soul: and nothing lends itself more to the delineation
of the ideal than the scrutiny of the hidden depths in the immaterial
nature of man. I need not to ramble over earth and sky to discover
a wondrous object woven of contrasts, of greatness and littleness
infinite, of intense gloom and of amazing brightness--capable at once
of exciting pity, admiration, terror, contempt. I find that object in
myself. Man springs out of nothing, crosses time, and disappears forever
in the bosom of God; he is seen but for a moment, staggering on the
verge of the two abysses, and there he is lost. If man were wholly
ignorant of himself, he would have no poetry in him; for it is
impossible to describe what the mind does not conceive. If man clearly
discerned his own nature, his imagination would remain idle, and
would have nothing to add to the picture. But the nature of man is
sufficiently disclosed for him to apprehend something of himself; and
sufficiently obscure for all the rest to be plunged in thick darkness,
in which he gropes forever--and forever in vain--to lay hold on some
completer notion of his being.

Amongst a democratic people poetry will not be fed with legendary lays
or the memorials of old traditions. The poet will not attempt to people
the universe with supernatural beings in whom his readers and his own
fancy have ceased to believe; nor will he present virtues and vices
in the mask of frigid personification, which are better received under
their own features. All these resources fail him; but Man remains, and
the poet needs no more. The destinies of mankind--man himself, taken
aloof from his age and his country, and standing in the presence of
Nature and of God, with his passions, his doubts, his rare prosperities,
and inconceivable wretchedness--will become the chief, if not the sole
theme of poetry amongst these nations. Experience may confirm this
assertion, if we consider the productions of the greatest poets who have
appeared since the world has been turned to democracy. The authors of
our age who have so admirably delineated the features of Faust, Childe
Harold, Rene, and Jocelyn, did not seek to record the actions of an
individual, but to enlarge and to throw light on some of the obscurer
recesses of the human heart. Such are the poems of democracy. The
principle of equality does not then destroy all the subjects of poetry:
it renders them less numerous, but more vast.




Chapter XVIII: Of The Inflated Style Of American Writers And Orators

I have frequently remarked that the Americans, who generally treat
of business in clear, plain language, devoid of all ornament, and so
extremely simple as to be often coarse, are apt to become inflated
as soon as they attempt a more poetical diction. They then vent their
pomposity from one end of a harangue to the other; and to hear them
lavish imagery on every occasion, one might fancy that they never spoke
of anything with simplicity. The English are more rarely given to a
similar failing. The cause of this may be pointed out without much
difficulty. In democratic communities each citizen is habitually engaged
in the contemplation of a very puny object, namely himself. If he ever
raises his looks higher, he then perceives nothing but the immense form
of society at large, or the still more imposing aspect of mankind. His
ideas are all either extremely minute and clear, or extremely general
and vague: what lies between is an open void. When he has been drawn out
of his own sphere, therefore, he always expects that some amazing object
will be offered to his attention; and it is on these terms alone that he
consents to tear himself for an instant from the petty complicated cares
which form the charm and the excitement of his life. This appears to me
sufficiently to explain why men in democracies, whose concerns are in
general so paltry, call upon their poets for conceptions so vast and
descriptions so unlimited.

The authors, on their part, do not fail to obey a propensity of which
they themselves partake; they perpetually inflate their imaginations,
and expanding them beyond all bounds, they not unfrequently abandon
the great in order to reach the gigantic. By these means they hope to
attract the observation of the multitude, and to fix it easily upon
themselves: nor are their hopes disappointed; for as the multitude
seeks for nothing in poetry but subjects of very vast dimensions, it
has neither the time to measure with accuracy the proportions of all the
subjects set before it, nor a taste sufficiently correct to perceive
at once in what respect they are out of proportion. The author and the
public at once vitiate one another.

We have just seen that amongst democratic nations, the sources of poetry
are grand, but not abundant. They are soon exhausted: and poets, not
finding the elements of the ideal in what is real and true, abandon
them entirely and create monsters. I do not fear that the poetry of
democratic nations will prove too insipid, or that it will fly too near
the ground; I rather apprehend that it will be forever losing itself in
the clouds, and that it will range at last to purely imaginary regions.
I fear that the productions of democratic poets may often be surcharged
with immense and incoherent imagery, with exaggerated descriptions and
strange creations; and that the fantastic beings of their brain may
sometimes make us regret the world of reality.




Chapter XIX: Some Observations On The Drama Amongst Democratic Nations

When the revolution which subverts the social and political state of an
aristocratic people begins to penetrate into literature, it generally
first manifests itself in the drama, and it always remains conspicuous
there. The spectator of a dramatic piece is, to a certain extent, taken
by surprise by the impression it conveys. He has no time to refer to his
memory, or to consult those more able to judge than himself. It does
not occur to him to resist the new literary tendencies which begin to
be felt by him; he yields to them before he knows what they are. Authors
are very prompt in discovering which way the taste of the public is thus
secretly inclined. They shape their productions accordingly; and the
literature of the stage, after having served to indicate the approaching
literary revolution, speedily completes its accomplishment. If you would
judge beforehand of the literature of a people which is lapsing into
democracy, study its dramatic productions.

The literature of the stage, moreover, even amongst aristocratic
nations, constitutes the most democratic part of their literature.
No kind of literary gratification is so much within the reach of the
multitude as that which is derived from theatrical representations.
Neither preparation nor study is required to enjoy them: they lay hold
on you in the midst of your prejudices and your ignorance. When the yet
untutored love of the pleasures of the mind begins to affect a class
of the community, it instantly draws them to the stage. The theatres
of aristocratic nations have always been filled with spectators not
belonging to the aristocracy. At the theatre alone the higher ranks mix
with the middle and the lower classes; there alone do the former consent
to listen to the opinion of the latter, or at least to allow them
to give an opinion at all. At the theatre, men of cultivation and of
literary attainments have always had more difficulty than elsewhere in
making their taste prevail over that of the people, and in preventing
themselves from being carried away by the latter. The pit has frequently
made laws for the boxes.

If it be difficult for an aristocracy to prevent the people from getting
the upper hand in the theatre, it will readily be understood that the
people will be supreme there when democratic principles have crept into
the laws and manners--when ranks are intermixed--when minds, as well as
fortunes, are brought more nearly together--and when the upper class
has lost, with its hereditary wealth, its power, its precedents, and its
leisure. The tastes and propensities natural to democratic nations, in
respect to literature, will therefore first be discernible in the drama,
and it may be foreseen that they will break out there with vehemence. In
written productions, the literary canons of aristocracy will be gently,
gradually, and, so to speak, legally modified; at the theatre they
will be riotously overthrown. The drama brings out most of the
good qualities, and almost all the defects, inherent in democratic
literature. Democratic peoples hold erudition very cheap, and care but
little for what occurred at Rome and Athens; they want to hear something
which concerns themselves, and the delineation of the present age is
what they demand.

When the heroes and the manners of antiquity are frequently brought
upon the stage, and dramatic authors faithfully observe the rules of
antiquated precedent, that is enough to warrant a conclusion that the
democratic classes have not yet got the upper hand of the theatres.
Racine makes a very humble apology in the preface to the "Britannicus"
for having disposed of Junia amongst the Vestals, who, according to
Aulus Gellius, he says, "admitted no one below six years of age nor
above ten." We may be sure that he would neither have accused himself
of the offence, nor defended himself from censure, if he had written for
our contemporaries. A fact of this kind not only illustrates the state
of literature at the time when it occurred, but also that of society
itself. A democratic stage does not prove that the nation is in a state
of democracy, for, as we have just seen, even in aristocracies it may
happen that democratic tastes affect the drama; but when the spirit
of aristocracy reigns exclusively on the stage, the fact irrefragably
demonstrates that the whole of society is aristocratic; and it may be
boldly inferred that the same lettered and learned class which sways the
dramatic writers commands the people and governs the country.

The refined tastes and the arrogant bearing of an aristocracy will
rarely fail to lead it, when it manages the stage, to make a kind of
selection in human nature. Some of the conditions of society claim
its chief interest; and the scenes which delineate their manners are
preferred upon the stage. Certain virtues, and even certain vices,
are thought more particularly to deserve to figure there; and they are
applauded whilst all others are excluded. Upon the stage, as well
as elsewhere, an aristocratic audience will only meet personages of
quality, and share the emotions of kings. The same thing applies to
style: an aristocracy is apt to impose upon dramatic authors certain
modes of expression which give the key in which everything is to be
delivered. By these means the stage frequently comes to delineate only
one side of man, or sometimes even to represent what is not to be met
with in human nature at all--to rise above nature and to go beyond it.

In democratic communities the spectators have no such partialities,
and they rarely display any such antipathies: they like to see upon the
stage that medley of conditions, of feelings, and of opinions, which
occurs before their eyes. The drama becomes more striking, more common,
and more true. Sometimes, however, those who write for the stage in
democracies also transgress the bounds of human nature--but it is on
a different side from their predecessors. By seeking to represent in
minute detail the little singularities of the moment and the peculiar
characteristics of certain personages, they forget to portray the
general features of the race.

When the democratic classes rule the stage, they introduce as much
license in the manner of treating subjects as in the choice of them.
As the love of the drama is, of all literary tastes, that which is most
natural to democratic nations, the number of authors and of spectators,
as well as of theatrical representations, is constantly increasing
amongst these communities. A multitude composed of elements so
different, and scattered in so many different places, cannot acknowledge
the same rules or submit to the same laws. No concurrence is possible
amongst judges so numerous, who know not when they may meet again; and
therefore each pronounces his own sentence on the piece. If the effect
of democracy is generally to question the authority of all literary
rules and conventions, on the stage it abolishes them altogether, and
puts in their place nothing but the whim of each author and of each
public.

The drama also displays in an especial manner the truth of what I have
said before in speaking more generally of style and art in democratic
literature. In reading the criticisms which were occasioned by the
dramatic productions of the age of Louis XIV, one is surprised to remark
the great stress which the public laid on the probability of the plot,
and the importance which was attached to the perfect consistency of
the characters, and to their doing nothing which could not be easily
explained and understood. The value which was set upon the forms of
language at that period, and the paltry strife about words with which
dramatic authors were assailed, are no less surprising. It would
seem that the men of the age of Louis XIV attached very exaggerated
importance to those details, which may be perceived in the study, but
which escape attention on the stage. For, after all, the principal
object of a dramatic piece is to be performed, and its chief merit is to
affect the audience. But the audience and the readers in that age were
the same: on quitting the theatre they called up the author for judgment
to their own firesides. In democracies, dramatic pieces are listened to,
but not read. Most of those who frequent the amusements of the stage do
not go there to seek the pleasures of the mind, but the keen emotions of
the heart. They do not expect to hear a fine literary work, but to see
a play; and provided the author writes the language of his country
correctly enough to be understood, and that his characters excite
curiosity and awaken sympathy, the audience are satisfied. They ask no
more of fiction, and immediately return to real life. Accuracy of style
is therefore less required, because the attentive observance of its
rules is less perceptible on the stage. As for the probability of the
plot, it is incompatible with perpetual novelty, surprise, and rapidity
of invention. It is therefore neglected, and the public excuses the
neglect. You may be sure that if you succeed in bringing your audience
into the presence of something that affects them, they will not care by
what road you brought them there; and they will never reproach you for
having excited their emotions in spite of dramatic rules.

The Americans very broadly display all the different propensities which
I have here described when they go to the theatres; but it must be
acknowledged that as yet a very small number of them go to theatres at
all. Although playgoers and plays have prodigiously increased in the
United States in the last forty years, the population indulges in this
kind of amusement with the greatest reserve. This is attributable to
peculiar causes, which the reader is already acquainted with, and of
which a few words will suffice to remind him. The Puritans who founded
the American republics were not only enemies to amusements, but they
professed an especial abhorrence for the stage. They considered it as
an abominable pastime; and as long as their principles prevailed with
undivided sway, scenic performances were wholly unknown amongst them.
These opinions of the first fathers of the colony have left very deep
marks on the minds of their descendants. The extreme regularity of
habits and the great strictness of manners which are observable in the
United States, have as yet opposed additional obstacles to the growth
of dramatic art. There are no dramatic subjects in a country which has
witnessed no great political catastrophes, and in which love invariably
leads by a straight and easy road to matrimony. People who spend every
day in the week in making money, and the Sunday in going to church, have
nothing to invite the muse of Comedy.

A single fact suffices to show that the stage is not very popular in the
United States. The Americans, whose laws allow of the utmost freedom
and even license of language in all other respects, have nevertheless
subjected their dramatic authors to a sort of censorship. Theatrical
performances can only take place by permission of the municipal
authorities. This may serve to show how much communities are like
individuals; they surrender themselves unscrupulously to their ruling
passions, and afterwards take the greatest care not to yield too much to
the vehemence of tastes which they do not possess.

No portion of literature is connected by closer or more numerous ties
with the present condition of society than the drama. The drama of one
period can never be suited to the following age, if in the interval an
important revolution has changed the manners and the laws of the nation.
The great authors of a preceding age may be read; but pieces written
for a different public will not be followed. The dramatic authors of the
past live only in books. The traditional taste of certain individuals,
vanity, fashion, or the genius of an actor may sustain or resuscitate
for a time the aristocratic drama amongst a democracy; but it will
speedily fall away of itself--not overthrown, but abandoned.




Chapter XX: Characteristics Of Historians In Democratic Ages

Historians who write in aristocratic ages are wont to refer all
occurrences to the particular will or temper of certain individuals; and
they are apt to attribute the most important revolutions to very
slight accidents. They trace out the smallest causes with sagacity,
and frequently leave the greatest unperceived. Historians who live in
democratic ages exhibit precisely opposite characteristics. Most of them
attribute hardly any influence to the individual over the destiny of the
race, nor to citizens over the fate of a people; but, on the other hand,
they assign great general causes to all petty incidents. These contrary
tendencies explain each other.

When the historian of aristocratic ages surveys the theatre of the
world, he at once perceives a very small number of prominent actors, who
manage the whole piece. These great personages, who occupy the front of
the stage, arrest the observation, and fix it on themselves; and whilst
the historian is bent on penetrating the secret motives which make them
speak and act, the rest escape his memory. The importance of the things
which some men are seen to do, gives him an exaggerated estimate of the
influence which one man may possess; and naturally leads him to think,
that in order to explain the impulses of the multitude, it is necessary
to refer them to the particular influence of some one individual.

When, on the contrary, all the citizens are independent of one another,
and each of them is individually weak, no one is seen to exert a great,
or still less a lasting power, over the community. At first sight,
individuals appear to be absolutely devoid of any influence over it;
and society would seem to advance alone by the free and voluntary
concurrence of all the men who compose it. This naturally prompts the
mind to search for that general reason which operates upon so many men's
faculties at the same time, and turns them simultaneously in the same
direction.

I am very well convinced that even amongst democratic nations, the
genius, the vices, or the virtues of certain individuals retard or
accelerate the natural current of a people's history: but causes of
this secondary and fortuitous nature are infinitely more various, more
concealed, more complex, less powerful, and consequently less easy to
trace in periods of equality than in ages of aristocracy, when the task
of the historian is simply to detach from the mass of general events the
particular influences of one man or of a few men. In the former case
the historian is soon wearied by the toil; his mind loses itself in this
labyrinth; and, in his inability clearly to discern or conspicuously to
point out the influence of individuals, he denies their existence.
He prefers talking about the characteristics of race, the physical
conformation of the country, or the genius of civilization, which
abridges his own labors, and satisfies his reader far better at less
cost.

M. de Lafayette says somewhere in his "Memoirs" that the exaggerated
system of general causes affords surprising consolations to second-rate
statesmen. I will add, that its effects are not less consolatory to
second-rate historians; it can always furnish a few mighty reasons
to extricate them from the most difficult part of their work, and it
indulges the indolence or incapacity of their minds, whilst it confers
upon them the honors of deep thinking.

For myself, I am of opinion that at all times one great portion of the
events of this world are attributable to general facts, and another to
special influences. These two kinds of cause are always in operation:
their proportion only varies. General facts serve to explain more things
in democratic than in aristocratic ages, and fewer things are then
assignable to special influences. At periods of aristocracy the
reverse takes place: special influences are stronger, general causes
weaker--unless indeed we consider as a general cause the fact itself of
the inequality of conditions, which allows some individuals to baffle
the natural tendencies of all the rest. The historians who seek to
describe what occurs in democratic societies are right, therefore, in
assigning much to general causes, and in devoting their chief attention
to discover them; but they are wrong in wholly denying the special
influence of individuals, because they cannot easily trace or follow it.

The historians who live in democratic ages are not only prone to assign
a great cause to every incident, but they are also given to connect
incidents together, so as to deduce a system from them. In aristocratic
ages, as the attention of historians is constantly drawn to individuals,
the connection of events escapes them; or rather, they do not believe
in any such connection. To them the clew of history seems every instant
crossed and broken by the step of man. In democratic ages, on the
contrary, as the historian sees much more of actions than of actors, he
may easily establish some kind of sequency and methodical order amongst
the former. Ancient literature, which is so rich in fine historical
compositions, does not contain a single great historical system, whilst
the poorest of modern literatures abound with them. It would appear
that the ancient historians did not make sufficient use of those general
theories which our historical writers are ever ready to carry to excess.

Those who write in democratic ages have another more dangerous tendency.
When the traces of individual action upon nations are lost, it often
happens that the world goes on to move, though the moving agent is no
longer discoverable. As it becomes extremely difficult to discern and
to analyze the reasons which, acting separately on the volition of each
member of the community, concur in the end to produce movement in the
old mass, men are led to believe that this movement is involuntary, and
that societies unconsciously obey some superior force ruling over them.
But even when the general fact which governs the private volition of all
individuals is supposed to be discovered upon the earth, the principle
of human free-will is not secure. A cause sufficiently extensive to
affect millions of men at once, and sufficiently strong to bend them all
together in the same direction, may well seem irresistible: having seen
that mankind do yield to it, the mind is close upon the inference that
mankind cannot resist it.

Historians who live in democratic ages, then, not only deny that the few
have any power of acting upon the destiny of a people, but they deprive
the people themselves of the power of modifying their own condition, and
they subject them either to an inflexible Providence, or to some blind
necessity. According to them, each nation is indissolubly bound by its
position, its origin, its precedents, and its character, to a certain
lot which no efforts can ever change. They involve generation in
generation, and thus, going back from age to age, and from necessity
to necessity, up to the origin of the world, they forge a close and
enormous chain, which girds and binds the human race. To their minds it
is not enough to show what events have occurred: they would fain show
that events could not have occurred otherwise. They take a nation
arrived at a certain stage of its history, and they affirm that it could
not but follow the track which brought it thither. It is easier to
make such an assertion than to show by what means the nation might have
adopted a better course.

In reading the historians of aristocratic ages, and especially those of
antiquity, it would seem that, to be master of his lot, and to govern
his fellow-creatures, man requires only to be master of himself. In
perusing the historical volumes which our age has produced, it would
seem that man is utterly powerless over himself and over all around him.
The historians of antiquity taught how to command: those of our time
teach only how to obey; in their writings the author often appears
great, but humanity is always diminutive. If this doctrine of necessity,
which is so attractive to those who write history in democratic ages,
passes from authors to their readers, till it infects the whole mass
of the community and gets possession of the public mind, it will soon
paralyze the activity of modern society, and reduce Christians to the
level of the Turks. I would moreover observe, that such principles
are peculiarly dangerous at the period at which we are arrived. Our
contemporaries are but too prone to doubt of the human free-will,
because each of them feels himself confined on every side by his own
weakness; but they are still willing to acknowledge the strength and
independence of men united in society. Let not this principle be lost
sight of; for the great object in our time is to raise the faculties of
men, not to complete their prostration.




Chapter XXI: Of Parliamentary Eloquence In The United States

Amongst aristocratic nations all the members of the community are
connected with and dependent upon each other; the graduated scale of
different ranks acts as a tie, which keeps everyone in his proper place
and the whole body in subordination. Something of the same kind always
occurs in the political assemblies of these nations. Parties naturally
range themselves under certain leaders, whom they obey by a sort of
instinct, which is only the result of habits contracted elsewhere. They
carry the manners of general society into the lesser assemblage.

In democratic countries it often happens that a great number of citizens
are tending to the same point; but each one only moves thither, or at
least flatters himself that he moves, of his own accord. Accustomed to
regulate his doings by personal impulse alone, he does not willingly
submit to dictation from without. This taste and habit of independence
accompany him into the councils of the nation. If he consents to connect
himself with other men in the prosecution of the same purpose, at least
he chooses to remain free to contribute to the common success after his
own fashion. Hence it is that in democratic countries parties are so
impatient of control, and are never manageable except in moments of
great public danger. Even then, the authority of leaders, which under
such circumstances may be able to make men act or speak, hardly ever
reaches the extent of making them keep silence.

Amongst aristocratic nations the members of political assemblies are
at the same time members of the aristocracy. Each of them enjoys high
established rank in his own right, and the position which he occupies
in the assembly is often less important in his eyes than that which
he fills in the country. This consoles him for playing no part in
the discussion of public affairs, and restrains him from too eagerly
attempting to play an insignificant one.

In America, it generally happens that a Representative only becomes
somebody from his position in the Assembly. He is therefore perpetually
haunted by a craving to acquire importance there, and he feels a
petulant desire to be constantly obtruding his opinions upon the House.
His own vanity is not the only stimulant which urges him on in this
course, but that of his constituents, and the continual necessity
of propitiating them. Amongst aristocratic nations a member of the
legislature is rarely in strict dependence upon his constituents: he is
frequently to them a sort of unavoidable representative; sometimes they
are themselves strictly dependent upon him; and if at length they reject
him, he may easily get elected elsewhere, or, retiring from public life,
he may still enjoy the pleasures of splendid idleness. In a democratic
country like the United States a Representative has hardly ever
a lasting hold on the minds of his constituents. However small an
electoral body may be, the fluctuations of democracy are constantly
changing its aspect; it must, therefore, be courted unceasingly. He
is never sure of his supporters, and, if they forsake him, he is
left without a resource; for his natural position is not sufficiently
elevated for him to be easily known to those not close to him; and,
with the complete state of independence prevailing among the people, he
cannot hope that his friends or the government will send him down to be
returned by an electoral body unacquainted with him. The seeds of his
fortune are, therefore, sown in his own neighborhood; from that nook of
earth he must start, to raise himself to the command of a people and
to influence the destinies of the world. Thus it is natural that in
democratic countries the members of political assemblies think more of
their constituents than of their party, whilst in aristocracies they
think more of their party than of their constituents.

But what ought to be said to gratify constituents is not always what
ought to be said in order to serve the party to which Representatives
profess to belong. The general interest of a party frequently demands
that members belonging to it should not speak on great questions which
they understand imperfectly; that they should speak but little on those
minor questions which impede the great ones; lastly, and for the most
part, that they should not speak at all. To keep silence is the
most useful service that an indifferent spokesman can render to the
commonwealth. Constituents, however, do not think so. The population of
a district sends a representative to take a part in the government of
a country, because they entertain a very lofty notion of his merits.
As men appear greater in proportion to the littleness of the objects
by which they are surrounded, it may be assumed that the opinion
entertained of the delegate will be so much the higher as talents are
more rare among his constituents. It will therefore frequently happen
that the less constituents have to expect from their representative, the
more they will anticipate from him; and, however incompetent he may be,
they will not fail to call upon him for signal exertions, corresponding
to the rank they have conferred upon him.

Independently of his position as a legislator of the State, electors
also regard their Representative as the natural patron of the
constituency in the Legislature; they almost consider him as the proxy
of each of his supporters, and they flatter themselves that he will not
be less zealous in defense of their private interests than of those
of the country. Thus electors are well assured beforehand that the
Representative of their choice will be an orator; that he will speak
often if he can, and that in case he is forced to refrain, he will
strive at any rate to compress into his less frequent orations an
inquiry into all the great questions of state, combined with a statement
of all the petty grievances they have themselves to complain to; so
that, though he be not able to come forward frequently, he should on
each occasion prove what he is capable of doing; and that, instead of
perpetually lavishing his powers, he should occasionally condense them
in a small compass, so as to furnish a sort of complete and brilliant
epitome of his constituents and of himself. On these terms they will
vote for him at the next election. These conditions drive worthy men of
humble abilities to despair, who, knowing their own powers, would never
voluntarily have come forward. But thus urged on, the Representative
begins to speak, to the great alarm of his friends; and rushing
imprudently into the midst of the most celebrated orators, he perplexes
the debate and wearies the House.

All laws which tend to make the Representative more dependent on the
elector, not only affect the conduct of the legislators, as I
have remarked elsewhere, but also their language. They exercise a
simultaneous influence on affairs themselves, and on the manner in which
affairs are discussed.

There is hardly a member of Congress who can make up his mind to go home
without having despatched at least one speech to his constituents;
nor who will endure any interruption until he has introduced into
his harangue whatever useful suggestions may be made touching the
four-and-twenty States of which the Union is composed, and especially
the district which he represents. He therefore presents to the mind of
his auditors a succession of great general truths (which he himself only
comprehends, and expresses, confusedly), and of petty minutia, which he
is but too able to discover and to point out. The consequence is that
the debates of that great assembly are frequently vague and perplexed,
and that they seem rather to drag their slow length along than to
advance towards a distinct object. Some such state of things will, I
believe, always arise in the public assemblies of democracies.

Propitious circumstances and good laws might succeed in drawing to the
legislature of a democratic people men very superior to those who are
returned by the Americans to Congress; but nothing will ever prevent the
men of slender abilities who sit there from obtruding themselves with
complacency, and in all ways, upon the public. The evil does not appear
to me to be susceptible of entire cure, because it not only originates
in the tactics of that assembly, but in its constitution and in that
of the country. The inhabitants of the United States seem themselves to
consider the matter in this light; and they show their long experience
of parliamentary life not by abstaining from making bad speeches, but by
courageously submitting to hear them made. They are resigned to it, as
to an evil which they know to be inevitable.

We have shown the petty side of political debates in democratic
assemblies--let us now exhibit the more imposing one. The proceedings
within the Parliament of England for the last one hundred and fifty
years have never occasioned any great sensation out of that country; the
opinions and feelings expressed by the speakers have never awakened much
sympathy, even amongst the nations placed nearest to the great arena of
British liberty; whereas Europe was excited by the very first debates
which took place in the small colonial assemblies of America at the
time of the Revolution. This was attributable not only to particular
and fortuitous circumstances, but to general and lasting causes. I can
conceive nothing more admirable or more powerful than a great orator
debating on great questions of state in a democratic assembly. As no
particular class is ever represented there by men commissioned to defend
its own interests, it is always to the whole nation, and in the name of
the whole nation, that the orator speaks. This expands his thoughts,
and heightens his power of language. As precedents have there but
little weight-as there are no longer any privileges attached to certain
property, nor any rights inherent in certain bodies or in certain
individuals, the mind must have recourse to general truths derived from
human nature to resolve the particular question under discussion. Hence
the political debates of a democratic people, however small it may be,
have a degree of breadth which frequently renders them attractive to
mankind. All men are interested by them, because they treat of man, who
is everywhere the same. Amongst the greatest aristocratic nations, on
the contrary, the most general questions are almost always argued on
some special grounds derived from the practice of a particular time, or
the rights of a particular class; which interest that class alone, or at
most the people amongst whom that class happens to exist. It is owing
to this, as much as to the greatness of the French people, and the
favorable disposition of the nations who listen to them, that the great
effect which the French political debates sometimes produce in the
world, must be attributed. The orators of France frequently speak to
mankind, even when they are addressing their countrymen only.




Section 2: Influence of Democracy on the Feelings of Americans




Chapter I: Why Democratic Nations Show A More Ardent And Enduring Love
Of Equality Than Of Liberty

The first and most intense passion which is engendered by the equality
of conditions is, I need hardly say, the love of that same equality. My
readers will therefore not be surprised that I speak of its before
all others. Everybody has remarked that in our time, and especially in
France, this passion for equality is every day gaining ground in the
human heart. It has been said a hundred times that our contemporaries
are far more ardently and tenaciously attached to equality than to
freedom; but as I do not find that the causes of the fact have been
sufficiently analyzed, I shall endeavor to point them out.

It is possible to imagine an extreme point at which freedom and equality
would meet and be confounded together. Let us suppose that all the
members of the community take a part in the government, and that each of
them has an equal right to take a part in it. As none is different from
his fellows, none can exercise a tyrannical power: men will be perfectly
free, because they will all be entirely equal; and they will all be
perfectly equal, because they will be entirely free. To this ideal state
democratic nations tend. Such is the completest form that equality can
assume upon earth; but there are a thousand others which, without being
equally perfect, are not less cherished by those nations.

The principle of equality may be established in civil society, without
prevailing in the political world. Equal rights may exist of indulging
in the same pleasures, of entering the same professions, of frequenting
the same places--in a word, of living in the same manner and seeking
wealth by the same means, although all men do not take an equal share
in the government. A kind of equality may even be established in the
political world, though there should be no political freedom there. A
man may be the equal of all his countrymen save one, who is the master
of all without distinction, and who selects equally from among them
all the agents of his power. Several other combinations might be easily
imagined, by which very great equality would be united to institutions
more or less free, or even to institutions wholly without freedom.
Although men cannot become absolutely equal unless they be entirely
free, and consequently equality, pushed to its furthest extent, may be
confounded with freedom, yet there is good reason for distinguishing the
one from the other. The taste which men have for liberty, and that which
they feel for equality, are, in fact, two different things; and I am
not afraid to add that, amongst democratic nations, they are two unequal
things.

Upon close inspection, it will be seen that there is in every age some
peculiar and preponderating fact with which all others are connected;
this fact almost always gives birth to some pregnant idea or some ruling
passion, which attracts to itself, and bears away in its course, all the
feelings and opinions of the time: it is like a great stream, towards
which each of the surrounding rivulets seems to flow. Freedom has
appeared in the world at different times and under various forms; it
has not been exclusively bound to any social condition, and it is
not confined to democracies. Freedom cannot, therefore, form the
distinguishing characteristic of democratic ages. The peculiar and
preponderating fact which marks those ages as its own is the equality
of conditions; the ruling passion of men in those periods is the love
of this equality. Ask not what singular charm the men of democratic ages
find in being equal, or what special reasons they may have for clinging
so tenaciously to equality rather than to the other advantages which
society holds out to them: equality is the distinguishing characteristic
of the age they live in; that, of itself, is enough to explain that they
prefer it to all the rest.

But independently of this reason there are several others, which will at
all times habitually lead men to prefer equality to freedom. If a people
could ever succeed in destroying, or even in diminishing, the equality
which prevails in its own body, this could only be accomplished by long
and laborious efforts. Its social condition must be modified, its laws
abolished, its opinions superseded, its habits changed, its manners
corrupted. But political liberty is more easily lost; to neglect to
hold it fast is to allow it to escape. Men therefore not only cling to
equality because it is dear to them; they also adhere to it because they
think it will last forever.

That political freedom may compromise in its excesses the tranquillity,
the property, the lives of individuals, is obvious to the narrowest
and most unthinking minds. But, on the contrary, none but attentive and
clear-sighted men perceive the perils with which equality threatens us,
and they commonly avoid pointing them out. They know that the calamities
they apprehend are remote, and flatter themselves that they will only
fall upon future generations, for which the present generation takes
but little thought. The evils which freedom sometimes brings with it are
immediate; they are apparent to all, and all are more or less affected
by them. The evils which extreme equality may produce are slowly
disclosed; they creep gradually into the social frame; they are only
seen at intervals, and at the moment at which they become most violent
habit already causes them to be no longer felt. The advantages which
freedom brings are only shown by length of time; and it is always easy
to mistake the cause in which they originate. The advantages of equality
are instantaneous, and they may constantly be traced from their source.
Political liberty bestows exalted pleasures, from time to time, upon a
certain number of citizens. Equality every day confers a number of small
enjoyments on every man. The charms of equality are every instant felt,
and are within the reach of all; the noblest hearts are not insensible
to them, and the most vulgar souls exult in them. The passion which
equality engenders must therefore be at once strong and general. Men
cannot enjoy political liberty unpurchased by some sacrifices, and they
never obtain it without great exertions. But the pleasures of equality
are self-proffered: each of the petty incidents of life seems to
occasion them, and in order to taste them nothing is required but to
live.

Democratic nations are at all times fond of equality, but there are
certain epochs at which the passion they entertain for it swells to the
height of fury. This occurs at the moment when the old social system,
long menaced, completes its own destruction after a last intestine
struggle, and when the barriers of rank are at length thrown down. At
such times men pounce upon equality as their booty, and they cling to
it as to some precious treasure which they fear to lose. The passion for
equality penetrates on every side into men's hearts, expands there,
and fills them entirely. Tell them not that by this blind surrender of
themselves to an exclusive passion they risk their dearest interests:
they are deaf. Show them not freedom escaping from their grasp, whilst
they are looking another way: they are blind--or rather, they can
discern but one sole object to be desired in the universe.

What I have said is applicable to all democratic nations: what I am
about to say concerns the French alone. Amongst most modern nations, and
especially amongst all those of the Continent of Europe, the taste and
the idea of freedom only began to exist and to extend themselves at
the time when social conditions were tending to equality, and as
a consequence of that very equality. Absolute kings were the most
efficient levellers of ranks amongst their subjects. Amongst these
nations equality preceded freedom: equality was therefore a fact of some
standing when freedom was still a novelty: the one had already created
customs, opinions, and laws belonging to it, when the other, alone and
for the first time, came into actual existence. Thus the latter was
still only an affair of opinion and of taste, whilst the former had
already crept into the habits of the people, possessed itself of their
manners, and given a particular turn to the smallest actions of their
lives. Can it be wondered that the men of our own time prefer the one to
the other?

I think that democratic communities have a natural taste for freedom:
left to themselves, they will seek it, cherish it, and view any
privation of it with regret. But for equality, their passion is ardent,
insatiable, incessant, invincible: they call for equality in freedom;
and if they cannot obtain that, they still call for equality in slavery.
They will endure poverty, servitude, barbarism--but they will not endure
aristocracy. This is true at all times, and especially true in our own.
All men and all powers seeking to cope with this irresistible passion,
will be overthrown and destroyed by it. In our age, freedom cannot be
established without it, and despotism itself cannot reign without its
support.




Chapter II: Of Individualism In Democratic Countries

I have shown how it is that in ages of equality every man seeks for his
opinions within himself: I am now about to show how it is that, in
the same ages, all his feelings are turned towards himself alone.
Individualism *a is a novel expression, to which a novel idea has given
birth. Our fathers were only acquainted with egotism. Egotism is a
passionate and exaggerated love of self, which leads a man to connect
everything with his own person, and to prefer himself to everything in
the world. Individualism is a mature and calm feeling, which disposes
each member of the community to sever himself from the mass of his
fellow-creatures; and to draw apart with his family and his friends; so
that, after he has thus formed a little circle of his own, he willingly
leaves society at large to itself. Egotism originates in blind instinct:
individualism proceeds from erroneous judgment more than from depraved
feelings; it originates as much in the deficiencies of the mind as in
the perversity of the heart. Egotism blights the germ of all virtue;
individualism, at first, only saps the virtues of public life; but,
in the long run, it attacks and destroys all others, and is at length
absorbed in downright egotism. Egotism is a vice as old as the world,
which does not belong to one form of society more than to another:
individualism is of democratic origin, and it threatens to spread in the
same ratio as the equality of conditions.

[Footnote a: [I adopt the expression of the original, however strange it
may seem to the English ear, partly because it illustrates the remark
on the introduction of general terms into democratic language which was
made in a preceding chapter, and partly because I know of no English
word exactly equivalent to the expression. The chapter itself defines
the meaning attached to it by the author.--Translator's Note.]]

Amongst aristocratic nations, as families remain for centuries in the
same condition, often on the same spot, all generations become as it
were contemporaneous. A man almost always knows his forefathers, and
respects them: he thinks he already sees his remote descendants, and he
loves them. He willingly imposes duties on himself towards the
former and the latter; and he will frequently sacrifice his personal
gratifications to those who went before and to those who will come after
him. Aristocratic institutions have, moreover, the effect of closely
binding every man to several of his fellow-citizens. As the classes of
an aristocratic people are strongly marked and permanent, each of
them is regarded by its own members as a sort of lesser country,
more tangible and more cherished than the country at large. As in
aristocratic communities all the citizens occupy fixed positions, one
above the other, the result is that each of them always sees a man above
himself whose patronage is necessary to him, and below himself another
man whose co-operation he may claim. Men living in aristocratic ages
are therefore almost always closely attached to something placed out of
their own sphere, and they are often disposed to forget themselves. It
is true that in those ages the notion of human fellowship is faint, and
that men seldom think of sacrificing themselves for mankind; but they
often sacrifice themselves for other men. In democratic ages, on the
contrary, when the duties of each individual to the race are much more
clear, devoted service to any one man becomes more rare; the bond of
human affection is extended, but it is relaxed.

Amongst democratic nations new families are constantly springing up,
others are constantly falling away, and all that remain change their
condition; the woof of time is every instant broken, and the track of
generations effaced. Those who went before are soon forgotten; of those
who will come after no one has any idea: the interest of man is confined
to those in close propinquity to himself. As each class approximates
to other classes, and intermingles with them, its members become
indifferent and as strangers to one another. Aristocracy had made a
chain of all the members of the community, from the peasant to the king:
democracy breaks that chain, and severs every link of it. As social
conditions become more equal, the number of persons increases who,
although they are neither rich enough nor powerful enough to exercise
any great influence over their fellow-creatures, have nevertheless
acquired or retained sufficient education and fortune to satisfy their
own wants. They owe nothing to any man, they expect nothing from any
man; they acquire the habit of always considering themselves as standing
alone, and they are apt to imagine that their whole destiny is in
their own hands. Thus not only does democracy make every man forget
his ancestors, but it hides his descendants, and separates his
contemporaries from him; it throws him back forever upon himself alone,
and threatens in the end to confine him entirely within the solitude of
his own heart.




Chapter III: Individualism Stronger At The Close Of A Democratic
Revolution Than At Other Periods

The period when the construction of democratic society upon the ruins of
an aristocracy has just been completed, is especially that at which this
separation of men from one another, and the egotism resulting from it,
most forcibly strike the observation. Democratic communities not only
contain a large number of independent citizens, but they are constantly
filled with men who, having entered but yesterday upon their independent
condition, are intoxicated with their new power. They entertain a
presumptuous confidence in their strength, and as they do not suppose
that they can henceforward ever have occasion to claim the assistance of
their fellow-creatures, they do not scruple to show that they care for
nobody but themselves.

An aristocracy seldom yields without a protracted struggle, in the
course of which implacable animosities are kindled between the different
classes of society. These passions survive the victory, and traces of
them may be observed in the midst of the democratic confusion which
ensues. Those members of the community who were at the top of the late
gradations of rank cannot immediately forget their former greatness;
they will long regard themselves as aliens in the midst of the newly
composed society. They look upon all those whom this state of society
has made their equals as oppressors, whose destiny can excite no
sympathy; they have lost sight of their former equals, and feel no
longer bound by a common interest to their fate: each of them, standing
aloof, thinks that he is reduced to care for himself alone. Those, on
the contrary, who were formerly at the foot of the social scale, and who
have been brought up to the common level by a sudden revolution, cannot
enjoy their newly acquired independence without secret uneasiness; and
if they meet with some of their former superiors on the same footing as
themselves, they stand aloof from them with an expression of triumph and
of fear. It is, then, commonly at the outset of democratic society that
citizens are most disposed to live apart. Democracy leads men not to
draw near to their fellow-creatures; but democratic revolutions lead
them to shun each other, and perpetuate in a state of equality the
animosities which the state of inequality engendered. The great
advantage of the Americans is that they have arrived at a state of
democracy without having to endure a democratic revolution; and that
they are born equal, instead of becoming so.




Chapter IV: That The Americans Combat The Effects Of Individualism By
Free Institutions

Despotism, which is of a very timorous nature, is never more secure of
continuance than when it can keep men asunder; and all is influence
is commonly exerted for that purpose. No vice of the human heart is so
acceptable to it as egotism: a despot easily forgives his subjects for
not loving him, provided they do not love each other. He does not ask
them to assist him in governing the State; it is enough that they do not
aspire to govern it themselves. He stigmatizes as turbulent and
unruly spirits those who would combine their exertions to promote the
prosperity of the community, and, perverting the natural meaning of
words, he applauds as good citizens those who have no sympathy for any
but themselves. Thus the vices which despotism engenders are precisely
those which equality fosters. These two things mutually and perniciously
complete and assist each other. Equality places men side by side,
unconnected by any common tie; despotism raises barriers to keep
them asunder; the former predisposes them not to consider their
fellow-creatures, the latter makes general indifference a sort of public
virtue.

Despotism then, which is at all times dangerous, is more particularly to
be feared in democratic ages. It is easy to see that in those same ages
men stand most in need of freedom. When the members of a community are
forced to attend to public affairs, they are necessarily drawn from
the circle of their own interests, and snatched at times from
self-observation. As soon as a man begins to treat of public affairs
in public, he begins to perceive that he is not so independent of his
fellow-men as he had at first imagined, and that, in order to obtain
their support, he must often lend them his co-operation.

When the public is supreme, there is no man who does not feel the value
of public goodwill, or who does not endeavor to court it by drawing to
himself the esteem and affection of those amongst whom he is to live.
Many of the passions which congeal and keep asunder human hearts,
are then obliged to retire and hide below the surface. Pride must be
dissembled; disdain dares not break out; egotism fears its own self.
Under a free government, as most public offices are elective, the men
whose elevated minds or aspiring hopes are too closely circumscribed in
private life, constantly feel that they cannot do without the population
which surrounds them. Men learn at such times to think of their
fellow-men from ambitious motives; and they frequently find it, in a
manner, their interest to forget themselves.

I may here be met by an objection derived from electioneering intrigues,
the meannesses of candidates, and the calumnies of their opponents.
These are opportunities for animosity which occur the oftener the more
frequent elections become. Such evils are doubtless great, but they are
transient; whereas the benefits which attend them remain. The desire
of being elected may lead some men for a time to violent hostility; but
this same desire leads all men in the long run mutually to support
each other; and if it happens that an election accidentally severs two
friends, the electoral system brings a multitude of citizens permanently
together, who would always have remained unknown to each other. Freedom
engenders private animosities, but despotism gives birth to general
indifference.

The Americans have combated by free institutions the tendency of
equality to keep men asunder, and they have subdued it. The legislators
of America did not suppose that a general representation of the whole
nation would suffice to ward off a disorder at once so natural to the
frame of democratic society, and so fatal: they also thought that
it would be well to infuse political life into each portion of the
territory, in order to multiply to an infinite extent opportunities of
acting in concert for all the members of the community, and to make them
constantly feel their mutual dependence on each other. The plan was a
wise one. The general affairs of a country only engage the attention of
leading politicians, who assemble from time to time in the same places;
and as they often lose sight of each other afterwards, no lasting ties
are established between them. But if the object be to have the local
affairs of a district conducted by the men who reside there, the same
persons are always in contact, and they are, in a manner, forced to be
acquainted, and to adapt themselves to one another.

It is difficult to draw a man out of his own circle to interest him in
the destiny of the State, because he does not clearly understand what
influence the destiny of the State can have upon his own lot. But if it
be proposed to make a road cross the end of his estate, he will see at
a glance that there is a connection between this small public affair and
his greatest private affairs; and he will discover, without its being
shown to him, the close tie which unites private to general interest.
Thus, far more may be done by intrusting to the citizens the
administration of minor affairs than by surrendering to them the control
of important ones, towards interesting them in the public welfare, and
convincing them that they constantly stand in need one of the other in
order to provide for it. A brilliant achievement may win for you the
favor of a people at one stroke; but to earn the love and respect of
the population which surrounds you, a long succession of little services
rendered and of obscure good deeds--a constant habit of kindness, and
an established reputation for disinterestedness--will be required.
Local freedom, then, which leads a great number of citizens to value the
affection of their neighbors and of their kindred, perpetually brings
men together, and forces them to help one another, in spite of the
propensities which sever them.

In the United States the more opulent citizens take great care not to
stand aloof from the people; on the contrary, they constantly keep on
easy terms with the lower classes: they listen to them, they speak to
them every day. They know that the rich in democracies always stand in
need of the poor; and that in democratic ages you attach a poor man to
you more by your manner than by benefits conferred. The magnitude of
such benefits, which sets off the difference of conditions, causes a
secret irritation to those who reap advantage from them; but the charm
of simplicity of manners is almost irresistible: their affability
carries men away, and even their want of polish is not always
displeasing. This truth does not take root at once in the minds of the
rich. They generally resist it as long as the democratic revolution
lasts, and they do not acknowledge it immediately after that revolution
is accomplished. They are very ready to do good to the people, but
they still choose to keep them at arm's length; they think that is
sufficient, but they are mistaken. They might spend fortunes thus
without warming the hearts of the population around them;--that
population does not ask them for the sacrifice of their money, but of
their pride.

It would seem as if every imagination in the United States were upon
the stretch to invent means of increasing the wealth and satisfying
the wants of the public. The best-informed inhabitants of each district
constantly use their information to discover new truths which may
augment the general prosperity; and if they have made any such
discoveries, they eagerly surrender them to the mass of the people.

When the vices and weaknesses, frequently exhibited by those who
govern in America, are closely examined, the prosperity of the people
occasions--but improperly occasions--surprise. Elected magistrates do
not make the American democracy flourish; it flourishes because the
magistrates are elective.

It would be unjust to suppose that the patriotism and the zeal which
every American displays for the welfare of his fellow-citizens are
wholly insincere. Although private interest directs the greater part
of human actions in the United States as well as elsewhere, it does
not regulate them all. I must say that I have often seen Americans make
great and real sacrifices to the public welfare; and I have remarked
a hundred instances in which they hardly ever failed to lend faithful
support to each other. The free institutions which the inhabitants of
the United States possess, and the political rights of which they make
so much use, remind every citizen, and in a thousand ways, that he lives
in society. They every instant impress upon his mind the notion that it
is the duty, as well as the interest of men, to make themselves useful
to their fellow-creatures; and as he sees no particular ground of
animosity to them, since he is never either their master or their slave,
his heart readily leans to the side of kindness. Men attend to the
interests of the public, first by necessity, afterwards by choice: what
was intentional becomes an instinct; and by dint of working for the good
of one's fellow citizens, the habit and the taste for serving them is at
length acquired.

Many people in France consider equality of conditions as one evil, and
political freedom as a second. When they are obliged to yield to the
former, they strive at least to escape from the latter. But I contend
that in order to combat the evils which equality may produce, there is
only one effectual remedy--namely, political freedom.




Chapter V: Of The Use Which The Americans Make Of Public Associations In
Civil Life

I do not propose to speak of those political associations--by the aid of
which men endeavor to defend themselves against the despotic influence
of a majority--or against the aggressions of regal power. That subject I
have already treated. If each citizen did not learn, in proportion as
he individually becomes more feeble, and consequently more incapable
of preserving his freedom single-handed, to combine with his
fellow-citizens for the purpose of defending it, it is clear that
tyranny would unavoidably increase together with equality.

Those associations only which are formed in civil life, without
reference to political objects, are here adverted to. The political
associations which exist in the United States are only a single feature
in the midst of the immense assemblage of associations in that country.
Americans of all ages, all conditions, and all dispositions, constantly
form associations. They have not only commercial and manufacturing
companies, in which all take part, but associations of a thousand other
kinds--religious, moral, serious, futile, extensive, or restricted,
enormous or diminutive. The Americans make associations to give
entertainments, to found establishments for education, to build inns,
to construct churches, to diffuse books, to send missionaries to
the antipodes; and in this manner they found hospitals, prisons, and
schools. If it be proposed to advance some truth, or to foster some
feeling by the encouragement of a great example, they form a society.
Wherever, at the head of some new undertaking, you see the government
in France, or a man of rank in England, in the United States you will be
sure to find an association. I met with several kinds of associations in
America, of which I confess I had no previous notion; and I have often
admired the extreme skill with which the inhabitants of the United
States succeed in proposing a common object to the exertions of a great
many men, and in getting them voluntarily to pursue it. I have since
travelled over England, whence the Americans have taken some of their
laws and many of their customs; and it seemed to me that the principle
of association was by no means so constantly or so adroitly used in
that country. The English often perform great things singly; whereas the
Americans form associations for the smallest undertakings. It is evident
that the former people consider association as a powerful means of
action, but the latter seem to regard it as the only means they have of
acting.

Thus the most democratic country on the face of the earth is that in
which men have in our time carried to the highest perfection the art of
pursuing in common the object of their common desires, and have applied
this new science to the greatest number of purposes. Is this the result
of accident? or is there in reality any necessary connection between the
principle of association and that of equality? Aristocratic communities
always contain, amongst a multitude of persons who by themselves are
powerless, a small number of powerful and wealthy citizens, each of whom
can achieve great undertakings single-handed. In aristocratic societies
men do not need to combine in order to act, because they are strongly
held together. Every wealthy and powerful citizen constitutes the head
of a permanent and compulsory association, composed of all those who are
dependent upon him, or whom he makes subservient to the execution of his
designs. Amongst democratic nations, on the contrary, all the citizens
are independent and feeble; they can do hardly anything by themselves,
and none of them can oblige his fellow-men to lend him their assistance.
They all, therefore, fall into a state of incapacity, if they do not
learn voluntarily to help each other. If men living in democratic
countries had no right and no inclination to associate for political
purposes, their independence would be in great jeopardy; but they might
long preserve their wealth and their cultivation: whereas if they
never acquired the habit of forming associations in ordinary life,
civilization itself would be endangered. A people amongst which
individuals should lose the power of achieving great things
single-handed, without acquiring the means of producing them by united
exertions, would soon relapse into barbarism.

Unhappily, the same social condition which renders associations so
necessary to democratic nations, renders their formation more difficult
amongst those nations than amongst all others. When several members of
an aristocracy agree to combine, they easily succeed in doing so; as
each of them brings great strength to the partnership, the number of its
members may be very limited; and when the members of an association
are limited in number, they may easily become mutually acquainted,
understand each other, and establish fixed regulations. The same
opportunities do not occur amongst democratic nations, where the
associated members must always be very numerous for their association to
have any power.

I am aware that many of my countrymen are not in the least embarrassed
by this difficulty. They contend that the more enfeebled and incompetent
the citizens become, the more able and active the government ought to
be rendered, in order that society at large may execute what individuals
can no longer accomplish. They believe this answers the whole
difficulty, but I think they are mistaken. A government might perform
the part of some of the largest American companies; and several States,
members of the Union, have already attempted it; but what political
power could ever carry on the vast multitude of lesser undertakings
which the American citizens perform every day, with the assistance of
the principle of association? It is easy to foresee that the time is
drawing near when man will be less and less able to produce, of himself
alone, the commonest necessaries of life. The task of the governing
power will therefore perpetually increase, and its very efforts will
extend it every day. The more it stands in the place of associations,
the more will individuals, losing the notion of combining together,
require its assistance: these are causes and effects which unceasingly
engender each other. Will the administration of the country ultimately
assume the management of all the manufacturers, which no single
citizen is able to carry on? And if a time at length arrives, when, in
consequence of the extreme subdivision of landed property, the soil
is split into an infinite number of parcels, so that it can only be
cultivated by companies of husbandmen, will it be necessary that the
head of the government should leave the helm of state to follow the
plough? The morals and the intelligence of a democratic people would be
as much endangered as its business and manufactures, if the government
ever wholly usurped the place of private companies.

Feelings and opinions are recruited, the heart is enlarged, and the
human mind is developed by no other means than by the reciprocal
influence of men upon each other. I have shown that these influences are
almost null in democratic countries; they must therefore be artificially
created, and this can only be accomplished by associations.

When the members of an aristocratic community adopt a new opinion, or
conceive a new sentiment, they give it a station, as it were, beside
themselves, upon the lofty platform where they stand; and opinions
or sentiments so conspicuous to the eyes of the multitude are easily
introduced into the minds or hearts of all around. In democratic
countries the governing power alone is naturally in a condition to
act in this manner; but it is easy to see that its action is always
inadequate, and often dangerous. A government can no more be competent
to keep alive and to renew the circulation of opinions and feelings
amongst a great people, than to manage all the speculations of
productive industry. No sooner does a government attempt to go
beyond its political sphere and to enter upon this new track, than
it exercises, even unintentionally, an insupportable tyranny; for a
government can only dictate strict rules, the opinions which it favors
are rigidly enforced, and it is never easy to discriminate between its
advice and its commands. Worse still will be the case if the government
really believes itself interested in preventing all circulation of
ideas; it will then stand motionless, and oppressed by the heaviness of
voluntary torpor. Governments therefore should not be the only active
powers: associations ought, in democratic nations, to stand in lieu of
those powerful private individuals whom the equality of conditions has
swept away.

As soon as several of the inhabitants of the United States have taken
up an opinion or a feeling which they wish to promote in the world,
they look out for mutual assistance; and as soon as they have found each
other out, they combine. From that moment they are no longer isolated
men, but a power seen from afar, whose actions serve for an example,
and whose language is listened to. The first time I heard in the United
States that 100,000 men had bound themselves publicly to abstain from
spirituous liquors, it appeared to me more like a joke than a serious
engagement; and I did not at once perceive why these temperate citizens
could not content themselves with drinking water by their own firesides.
I at last understood that 300,000 Americans, alarmed by the progress
of drunkenness around them, had made up their minds to patronize
temperance. They acted just in the same way as a man of high rank who
should dress very plainly, in order to inspire the humbler orders with
a contempt of luxury. It is probable that if these 100,000 men had lived
in France, each of them would singly have memorialized the government to
watch the public-houses all over the kingdom.

Nothing, in my opinion, is more deserving of our attention than the
intellectual and moral associations of America. The political and
industrial associations of that country strike us forcibly; but the
others elude our observation, or if we discover them, we understand them
imperfectly, because we have hardly ever seen anything of the kind.
It must, however, be acknowledged that they are as necessary to the
American people as the former, and perhaps more so. In democratic
countries the science of association is the mother of science; the
progress of all the rest depends upon the progress it has made. Amongst
the laws which rule human societies there is one which seems to be more
precise and clear than all others. If men are to remain civilized, or to
become so, the art of associating together must grow and improve in the
same ratio in which the equality of conditions is increased.




Chapter VI: Of The Relation Between Public Associations And Newspapers

When men are no longer united amongst themselves by firm and lasting
ties, it is impossible to obtain the cooperation of any great number of
them, unless you can persuade every man whose concurrence you require
that this private interest obliges him voluntarily to unite his
exertions to the exertions of all the rest. This can only be habitually
and conveniently effected by means of a newspaper; nothing but a
newspaper can drop the same thought into a thousand minds at the same
moment. A newspaper is an adviser who does not require to be sought, but
who comes of his own accord, and talks to you briefly every day of the
common weal, without distracting you from your private affairs.

Newspapers therefore become more necessary in proportion as men become
more equal, and individualism more to be feared. To suppose that they
only serve to protect freedom would be to diminish their importance:
they maintain civilization. I shall not deny that in democratic
countries newspapers frequently lead the citizens to launch together in
very ill-digested schemes; but if there were no newspapers there would
be no common activity. The evil which they produce is therefore much
less than that which they cure.

The effect of a newspaper is not only to suggest the same purpose to
a great number of persons, but also to furnish means for executing in
common the designs which they may have singly conceived. The principal
citizens who inhabit an aristocratic country discern each other from
afar; and if they wish to unite their forces, they move towards each
other, drawing a multitude of men after them. It frequently happens, on
the contrary, in democratic countries, that a great number of men who
wish or who want to combine cannot accomplish it, because as they are
very insignificant and lost amidst the crowd, they cannot see, and know
not where to find, one another. A newspaper then takes up the notion or
the feeling which had occurred simultaneously, but singly, to each of
them. All are then immediately guided towards this beacon; and these
wandering minds, which had long sought each other in darkness, at length
meet and unite.

The newspaper brought them together, and the newspaper is still
necessary to keep them united. In order that an association amongst a
democratic people should have any power, it must be a numerous body.
The persons of whom it is composed are therefore scattered over a wide
extent, and each of them is detained in the place of his domicile by the
narrowness of his income, or by the small unremitting exertions by which
he earns it. Means then must be found to converse every day without
seeing each other, and to take steps in common without having met. Thus
hardly any democratic association can do without newspapers. There is
consequently a necessary connection between public associations
and newspapers: newspapers make associations, and associations make
newspapers; and if it has been correctly advanced that associations will
increase in number as the conditions of men become more equal, it is not
less certain that the number of newspapers increases in proportion to
that of associations. Thus it is in America that we find at the same
time the greatest number of associations and of newspapers.

This connection between the number of newspapers and that of
associations leads us to the discovery of a further connection between
the state of the periodical press and the form of the administration
in a country; and shows that the number of newspapers must diminish
or increase amongst a democratic people, in proportion as its
administration is more or less centralized. For amongst democratic
nations the exercise of local powers cannot be intrusted to the
principal members of the community as in aristocracies. Those powers
must either be abolished, or placed in the hands of very large
numbers of men, who then in fact constitute an association permanently
established by law for the purpose of administering the affairs of a
certain extent of territory; and they require a journal, to bring
to them every day, in the midst of their own minor concerns, some
intelligence of the state of their public weal. The more numerous local
powers are, the greater is the number of men in whom they are vested by
law; and as this want is hourly felt, the more profusely do newspapers
abound.

The extraordinary subdivision of administrative power has much more
to do with the enormous number of American newspapers than the great
political freedom of the country and the absolute liberty of the press.
If all the inhabitants of the Union had the suffrage--but a suffrage
which should only extend to the choice of their legislators in
Congress--they would require but few newspapers, because they would only
have to act together on a few very important but very rare occasions.
But within the pale of the great association of the nation, lesser
associations have been established by law in every country, every city,
and indeed in every village, for the purposes of local administration.
The laws of the country thus compel every American to co-operate every
day of his life with some of his fellow-citizens for a common purpose,
and each one of them requires a newspaper to inform him what all the
others are doing.

I am of opinion that a democratic people, *a without any national
representative assemblies, but with a great number of small local
powers, would have in the end more newspapers than another people
governed by a centralized administration and an elective legislation.
What best explains to me the enormous circulation of the daily press
in the United States, is that amongst the Americans I find the utmost
national freedom combined with local freedom of every kind. There is
a prevailing opinion in France and England that the circulation of
newspapers would be indefinitely increased by removing the taxes which
have been laid upon the press. This is a very exaggerated estimate
of the effects of such a reform. Newspapers increase in numbers, not
according to their cheapness, but according to the more or less frequent
want which a great number of men may feel for intercommunication and
combination.

[Footnote a: I say a democratic people: the administration of an
aristocratic people may be the reverse of centralized, and yet the want
of newspapers be little felt, because local powers are then vested in
the hands of a very small number of men, who either act apart, or who
know each other and can easily meet and come to an understanding.]

In like manner I should attribute the increasing influence of the
daily press to causes more general than those by which it is commonly
explained. A newspaper can only subsist on the condition of publishing
sentiments or principles common to a large number of men. A newspaper
therefore always represents an association which is composed of its
habitual readers. This association may be more or less defined, more or
less restricted, more or less numerous; but the fact that the newspaper
keeps alive, is a proof that at least the germ of such an association
exists in the minds of its readers.

This leads me to a last reflection, with which I shall conclude this
chapter. The more equal the conditions of men become, and the less
strong men individually are, the more easily do they give way to the
current of the multitude, and the more difficult is it for them to
adhere by themselves to an opinion which the multitude discard. A
newspaper represents an association; it may be said to address each of
its readers in the name of all the others, and to exert its influence
over them in proportion to their individual weakness. The power of the
newspaper press must therefore increase as the social conditions of men
become more equal.




Chapter VII: Connection Of Civil And Political Associations

There is only one country on the face of the earth where the citizens
enjoy unlimited freedom of association for political purposes. This same
country is the only one in the world where the continual exercise of the
right of association has been introduced into civil life, and where all
the advantages which civilization can confer are procured by means of
it. In all the countries where political associations are prohibited,
civil associations are rare. It is hardly probable that this is the
result of accident; but the inference should rather be, that there is a
natural, and perhaps a necessary, connection between these two kinds
of associations. Certain men happen to have a common interest in some
concern--either a commercial undertaking is to be managed, or some
speculation in manufactures to be tried; they meet, they combine, and
thus by degrees they become familiar with the principle of association.
The greater is the multiplicity of small affairs, the more do men, even
without knowing it, acquire facility in prosecuting great undertakings
in common. Civil associations, therefore, facilitate political
association: but, on the other hand, political association singularly
strengthens and improves associations for civil purposes. In civil life
every man may, strictly speaking, fancy that he can provide for his own
wants; in politics, he can fancy no such thing. When a people, then,
have any knowledge of public life, the notion of association, and the
wish to coalesce, present themselves every day to the minds of the whole
community: whatever natural repugnance may restrain men from acting in
concert, they will always be ready to combine for the sake of a party.
Thus political life makes the love and practice of association more
general; it imparts a desire of union, and teaches the means of
combination to numbers of men who would have always lived apart.

Politics not only give birth to numerous associations, but to
associations of great extent. In civil life it seldom happens that any
one interest draws a very large number of men to act in concert; much
skill is required to bring such an interest into existence: but in
politics opportunities present themselves every day. Now it is solely
in great associations that the general value of the principle of
association is displayed. Citizens who are individually powerless,
do not very clearly anticipate the strength which they may acquire by
uniting together; it must be shown to them in order to be understood.
Hence it is often easier to collect a multitude for a public purpose
than a few persons; a thousand citizens do not see what interest they
have in combining together--ten thousand will be perfectly aware of it.
In politics men combine for great undertakings; and the use they make
of the principle of association in important affairs practically teaches
them that it is their interest to help each other in those of less
moment. A political association draws a number of individuals at the
same time out of their own circle: however they may be naturally kept
asunder by age, mind, and fortune, it places them nearer together and
brings them into contact. Once met, they can always meet again.

Men can embark in few civil partnerships without risking a portion of
their possessions; this is the case with all manufacturing and
trading companies. When men are as yet but little versed in the art of
association, and are unacquainted with its principal rules, they
are afraid, when first they combine in this manner, of buying their
experience dear. They therefore prefer depriving themselves of a
powerful instrument of success to running the risks which attend the use
of it. They are, however, less reluctant to join political associations,
which appear to them to be without danger, because they adventure no
money in them. But they cannot belong to these associations for any
length of time without finding out how order is maintained amongst a
large number of men, and by what contrivance they are made to advance,
harmoniously and methodically, to the same object. Thus they learn to
surrender their own will to that of all the rest, and to make their own
exertions subordinate to the common impulse--things which it is not less
necessary to know in civil than in political associations. Political
associations may therefore be considered as large free schools, where
all the members of the community go to learn the general theory of
association.

But even if political association did not directly contribute to the
progress of civil association, to destroy the former would be to impair
the latter. When citizens can only meet in public for certain purposes,
they regard such meetings as a strange proceeding of rare occurrence,
and they rarely think at all about it. When they are allowed to meet
freely for all purposes, they ultimately look upon public association
as the universal, or in a manner the sole means, which men can employ to
accomplish the different purposes they may have in view. Every new want
instantly revives the notion. The art of association then becomes, as I
have said before, the mother of action, studied and applied by all.

When some kinds of associations are prohibited and others allowed, it is
difficult to distinguish the former from the latter, beforehand. In this
state of doubt men abstain from them altogether, and a sort of public
opinion passes current which tends to cause any association whatsoever
to be regarded as a bold and almost an illicit enterprise. *a

[Footnote a: This is more especially true when the executive government
has a discretionary power of allowing or prohibiting associations. When
certain associations are simply prohibited by law, and the courts of
justice have to punish infringements of that law, the evil is far less
considerable. Then every citizen knows beforehand pretty nearly what he
has to expect. He judges himself before he is judged by the law, and,
abstaining from prohibited associations, he embarks in those which are
legally sanctioned. It is by these restrictions that all free nations
have always admitted that the right of association might be limited.
But if the legislature should invest a man with a power of ascertaining
beforehand which associations are dangerous and which are useful, and
should authorize him to destroy all associations in the bud or allow
them to be formed, as nobody would be able to foresee in what cases
associations might be established and in what cases they would be put
down, the spirit of association would be entirely paralyzed. The former
of these laws would only assail certain associations; the latter would
apply to society itself, and inflict an injury upon it. I can conceive
that a regular government may have recourse to the former, but I do not
concede that any government has the right of enacting the latter.]

It is therefore chimerical to suppose that the spirit of association,
when it is repressed on some one point, will nevertheless display
the same vigor on all others; and that if men be allowed to prosecute
certain undertakings in common, that is quite enough for them eagerly
to set about them. When the members of a community are allowed and
accustomed to combine for all purposes, they will combine as readily for
the lesser as for the more important ones; but if they are only allowed
to combine for small affairs, they will be neither inclined nor able
to effect it. It is in vain that you will leave them entirely free to
prosecute their business on joint-stock account: they will hardly care
to avail themselves of the rights you have granted to them; and, after
having exhausted your strength in vain efforts to put down prohibited
associations, you will be surprised that you cannot persuade men to form
the associations you encourage.

I do not say that there can be no civil associations in a country where
political association is prohibited; for men can never live in society
without embarking in some common undertakings: but I maintain that in
such a country civil associations will always be few in number, feebly
planned, unskillfully managed, that they will never form any vast
designs, or that they will fail in the execution of them.

This naturally leads me to think that freedom of association in
political matters is not so dangerous to public tranquillity as is
supposed; and that possibly, after having agitated society for some
time, it may strengthen the State in the end. In democratic countries
political associations are, so to speak, the only powerful persons who
aspire to rule the State. Accordingly, the governments of our time look
upon associations of this kind just as sovereigns in the Middle Ages
regarded the great vassals of the Crown: they entertain a sort of
instinctive abhorrence of them, and they combat them on all occasions.
They bear, on the contrary, a natural goodwill to civil associations,
because they readily discover that, instead of directing the minds of
the community to public affairs, these institutions serve to divert them
from such reflections; and that, by engaging them more and more in the
pursuit of objects which cannot be attained without public tranquillity,
they deter them from revolutions. But these governments do not attend
to the fact that political associations tend amazingly to multiply and
facilitate those of a civil character, and that in avoiding a dangerous
evil they deprive themselves of an efficacious remedy.

When you see the Americans freely and constantly forming associations
for the purpose of promoting some political principle, of raising one
man to the head of affairs, or of wresting power from another, you
have some difficulty in understanding that men so independent do not
constantly fall into the abuse of freedom. If, on the other hand, you
survey the infinite number of trading companies which are in operation
in the United States, and perceive that the Americans are on every side
unceasingly engaged in the execution of important and difficult plans,
which the slightest revolution would throw into confusion, you will
readily comprehend why people so well employed are by no means tempted
to perturb the State, nor to destroy that public tranquillity by which
they all profit.

Is it enough to observe these things separately, or should we not
discover the hidden tie which connects them? In their political
associations, the Americans of all conditions, minds, and ages, daily
acquire a general taste for association, and grow accustomed to the use
of it. There they meet together in large numbers, they converse, they
listen to each other, and they are mutually stimulated to all sorts of
undertakings. They afterwards transfer to civil life the notions they
have thus acquired, and make them subservient to a thousand purposes.
Thus it is by the enjoyment of a dangerous freedom that the Americans
learn the art of rendering the dangers of freedom less formidable.

If a certain moment in the existence of a nation be selected, it is easy
to prove that political associations perturb the State, and paralyze
productive industry; but take the whole life of a people, and it may
perhaps be easy to demonstrate that freedom of association in political
matters is favorable to the prosperity and even to the tranquillity of
the community.

I said in the former part of this work, "The unrestrained liberty of
political association cannot be entirely assimilated to the liberty of
the press. The one is at the same time less necessary and more dangerous
than the other. A nation may confine it within certain limits without
ceasing to be mistress of itself; and it may sometimes be obliged to do
so in order to maintain its own authority." And further on I added:
"It cannot be denied that the unrestrained liberty of association for
political purposes is the last degree of liberty which a people is fit
for. If it does not throw them into anarchy, it perpetually brings them,
as it were, to the verge of it." Thus I do not think that a nation
is always at liberty to invest its citizens with an absolute right of
association for political purposes; and I doubt whether, in any country
or in any age, it be wise to set no limits to freedom of association.
A certain nation, it is said, could not maintain tranquillity in the
community, cause the laws to be respected, or establish a lasting
government, if the right of association were not confined within narrow
limits. These blessings are doubtless invaluable, and I can imagine
that, to acquire or to preserve them, a nation may impose upon itself
severe temporary restrictions: but still it is well that the nation
should know at what price these blessings are purchased. I can
understand that it may be advisable to cut off a man's arm in order to
save his life; but it would be ridiculous to assert that he will be as
dexterous as he was before he lost it.




Chapter VIII: The Americans Combat Individualism By The Principle Of
Interest Rightly Understood

When the world was managed by a few rich and powerful individuals, these
persons loved to entertain a lofty idea of the duties of man. They were
fond of professing that it is praiseworthy to forget one's self, and
that good should be done without hope of reward, as it is by the Deity
himself. Such were the standard opinions of that time in morals. I doubt
whether men were more virtuous in aristocratic ages than in others; but
they were incessantly talking of the beauties of virtue, and its utility
was only studied in secret. But since the imagination takes less lofty
flights and every man's thoughts are centred in himself, moralists are
alarmed by this idea of self-sacrifice, and they no longer venture to
present it to the human mind. They therefore content themselves with
inquiring whether the personal advantage of each member of the community
does not consist in working for the good of all; and when they have hit
upon some point on which private interest and public interest meet and
amalgamate, they are eager to bring it into notice. Observations of this
kind are gradually multiplied: what was only a single remark becomes a
general principle; and it is held as a truth that man serves himself
in serving his fellow-creatures, and that his private interest is to do
good.

I have already shown, in several parts of this work, by what means the
inhabitants of the United States almost always manage to combine their
own advantage with that of their fellow-citizens: my present purpose is
to point out the general rule which enables them to do so. In the United
States hardly anybody talks of the beauty of virtue; but they maintain
that virtue is useful, and prove it every day. The American moralists
do not profess that men ought to sacrifice themselves for their
fellow-creatures because it is noble to make such sacrifices; but they
boldly aver that such sacrifices are as necessary to him who imposes
them upon himself as to him for whose sake they are made. They have
found out that in their country and their age man is brought home to
himself by an irresistible force; and losing all hope of stopping
that force, they turn all their thoughts to the direction of it. They
therefore do not deny that every man may follow his own interest;
but they endeavor to prove that it is the interest of every man to be
virtuous. I shall not here enter into the reasons they allege, which
would divert me from my subject: suffice it to say that they have
convinced their fellow-countrymen.

Montaigne said long ago: "Were I not to follow the straight road for its
straightness, I should follow it for having found by experience that in
the end it is commonly the happiest and most useful track." The doctrine
of interest rightly understood is not, then, new, but amongst the
Americans of our time it finds universal acceptance: it has become
popular there; you may trace it at the bottom of all their actions, you
will remark it in all they say. It is as often to be met with on the
lips of the poor man as of the rich. In Europe the principle of interest
is much grosser than it is in America, but at the same time it is
less common, and especially it is less avowed; amongst us, men still
constantly feign great abnegation which they no longer feel. The
Americans, on the contrary, are fond of explaining almost all the
actions of their lives by the principle of interest rightly understood;
they show with complacency how an enlightened regard for themselves
constantly prompts them to assist each other, and inclines them
willingly to sacrifice a portion of their time and property to the
welfare of the State. In this respect I think they frequently fail to
do themselves justice; for in the United States, as well as elsewhere,
people are sometimes seen to give way to those disinterested and
spontaneous impulses which are natural to man; but the Americans seldom
allow that they yield to emotions of this kind; they are more anxious to
do honor to their philosophy than to themselves.

I might here pause, without attempting to pass a judgment on what I have
described. The extreme difficulty of the subject would be my excuse,
but I shall not avail myself of it; and I had rather that my readers,
clearly perceiving my object, should refuse to follow me than that
I should leave them in suspense. The principle of interest rightly
understood is not a lofty one, but it is clear and sure. It does not aim
at mighty objects, but it attains without excessive exertion all
those at which it aims. As it lies within the reach of all capacities,
everyone can without difficulty apprehend and retain it. By its
admirable conformity to human weaknesses, it easily obtains great
dominion; nor is that dominion precarious, since the principle checks
one personal interest by another, and uses, to direct the passions,
the very same instrument which excites them. The principle of interest
rightly understood produces no great acts of self-sacrifice, but it
suggests daily small acts of self-denial. By itself it cannot suffice to
make a man virtuous, but it disciplines a number of citizens in habits
of regularity, temperance, moderation, foresight, self-command; and, if
it does not lead men straight to virtue by the will, it gradually draws
them in that direction by their habits. If the principle of interest
rightly understood were to sway the whole moral world, extraordinary
virtues would doubtless be more rare; but I think that gross depravity
would then also be less common. The principle of interest rightly
understood perhaps prevents some men from rising far above the level of
mankind; but a great number of other men, who were falling far below it,
are caught and restrained by it. Observe some few individuals, they are
lowered by it; survey mankind, it is raised. I am not afraid to say that
the principle of interest, rightly understood, appears to me the best
suited of all philosophical theories to the wants of the men of our
time, and that I regard it as their chief remaining security against
themselves. Towards it, therefore, the minds of the moralists of our
age should turn; even should they judge it to be incomplete, it must
nevertheless be adopted as necessary.

I do not think upon the whole that there is more egotism amongst us than
in America; the only difference is, that there it is enlightened--here
it is not. Every American will sacrifice a portion of his private
interests to preserve the rest; we would fain preserve the whole, and
oftentimes the whole is lost. Everybody I see about me seems bent on
teaching his contemporaries, by precept and example, that what is useful
is never wrong. Will nobody undertake to make them understand how what
is right may be useful? No power upon earth can prevent the increasing
equality of conditions from inclining the human mind to seek out what is
useful, or from leading every member of the community to be wrapped up
in himself. It must therefore be expected that personal interest will
become more than ever the principal, if not the sole, spring of men's
actions; but it remains to be seen how each man will understand his
personal interest. If the members of a community, as they become more
equal, become more ignorant and coarse, it is difficult to foresee to
what pitch of stupid excesses their egotism may lead them; and no one
can foretell into what disgrace and wretchedness they would plunge
themselves, lest they should have to sacrifice something of their own
well-being to the prosperity of their fellow-creatures. I do not think
that the system of interest, as it is professed in America, is, in all
its parts, self-evident; but it contains a great number of truths so
evident that men, if they are but educated, cannot fail to see them.
Educate, then, at any rate; for the age of implicit self-sacrifice and
instinctive virtues is already flitting far away from us, and the time
is fast approaching when freedom, public peace, and social order itself
will not be able to exist without education.




Chapter IX: That The Americans Apply The Principle Of Interest Rightly
Understood To Religious Matters

If the principle of interest rightly understood had nothing but the
present world in view, it would be very insufficient; for there are many
sacrifices which can only find their recompense in another; and whatever
ingenuity may be put forth to demonstrate the utility of virtue, it will
never be an easy task to make that man live aright who has no thoughts
of dying. It is therefore necessary to ascertain whether the principle
of interest rightly understood is easily compatible with religious
belief. The philosophers who inculcate this system of morals tell men,
that to be happy in this life they must watch their own passions and
steadily control their excess; that lasting happiness can only be
secured by renouncing a thousand transient gratifications; and that a
man must perpetually triumph over himself, in order to secure his own
advantage. The founders of almost all religions have held the same
language. The track they point out to man is the same, only that the
goal is more remote; instead of placing in this world the reward of the
sacrifices they impose, they transport it to another. Nevertheless I
cannot believe that all those who practise virtue from religious motives
are only actuated by the hope of a recompense. I have known zealous
Christians who constantly forgot themselves, to work with greater ardor
for the happiness of their fellow-men; and I have heard them declare
that all they did was only to earn the blessings of a future state. I
cannot but think that they deceive themselves; I respect them too much
to believe them.

Christianity indeed teaches that a man must prefer his neighbor to
himself, in order to gain eternal life; but Christianity also teaches
that men ought to benefit their fellow-creatures for the love of God.
A sublime expression! Man, searching by his intellect into the divine
conception, and seeing that order is the purpose of God, freely combines
to prosecute the great design; and whilst he sacrifices his personal
interests to this consummate order of all created things, expects no
other recompense than the pleasure of contemplating it. I do not believe
that interest is the sole motive of religious men: but I believe that
interest is the principal means which religions themselves employ to
govern men, and I do not question that this way they strike into the
multitude and become popular. It is not easy clearly to perceive why
the principle of interest rightly understood should keep aloof from
religious opinions; and it seems to me more easy to show why it should
draw men to them. Let it be supposed that, in order to obtain happiness
in this world, a man combats his instinct on all occasions and
deliberately calculates every action of his life; that, instead of
yielding blindly to the impetuosity of first desires, he has learned the
art of resisting them, and that he has accustomed himself to sacrifice
without an effort the pleasure of a moment to the lasting interest
of his whole life. If such a man believes in the religion which he
professes, it will cost him but little to submit to the restrictions it
may impose. Reason herself counsels him to obey, and habit has prepared
him to endure them. If he should have conceived any doubts as to the
object of his hopes, still he will not easily allow himself to be
stopped by them; and he will decide that it is wise to risk some of the
advantages of this world, in order to preserve his rights to the great
inheritance promised him in another. "To be mistaken in believing that
the Christian religion is true," says Pascal, "is no great loss to
anyone; but how dreadful to be mistaken in believing it to be false!"

The Americans do not affect a brutal indifference to a future state;
they affect no puerile pride in despising perils which they hope to
escape from. They therefore profess their religion without shame and
without weakness; but there generally is, even in their zeal, something
so indescribably tranquil, methodical, and deliberate, that it would
seem as if the head, far more than the heart, brought them to the
foot of the altar. The Americans not only follow their religion from
interest, but they often place in this world the interest which makes
them follow it. In the Middle Ages the clergy spoke of nothing but a
future state; they hardly cared to prove that a sincere Christian may
be a happy man here below. But the American preachers are constantly
referring to the earth; and it is only with great difficulty that they
can divert their attention from it. To touch their congregations, they
always show them how favorable religious opinions are to freedom and
public tranquillity; and it is often difficult to ascertain from their
discourses whether the principal object of religion is to procure
eternal felicity in the other world, or prosperity in this.




Chapter X: Of The Taste For Physical Well-Being In America

In America the passion for physical well-being is not always exclusive,
but it is general; and if all do not feel it in the same manner, yet it
is felt by all. Carefully to satisfy all, even the least wants of the
body, and to provide the little conveniences of life, is uppermost
in every mind. Something of an analogous character is more and more
apparent in Europe. Amongst the causes which produce these similar
consequences in both hemispheres, several are so connected with my
subject as to deserve notice.

When riches are hereditarily fixed in families, there are a great number
of men who enjoy the comforts of life without feeling an exclusive
taste for those comforts. The heart of man is not so much caught by the
undisturbed possession of anything valuable as by the desire, as yet
imperfectly satisfied, of possessing it, and by the incessant dread
of losing it. In aristocratic communities, the wealthy, never having
experienced a condition different from their own, entertain no fear of
changing it; the existence of such conditions hardly occurs to them. The
comforts of life are not to them the end of life, but simply a way of
living; they regard them as existence itself--enjoyed, but scarcely
thought of. As the natural and instinctive taste which all men feel
for being well off is thus satisfied without trouble and without
apprehension, their faculties are turned elsewhere, and cling to more
arduous and more lofty undertakings, which excite and engross their
minds. Hence it is that, in the midst of physical gratifications, the
members of an aristocracy often display a haughty contempt of these very
enjoyments, and exhibit singular powers of endurance under the privation
of them. All the revolutions which have ever shaken or destroyed
aristocracies, have shown how easily men accustomed to superfluous
luxuries can do without the necessaries of life; whereas men who have
toiled to acquire a competency can hardly live after they have lost it.

If I turn my observation from the upper to the lower classes, I find
analogous effects produced by opposite causes. Amongst a nation where
aristocracy predominates in society, and keeps it stationary, the
people in the end get as much accustomed to poverty as the rich to
their opulence. The latter bestow no anxiety on their physical comforts,
because they enjoy them without an effort; the former do not think
of things which they despair of obtaining, and which they hardly know
enough of to desire them. In communities of this kind, the imagination
of the poor is driven to seek another world; the miseries of real life
inclose it around, but it escapes from their control, and flies to seek
its pleasures far beyond. When, on the contrary, the distinctions
of ranks are confounded together and privileges are destroyed--when
hereditary property is subdivided, and education and freedom widely
diffused, the desire of acquiring the comforts of the world haunts the
imagination of the poor, and the dread of losing them that of the rich.
Many scanty fortunes spring up; those who possess them have a sufficient
share of physical gratifications to conceive a taste for these
pleasures--not enough to satisfy it. They never procure them without
exertion, and they never indulge in them without apprehension. They
are therefore always straining to pursue or to retain gratifications so
delightful, so imperfect, so fugitive.

If I were to inquire what passion is most natural to men who are
stimulated and circumscribed by the obscurity of their birth or the
mediocrity of their fortune, I could discover none more peculiarly
appropriate to their condition than this love of physical prosperity.
The passion for physical comforts is essentially a passion of the
middle classes: with those classes it grows and spreads, with them it
preponderates. From them it mounts into the higher orders of society,
and descends into the mass of the people. I never met in America with
any citizen so poor as not to cast a glance of hope and envy on the
enjoyments of the rich, or whose imagination did not possess itself by
anticipation of those good things which fate still obstinately withheld
from him. On the other hand, I never perceived amongst the wealthier
inhabitants of the United States that proud contempt of physical
gratifications which is sometimes to be met with even in the most
opulent and dissolute aristocracies. Most of these wealthy persons were
once poor; they have felt the sting of want; they were long a prey to
adverse fortunes; and now that the victory is won, the passions which
accompanied the contest have survived it: their minds are, as it were,
intoxicated by the small enjoyments which they have pursued for forty
years. Not but that in the United States, as elsewhere, there are a
certain number of wealthy persons who, having come into their property
by inheritance, possess, without exertion, an opulence they have not
earned. But even these men are not less devotedly attached to the
pleasures of material life. The love of well-being is now become the
predominant taste of the nation; the great current of man's passions
runs in that channel, and sweeps everything along in its course.




Chapter XI: Peculiar Effects Of The Love Of Physical Gratifications In
Democratic Ages

It may be supposed, from what has just been said, that the love
of physical gratifications must constantly urge the Americans to
irregularities in morals, disturb the peace of families, and threaten
the security of society at large. Such is not the case: the passion for
physical gratifications produces in democracies effects very different
from those which it occasions in aristocratic nations. It sometimes
happens that, wearied with public affairs and sated with opulence,
amidst the ruin of religious belief and the decline of the State, the
heart of an aristocracy may by degrees be seduced to the pursuit of
sensual enjoyments only. At other times the power of the monarch or the
weakness of the people, without stripping the nobility of their fortune,
compels them to stand aloof from the administration of affairs, and
whilst the road to mighty enterprise is closed, abandons them to the
inquietude of their own desires; they then fall back heavily upon
themselves, and seek in the pleasures of the body oblivion of their
former greatness. When the members of an aristocratic body are thus
exclusively devoted to the pursuit of physical gratifications, they
commonly concentrate in that direction all the energy which they derive
from their long experience of power. Such men are not satisfied with
the pursuit of comfort; they require sumptuous depravity and splendid
corruption. The worship they pay the senses is a gorgeous one; and they
seem to vie with each other in the art of degrading their own natures.
The stronger, the more famous, and the more free an aristocracy has
been, the more depraved will it then become; and however brilliant
may have been the lustre of its virtues, I dare predict that they will
always be surpassed by the splendor of its vices.

The taste for physical gratifications leads a democratic people into no
such excesses. The love of well-being is there displayed as a tenacious,
exclusive, universal passion; but its range is confined. To build
enormous palaces, to conquer or to mimic nature, to ransack the world in
order to gratify the passions of a man, is not thought of: but to add
a few roods of land to your field, to plant an orchard, to enlarge a
dwelling, to be always making life more comfortable and convenient,
to avoid trouble, and to satisfy the smallest wants without effort and
almost without cost. These are small objects, but the soul clings to
them; it dwells upon them closely and day by day, till they at last shut
out the rest of the world, and sometimes intervene between itself and
heaven.

This, it may be said, can only be applicable to those members of the
community who are in humble circumstances; wealthier individuals will
display tastes akin to those which belonged to them in aristocratic
ages. I contest the proposition: in point of physical gratifications,
the most opulent members of a democracy will not display tastes very
different from those of the people; whether it be that, springing from
the people, they really share those tastes, or that they esteem it a
duty to submit to them. In democratic society the sensuality of the
public has taken a moderate and tranquil course, to which all are bound
to conform: it is as difficult to depart from the common rule by one's
vices as by one's virtues. Rich men who live amidst democratic nations
are therefore more intent on providing for their smallest wants than for
their extraordinary enjoyments; they gratify a number of petty desires,
without indulging in any great irregularities of passion: thus they are
more apt to become enervated than debauched. The especial taste which
the men of democratic ages entertain for physical enjoyments is not
naturally opposed to the principles of public order; nay, it often
stands in need of order that it may be gratified. Nor is it adverse to
regularity of morals, for good morals contribute to public tranquillity
and are favorable to industry. It may even be frequently combined with a
species of religious morality: men wish to be as well off as they can
in this world, without foregoing their chance of another. Some physical
gratifications cannot be indulged in without crime; from such they
strictly abstain. The enjoyment of others is sanctioned by religion
and morality; to these the heart, the imagination, and life itself are
unreservedly given up; till, in snatching at these lesser gifts, men
lose sight of those more precious possessions which constitute the glory
and the greatness of mankind. The reproach I address to the principle
of equality, is not that it leads men away in the pursuit of forbidden
enjoyments, but that it absorbs them wholly in quest of those which are
allowed. By these means, a kind of virtuous materialism may ultimately
be established in the world, which would not corrupt, but enervate the
soul, and noiselessly unbend its springs of action.




Chapter XII: Causes Of Fanatical Enthusiasm In Some Americans

Although the desire of acquiring the good things of this world is the
prevailing passion of the American people, certain momentary outbreaks
occur, when their souls seem suddenly to burst the bonds of matter by
which they are restrained, and to soar impetuously towards heaven. In
all the States of the Union, but especially in the half-peopled country
of the Far West, wandering preachers may be met with who hawk about the
word of God from place to place. Whole families--old men, women, and
children--cross rough passes and untrodden wilds, coming from a great
distance, to join a camp-meeting, where they totally forget for several
days and nights, in listening to these discourses, the cares of business
and even the most urgent wants of the body. Here and there, in the midst
of American society, you meet with men, full of a fanatical and almost
wild enthusiasm, which hardly exists in Europe. From time to time
strange sects arise, which endeavor to strike out extraordinary paths
to eternal happiness. Religious insanity is very common in the United
States.

Nor ought these facts to surprise us. It was not man who implanted in
himself the taste for what is infinite and the love of what is immortal:
those lofty instincts are not the offspring of his capricious will;
their steadfast foundation is fixed in human nature, and they exist in
spite of his efforts. He may cross and distort them--destroy them he
cannot. The soul has wants which must be satisfied; and whatever pains
be taken to divert it from itself, it soon grows weary, restless, and
disquieted amidst the enjoyments of sense. If ever the faculties of
the great majority of mankind were exclusively bent upon the pursuit of
material objects, it might be anticipated that an amazing reaction would
take place in the souls of some men. They would drift at large in the
world of spirits, for fear of remaining shackled by the close bondage of
the body.

It is not then wonderful if, in the midst of a community whose thoughts
tend earthward, a small number of individuals are to be found who turn
their looks to heaven. I should be surprised if mysticism did not soon
make some advance amongst a people solely engaged in promoting its own
worldly welfare. It is said that the deserts of the Thebaid were peopled
by the persecutions of the emperors and the massacres of the Circus; I
should rather say that it was by the luxuries of Rome and the Epicurean
philosophy of Greece. If their social condition, their present
circumstances, and their laws did not confine the minds of the Americans
so closely to the pursuit of worldly welfare, it is probable that they
would display more reserve and more experience whenever their attention
is turned to things immaterial, and that they would check themselves
without difficulty. But they feel imprisoned within bounds which they
will apparently never be allowed to pass. As soon as they have passed
these bounds, their minds know not where to fix themselves, and they
often rush unrestrained beyond the range of common-sense.




Chapter XIII: Causes Of The Restless Spirit Of Americans In The Midst Of
Their Prosperity

In certain remote corners of the Old World you may still sometimes
stumble upon a small district which seems to have been forgotten amidst
the general tumult, and to have remained stationary whilst everything
around it was in motion. The inhabitants are for the most part extremely
ignorant and poor; they take no part in the business of the country, and
they are frequently oppressed by the government; yet their countenances
are generally placid, and their spirits light. In America I saw the
freest and most enlightened men, placed in the happiest circumstances
which the world affords: it seemed to me as if a cloud habitually hung
upon their brow, and I thought them serious and almost sad even in their
pleasures. The chief reason of this contrast is that the former do not
think of the ills they endure--the latter are forever brooding over
advantages they do not possess. It is strange to see with what feverish
ardor the Americans pursue their own welfare; and to watch the vague
dread that constantly torments them lest they should not have chosen the
shortest path which may lead to it. A native of the United States clings
to this world's goods as if he were certain never to die; and he is so
hasty in grasping at all within his reach, that one would suppose he was
constantly afraid of not living long enough to enjoy them. He clutches
everything, he holds nothing fast, but soon loosens his grasp to pursue
fresh gratifications.

In the United States a man builds a house to spend his latter years in
it, and he sells it before the roof is on: he plants a garden, and lets
it just as the trees are coming into bearing: he brings a field into
tillage, and leaves other men to gather the crops: he embraces a
profession, and gives it up: he settles in a place, which he soon
afterwards leaves, to carry his changeable longings elsewhere. If his
private affairs leave him any leisure, he instantly plunges into the
vortex of politics; and if at the end of a year of unremitting labor he
finds he has a few days' vacation, his eager curiosity whirls him over
the vast extent of the United States, and he will travel fifteen
hundred miles in a few days, to shake off his happiness. Death at length
overtakes him, but it is before he is weary of his bootless chase of
that complete felicity which is forever on the wing.

At first sight there is something surprising in this strange unrest of
so many happy men, restless in the midst of abundance. The spectacle
itself is however as old as the world; the novelty is to see a whole
people furnish an exemplification of it. Their taste for physical
gratifications must be regarded as the original source of that secret
inquietude which the actions of the Americans betray, and of that
inconstancy of which they afford fresh examples every day. He who has
set his heart exclusively upon the pursuit of worldly welfare is always
in a hurry, for he has but a limited time at his disposal to reach it,
to grasp it, and to enjoy it. The recollection of the brevity of life is
a constant spur to him. Besides the good things which he possesses, he
every instant fancies a thousand others which death will prevent him
from trying if he does not try them soon. This thought fills him with
anxiety, fear, and regret, and keeps his mind in ceaseless trepidation,
which leads him perpetually to change his plans and his abode. If in
addition to the taste for physical well-being a social condition be
superadded, in which the laws and customs make no condition permanent,
here is a great additional stimulant to this restlessness of temper. Men
will then be seen continually to change their track, for fear of missing
the shortest cut to happiness. It may readily be conceived that if men,
passionately bent upon physical gratifications, desire eagerly, they are
also easily discouraged: as their ultimate object is to enjoy, the
means to reach that object must be prompt and easy, or the trouble of
acquiring the gratification would be greater than the gratification
itself. Their prevailing frame of mind then is at once ardent and
relaxed, violent and enervated. Death is often less dreaded than
perseverance in continuous efforts to one end.

The equality of conditions leads by a still straighter road to several
of the effects which I have here described. When all the privileges of
birth and fortune are abolished, when all professions are accessible
to all, and a man's own energies may place him at the top of any one of
them, an easy and unbounded career seems open to his ambition, and he
will readily persuade himself that he is born to no vulgar destinies.
But this is an erroneous notion, which is corrected by daily experience.
The same equality which allows every citizen to conceive these
lofty hopes, renders all the citizens less able to realize them: it
circumscribes their powers on every side, whilst it gives freer scope to
their desires. Not only are they themselves powerless, but they are
met at every step by immense obstacles, which they did not at first
perceive. They have swept away the privileges of some of their
fellow-creatures which stood in their way, but they have opened the door
to universal competition: the barrier has changed its shape rather than
its position. When men are nearly alike, and all follow the same track,
it is very difficult for any one individual to walk quick and cleave
a way through the dense throng which surrounds and presses him. This
constant strife between the propensities springing from the equality
of conditions and the means it supplies to satisfy them, harasses and
wearies the mind.

It is possible to conceive men arrived at a degree of freedom which
should completely content them; they would then enjoy their independence
without anxiety and without impatience. But men will never establish any
equality with which they can be contented. Whatever efforts a people may
make, they will never succeed in reducing all the conditions of society
to a perfect level; and even if they unhappily attained that absolute
and complete depression, the inequality of minds would still remain,
which, coming directly from the hand of God, will forever escape the
laws of man. However democratic then the social state and the political
constitution of a people may be, it is certain that every member of the
community will always find out several points about him which command
his own position; and we may foresee that his looks will be doggedly
fixed in that direction. When inequality of conditions is the common
law of society, the most marked inequalities do not strike the eye: when
everything is nearly on the same level, the slightest are marked enough
to hurt it. Hence the desire of equality always becomes more insatiable
in proportion as equality is more complete.

Amongst democratic nations men easily attain a certain equality
of conditions: they can never attain the equality they desire. It
perpetually retires from before them, yet without hiding itself from
their sight, and in retiring draws them on. At every moment they think
they are about to grasp it; it escapes at every moment from their hold.
They are near enough to see its charms, but too far off to enjoy them;
and before they have fully tasted its delights they die. To these causes
must be attributed that strange melancholy which oftentimes will haunt
the inhabitants of democratic countries in the midst of their abundance,
and that disgust at life which sometimes seizes upon them in the midst
of calm and easy circumstances. Complaints are made in France that the
number of suicides increases; in America suicide is rare, but insanity
is said to be more common than anywhere else. These are all different
symptoms of the same disease. The Americans do not put an end to their
lives, however disquieted they may be, because their religion
forbids it; and amongst them materialism may be said hardly to exist,
notwithstanding the general passion for physical gratification. The will
resists--reason frequently gives way. In democratic ages enjoyments are
more intense than in the ages of aristocracy, and especially the number
of those who partake in them is larger: but, on the other hand, it must
be admitted that man's hopes and his desires are oftener blasted, the
soul is more stricken and perturbed, and care itself more keen.




Chapter XIV: Taste For Physical Gratifications United In America To Love
Of Freedom And Attention To Public Affairs

When a democratic state turns to absolute monarchy, the activity which
was before directed to public and to private affairs is all at once
centred upon the latter: the immediate consequence is, for some time,
great physical prosperity; but this impulse soon slackens, and the
amount of productive industry is checked. I know not if a single trading
or manufacturing people can be cited, from the Tyrians down to the
Florentines and the English, who were not a free people also. There
is therefore a close bond and necessary relation between these two
elements--freedom and productive industry. This proposition is generally
true of all nations, but especially of democratic nations. I have
already shown that men who live in ages of equality continually require
to form associations in order to procure the things they covet; and, on
the other hand, I have shown how great political freedom improves and
diffuses the art of association. Freedom, in these ages, is therefore
especially favorable to the production of wealth; nor is it difficult
to perceive that despotism is especially adverse to the same result.
The nature of despotic power in democratic ages is not to be fierce or
cruel, but minute and meddling. Despotism of this kind, though it does
not trample on humanity, is directly opposed to the genius of commerce
and the pursuits of industry.

Thus the men of democratic ages require to be free in order more readily
to procure those physical enjoyments for which they are always longing.
It sometimes happens, however, that the excessive taste they conceive
for these same enjoyments abandons them to the first master who appears.
The passion for worldly welfare then defeats itself, and, without
perceiving it, throws the object of their desires to a greater distance.

There is, indeed, a most dangerous passage in the history of a
democratic people. When the taste for physical gratifications amongst
such a people has grown more rapidly than their education and their
experience of free institutions, the time will come when men are carried
away, and lose all self-restraint, at the sight of the new possessions
they are about to lay hold upon. In their intense and exclusive anxiety
to make a fortune, they lose sight of the close connection which exists
between the private fortune of each of them and the prosperity of all.
It is not necessary to do violence to such a people in order to strip
them of the rights they enjoy; they themselves willingly loosen
their hold. The discharge of political duties appears to them to be a
troublesome annoyance, which diverts them from their occupations and
business. If they be required to elect representatives, to support the
Government by personal service, to meet on public business, they have no
time--they cannot waste their precious time in useless engagements: such
idle amusements are unsuited to serious men who are engaged with the
more important interests of life. These people think they are following
the principle of self-interest, but the idea they entertain of that
principle is a very rude one; and the better to look after what they
call their business, they neglect their chief business, which is to
remain their own masters.

As the citizens who work do not care to attend to public business, and
as the class which might devote its leisure to these duties has ceased
to exist, the place of the Government is, as it were, unfilled. If at
that critical moment some able and ambitious man grasps the supreme
power, he will find the road to every kind of usurpation open before
him. If he does but attend for some time to the material prosperity of
the country, no more will be demanded of him. Above all he must insure
public tranquillity: men who are possessed by the passion of physical
gratification generally find out that the turmoil of freedom disturbs
their welfare, before they discover how freedom itself serves to promote
it. If the slightest rumor of public commotion intrudes into the petty
pleasures of private life, they are aroused and alarmed by it. The fear
of anarchy perpetually haunts them, and they are always ready to fling
away their freedom at the first disturbance.

I readily admit that public tranquillity is a great good; but at the
same time I cannot forget that all nations have been enslaved by being
kept in good order. Certainly it is not to be inferred that nations
ought to despise public tranquillity; but that state ought not to
content them. A nation which asks nothing of its government but the
maintenance of order is already a slave at heart--the slave of its own
well-being, awaiting but the hand that will bind it. By such a nation
the despotism of faction is not less to be dreaded than the despotism
of an individual. When the bulk of the community is engrossed by private
concerns, the smallest parties need not despair of getting the upper
hand in public affairs. At such times it is not rare to see upon
the great stage of the world, as we see at our theatres, a multitude
represented by a few players, who alone speak in the name of an
absent or inattentive crowd: they alone are in action whilst all are
stationary; they regulate everything by their own caprice; they change
the laws, and tyrannize at will over the manners of the country; and
then men wonder to see into how small a number of weak and worthless
hands a great people may fall.

Hitherto the Americans have fortunately escaped all the perils which I
have just pointed out; and in this respect they are really deserving of
admiration. Perhaps there is no country in the world where fewer idle
men are to be met with than in America, or where all who work are more
eager to promote their own welfare. But if the passion of the
Americans for physical gratifications is vehement, at least it is
not indiscriminating; and reason, though unable to restrain it, still
directs its course. An American attends to his private concerns as if he
were alone in the world, and the next minute he gives himself up to the
common weal as if he had forgotten them. At one time he seems animated
by the most selfish cupidity, at another by the most lively patriotism.
The human heart cannot be thus divided. The inhabitants of the United
States alternately display so strong and so similar a passion for their
own welfare and for their freedom, that it may be supposed that these
passions are united and mingled in some part of their character. And
indeed the Americans believe their freedom to be the best instrument and
surest safeguard of their welfare: they are attached to the one by the
other. They by no means think that they are not called upon to take a
part in the public weal; they believe, on the contrary, that their chief
business is to secure for themselves a government which will allow them
to acquire the things they covet, and which will not debar them from the
peaceful enjoyment of those possessions which they have acquired.




Chapter XV: That Religious Belief Sometimes Turns The Thoughts Of The
Americans To Immaterial Pleasures

In the United States, on the seventh day of every week, the trading and
working life of the nation seems suspended; all noises cease; a deep
tranquillity, say rather the solemn calm of meditation, succeeds the
turmoil of the week, and the soul resumes possession and contemplation
of itself. Upon this day the marts of traffic are deserted; every member
of the community, accompanied by his children, goes to church, where he
listens to strange language which would seem unsuited to his ear. He
is told of the countless evils caused by pride and covetousness: he
is reminded of the necessity of checking his desires, of the finer
pleasures which belong to virtue alone, and of the true happiness which
attends it. On his return home, he does not turn to the ledgers of his
calling, but he opens the book of Holy Scripture; there he meets with
sublime or affecting descriptions of the greatness and goodness of the
Creator, of the infinite magnificence of the handiwork of God, of the
lofty destinies of man, of his duties, and of his immortal privileges.
Thus it is that the American at times steals an hour from himself; and
laying aside for a while the petty passions which agitate his life,
and the ephemeral interests which engross it, he strays at once into an
ideal world, where all is great, eternal, and pure.

I have endeavored to point out in another part of this work the causes
to which the maintenance of the political institutions of the Americans
is attributable; and religion appeared to be one of the most prominent
amongst them. I am now treating of the Americans in an individual
capacity, and I again observe that religion is not less useful to each
citizen than to the whole State. The Americans show, by their practice,
that they feel the high necessity of imparting morality to democratic
communities by means of religion. What they think of themselves in
this respect is a truth of which every democratic nation ought to be
thoroughly persuaded.

I do not doubt that the social and political constitution of a people
predisposes them to adopt a certain belief and certain tastes, which
afterwards flourish without difficulty amongst them; whilst the same
causes may divert a people from certain opinions and propensities,
without any voluntary effort, and, as it were, without any distinct
consciousness, on their part. The whole art of the legislator
is correctly to discern beforehand these natural inclinations of
communities of men, in order to know whether they should be assisted, or
whether it may not be necessary to check them. For the duties incumbent
on the legislator differ at different times; the goal towards which the
human race ought ever to be tending is alone stationary; the means of
reaching it are perpetually to be varied.

If I had been born in an aristocratic age, in the midst of a nation
where the hereditary wealth of some, and the irremediable penury of
others, should equally divert men from the idea of bettering their
condition, and hold the soul as it were in a state of torpor fixed on
the contemplation of another world, I should then wish that it were
possible for me to rouse that people to a sense of their wants; I should
seek to discover more rapid and more easy means for satisfying the fresh
desires which I might have awakened; and, directing the most strenuous
efforts of the human mind to physical pursuits, I should endeavor to
stimulate it to promote the well-being of man. If it happened that some
men were immoderately incited to the pursuit of riches, and displayed an
excessive liking for physical gratifications, I should not be alarmed;
these peculiar symptoms would soon be absorbed in the general aspect of
the people.

The attention of the legislators of democracies is called to other
cares. Give democratic nations education and freedom, and leave them
alone. They will soon learn to draw from this world all the benefits
which it can afford; they will improve each of the useful arts, and will
day by day render life more comfortable, more convenient, and more easy.
Their social condition naturally urges them in this direction; I do not
fear that they will slacken their course.

But whilst man takes delight in this honest and lawful pursuit of his
wellbeing, it is to be apprehended that he may in the end lose the use
of his sublimest faculties; and that whilst he is busied in improving
all around him, he may at length degrade himself. Here, and here only,
does the peril lie. It should therefore be the unceasing object of the
legislators of democracies, and of all the virtuous and enlightened men
who live there, to raise the souls of their fellow-citizens, and keep
them lifted up towards heaven. It is necessary that all who feel an
interest in the future destinies of democratic society should unite, and
that all should make joint and continual efforts to diffuse the love
of the infinite, a sense of greatness, and a love of pleasures not
of earth. If amongst the opinions of a democratic people any of those
pernicious theories exist which tend to inculcate that all perishes with
the body, let men by whom such theories are professed be marked as the
natural foes of such a people.

The materialists are offensive to me in many respects; their doctrines
I hold to be pernicious, and I am disgusted at their arrogance. If their
system could be of any utility to man, it would seem to be by giving him
a modest opinion of himself. But these reasoners show that it is not
so; and when they think they have said enough to establish that they are
brutes, they show themselves as proud as if they had demonstrated that
they are gods. Materialism is, amongst all nations, a dangerous disease
of the human mind; but it is more especially to be dreaded amongst a
democratic people, because it readily amalgamates with that vice which
is most familiar to the heart under such circumstances. Democracy
encourages a taste for physical gratification: this taste, if it become
excessive, soon disposes men to believe that all is matter only; and
materialism, in turn, hurries them back with mad impatience to these
same delights: such is the fatal circle within which democratic nations
are driven round. It were well that they should see the danger and hold
back.

Most religions are only general, simple, and practical means of teaching
men the doctrine of the immortality of the soul. That is the greatest
benefit which a democratic people derives, from its belief, and hence
belief is more necessary to such a people than to all others. When
therefore any religion has struck its roots deep into a democracy,
beware lest you disturb them; but rather watch it carefully, as the most
precious bequest of aristocratic ages. Seek not to supersede the old
religious opinions of men by new ones; lest in the passage from one
faith to another, the soul being left for a while stripped of all
belief, the love of physical gratifications should grow upon it and fill
it wholly.

The doctrine of metempsychosis is assuredly not more rational than that
of materialism; nevertheless if it were absolutely necessary that a
democracy should choose one of the two, I should not hesitate to decide
that the community would run less risk of being brutalized by believing
that the soul of man will pass into the carcass of a hog, than by
believing that the soul of man is nothing at all. The belief in a
supersensual and immortal principle, united for a time to matter, is
so indispensable to man's greatness, that its effects are striking even
when it is not united to the doctrine of future reward and punishment;
and when it holds no more than that after death the divine principle
contained in man is absorbed in the Deity, or transferred to animate
the frame of some other creature. Men holding so imperfect a belief will
still consider the body as the secondary and inferior portion of
their nature, and they will despise it even whilst they yield to its
influence; whereas they have a natural esteem and secret admiration for
the immaterial part of man, even though they sometimes refuse to submit
to its dominion. That is enough to give a lofty cast to their opinions
and their tastes, and to bid them tend with no interested motive, and as
it were by impulse, to pure feelings and elevated thoughts.

It is not certain that Socrates and his followers had very fixed
opinions as to what would befall man hereafter; but the sole point
of belief on which they were determined--that the soul has nothing in
common with the body, and survives it--was enough to give the Platonic
philosophy that sublime aspiration by which it is distinguished. It
is clear from the works of Plato, that many philosophical writers, his
predecessors or contemporaries, professed materialism. These writers
have not reached us, or have reached us in mere fragments. The same
thing has happened in almost all ages; the greater part of the most
famous minds in literature adhere to the doctrines of a supersensual
philosophy. The instinct and the taste of the human race maintain those
doctrines; they save them oftentimes in spite of men themselves, and
raise the names of their defenders above the tide of time. It must not
then be supposed that at any period or under any political condition,
the passion for physical gratifications, and the opinions which are
superinduced by that passion, can ever content a whole people. The heart
of man is of a larger mould: it can at once comprise a taste for the
possessions of earth and the love of those of heaven: at times it may
seem to cling devotedly to the one, but it will never be long without
thinking of the other.

If it be easy to see that it is more particularly important in
democratic ages that spiritual opinions should prevail, it is not easy
to say by what means those who govern democratic nations may make them
predominate. I am no believer in the prosperity, any more than in the
durability, of official philosophies; and as to state religions, I
have always held, that if they be sometimes of momentary service to the
interests of political power, they always, sooner or later, become
fatal to the Church. Nor do I think with those who assert, that to raise
religion in the eyes of the people, and to make them do honor to her
spiritual doctrines, it is desirable indirectly to give her ministers a
political influence which the laws deny them. I am so much alive to
the almost inevitable dangers which beset religious belief whenever
the clergy take part in public affairs, and I am so convinced that
Christianity must be maintained at any cost in the bosom of modern
democracies, that I had rather shut up the priesthood within the
sanctuary than allow them to step beyond it.

What means then remain in the hands of constituted authorities to bring
men back to spiritual opinions, or to hold them fast to the religion
by which those opinions are suggested? My answer will do me harm in
the eyes of politicians. I believe that the sole effectual means which
governments can employ in order to have the doctrine of the immortality
of the soul duly respected, is ever to act as if they believed in it
themselves; and I think that it is only by scrupulous conformity to
religious morality in great affairs that they can hope to teach the
community at large to know, to love, and to observe it in the lesser
concerns of life.




Chapter XVI: That Excessive Care Of Worldly Welfare May Impair That
Welfare

There is a closer tie than is commonly supposed between the improvement
of the soul and the amelioration of what belongs to the body. Man may
leave these two things apart, and consider each of them alternately; but
he cannot sever them entirely without at last losing sight of one and of
the other. The beasts have the same senses as ourselves, and very nearly
the same appetites. We have no sensual passions which are not common
to our race and theirs, and which are not to be found, at least in the
germ, in a dog as well as in a man. Whence is it then that the animals
can only provide for their first and lowest wants, whereas we can
infinitely vary and endlessly increase our enjoyments?

We are superior to the beasts in this, that we use our souls to find out
those material benefits to which they are only led by instinct. In man,
the angel teaches the brute the art of contenting its desires. It is
because man is capable of rising above the things of the body, and of
contemning life itself, of which the beasts have not the least notion,
that he can multiply these same things of the body to a degree which
inferior races are equally unable to conceive. Whatever elevates,
enlarges, and expands the soul, renders it more capable of succeeding
in those very undertakings which concern it not. Whatever, on the other
hand, enervates or lowers it, weakens it for all purposes, the chiefest,
as well as the least, and threatens to render it almost equally impotent
for the one and for the other. Hence the soul must remain great and
strong, though it were only to devote its strength and greatness from
time to time to the service of the body. If men were ever to content
themselves with material objects, it is probable that they would lose by
degrees the art of producing them; and they would enjoy them in the end,
like the brutes, without discernment and without improvement.




Chapter XVII: That In Times Marked By Equality Of Conditions And
Sceptical Opinions, It Is Important To Remove To A Distance The Objects
Of Human Actions

In the ages of faith the final end of life is placed beyond life. The
men of those ages therefore naturally, and in a manner involuntarily,
accustom themselves to fix their gaze for a long course of years on some
immovable object, towards which they are constantly tending; and they
learn by insensible degrees to repress a multitude of petty passing
desires, in order to be the better able to content that great and
lasting desire which possesses them. When these same men engage in the
affairs of this world, the same habits may be traced in their conduct.
They are apt to set up some general and certain aim and end to their
actions here below, towards which all their efforts are directed: they
do not turn from day to day to chase some novel object of desire, but
they have settled designs which they are never weary of pursuing. This
explains why religious nations have so often achieved such lasting
results: for whilst they were thinking only of the other world, they
had found out the great secret of success in this. Religions give men a
general habit of conducting themselves with a view to futurity: in
this respect they are not less useful to happiness in this life than
to felicity hereafter; and this is one of their chief political
characteristics.

But in proportion as the light of faith grows dim, the range of man's
sight is circumscribed, as if the end and aim of human actions appeared
every day to be more within his reach. When men have once allowed
themselves to think no more of what is to befall them after life, they
readily lapse into that complete and brutal indifference to futurity,
which is but too conformable to some propensities of mankind. As soon
as they have lost the habit of placing their chief hopes upon remote
events, they naturally seek to gratify without delay their smallest
desires; and no sooner do they despair of living forever, than they
are disposed to act as if they were to exist but for a single day.
In sceptical ages it is always therefore to be feared that men may
perpetually give way to their daily casual desires; and that, wholly
renouncing whatever cannot be acquired without protracted effort, they
may establish nothing great, permanent, and calm.

If the social condition of a people, under these circumstances, becomes
democratic, the danger which I here point out is thereby increased. When
everyone is constantly striving to change his position--when an immense
field for competition is thrown open to all--when wealth is amassed or
dissipated in the shortest possible space of time amidst the turmoil
of democracy, visions of sudden and easy fortunes--of great possessions
easily won and lost--of chance, under all its forms--haunt the mind. The
instability of society itself fosters the natural instability of man's
desires. In the midst of these perpetual fluctuations of his lot, the
present grows upon his mind, until it conceals futurity from his sight,
and his looks go no further than the morrow.

In those countries in which unhappily irreligion and democracy coexist,
the most important duty of philosophers and of those in power is to be
always striving to place the objects of human actions far beyond man's
immediate range. Circumscribed by the character of his country and
his age, the moralist must learn to vindicate his principles in that
position. He must constantly endeavor to show his contemporaries, that,
even in the midst of the perpetual commotion around them, it is easier
than they think to conceive and to execute protracted undertakings. He
must teach them that, although the aspect of mankind may have changed,
the methods by which men may provide for their prosperity in this world
are still the same; and that amongst democratic nations, as well as
elsewhere, it is only by resisting a thousand petty selfish passions of
the hour that the general and unquenchable passion for happiness can be
satisfied.

The task of those in power is not less clearly marked out. At all times
it is important that those who govern nations should act with a view to
the future: but this is even more necessary in democratic and sceptical
ages than in any others. By acting thus, the leading men of democracies
not only make public affairs prosperous, but they also teach private
individuals, by their example, the art of managing private concerns.
Above all they must strive as much as possible to banish chance from the
sphere of politics. The sudden and undeserved promotion of a courtier
produces only a transient impression in an aristocratic country, because
the aggregate institutions and opinions of the nation habitually compel
men to advance slowly in tracks which they cannot get out of. But
nothing is more pernicious than similar instances of favor exhibited
to the eyes of a democratic people: they give the last impulse to the
public mind in a direction where everything hurries it onwards. At times
of scepticism and equality more especially, the favor of the people or
of the prince, which chance may confer or chance withhold, ought never
to stand in lieu of attainments or services. It is desirable that every
advancement should there appear to be the result of some effort; so that
no greatness should be of too easy acquirement, and that ambition should
be obliged to fix its gaze long upon an object before it is gratified.
Governments must apply themselves to restore to men that love of the
future with which religion and the state of society no longer inspire
them; and, without saying so, they must practically teach the community
day by day that wealth, fame, and power are the rewards of labor--that
great success stands at the utmost range of long desires, and that
nothing lasting is obtained but what is obtained by toil. When men have
accustomed themselves to foresee from afar what is likely to befall in
the world and to feed upon hopes, they can hardly confine their minds
within the precise circumference of life, and they are ready to break
the boundary and cast their looks beyond. I do not doubt that, by
training the members of a community to think of their future condition
in this world, they would be gradually and unconsciously brought nearer
to religious convictions. Thus the means which allow men, up to a
certain point, to go without religion, are perhaps after all the
only means we still possess for bringing mankind back by a long and
roundabout path to a state of faith.




Chapter XVIII: That Amongst The Americans All Honest Callings Are
Honorable

Amongst a democratic people, where there is no hereditary wealth, every
man works to earn a living, or has worked, or is born of parents who
have worked. The notion of labor is therefore presented to the mind
on every side as the necessary, natural, and honest condition of human
existence. Not only is labor not dishonorable amongst such a people, but
it is held in honor: the prejudice is not against it, but in its favor.
In the United States a wealthy man thinks that he owes it to public
opinion to devote his leisure to some kind of industrial or commercial
pursuit, or to public business. He would think himself in bad repute if
he employed his life solely in living. It is for the purpose of escaping
this obligation to work, that so many rich Americans come to Europe,
where they find some scattered remains of aristocratic society, amongst
which idleness is still held in honor.

Equality of conditions not only ennobles the notion of labor in men's
estimation, but it raises the notion of labor as a source of profit. In
aristocracies it is not exactly labor that is despised, but labor with
a view to profit. Labor is honorific in itself, when it is undertaken at
the sole bidding of ambition or of virtue. Yet in aristocratic society
it constantly happens that he who works for honor is not insensible to
the attractions of profit. But these two desires only intermingle in
the innermost depths of his soul: he carefully hides from every eye
the point at which they join; he would fain conceal it from himself. In
aristocratic countries there are few public officers who do not affect
to serve their country without interested motives. Their salary is an
incident of which they think but little, and of which they always affect
not to think at all. Thus the notion of profit is kept distinct from
that of labor; however they may be united in point of fact, they are not
thought of together.

In democratic communities these two notions are, on the contrary, always
palpably united. As the desire of well-being is universal--as fortunes
are slender or fluctuating--as everyone wants either to increase his
own resources, or to provide fresh ones for his progeny, men clearly see
that it is profit which, if not wholly, at least partially, leads them
to work. Even those who are principally actuated by the love of fame are
necessarily made familiar with the thought that they are not exclusively
actuated by that motive; and they discover that the desire of getting
a living is mingled in their minds with the desire of making life
illustrious.

As soon as, on the one hand, labor is held by the whole community to be
an honorable necessity of man's condition, and, on the other, as soon as
labor is always ostensibly performed, wholly or in part, for the purpose
of earning remuneration, the immense interval which separated different
callings in aristocratic societies disappears. If all are not alike, all
at least have one feature in common. No profession exists in which men
do not work for money; and the remuneration which is common to them
all gives them all an air of resemblance. This serves to explain
the opinions which the Americans entertain with respect to different
callings. In America no one is degraded because he works, for everyone
about him works also; nor is anyone humiliated by the notion of
receiving pay, for the President of the United States also works for
pay. He is paid for commanding, other men for obeying orders. In the
United States professions are more or less laborious, more or less
profitable; but they are never either high or low: every honest calling
is honorable.




Chapter XIX: That Almost All The Americans Follow Industrial Callings

Agriculture is, perhaps, of all the useful arts that which improves most
slowly amongst democratic nations. Frequently, indeed, it would seem
to be stationary, because other arts are making rapid strides towards
perfection. On the other hand, almost all the tastes and habits which
the equality of condition engenders naturally lead men to commercial and
industrial occupations.

Suppose an active, enlightened, and free man, enjoying a competency, but
full of desires: he is too poor to live in idleness; he is rich enough
to feel himself protected from the immediate fear of want, and he thinks
how he can better his condition. This man has conceived a taste for
physical gratifications, which thousands of his fellow-men indulge in
around him; he has himself begun to enjoy these pleasures, and he is
eager to increase his means of satisfying these tastes more completely.
But life is slipping away, time is urgent--to what is he to turn? The
cultivation of the ground promises an almost certain result to his
exertions, but a slow one; men are not enriched by it without patience
and toil. Agriculture is therefore only suited to those who have already
large, superfluous wealth, or to those whose penury bids them only seek
a bare subsistence. The choice of such a man as we have supposed is soon
made; he sells his plot of ground, leaves his dwelling, and embarks in
some hazardous but lucrative calling. Democratic communities abound
in men of this kind; and in proportion as the equality of conditions
becomes greater, their multitude increases. Thus democracy not only
swells the number of workingmen, but it leads men to prefer one kind
of labor to another; and whilst it diverts them from agriculture, it
encourages their taste for commerce and manufactures. *a

[Footnote a: It has often been remarked that manufacturers and
mercantile men are inordinately addicted to physical gratifications, and
this has been attributed to commerce and manufactures; but that is,
I apprehend, to take the effect for the cause. The taste for physical
gratifications is not imparted to men by commerce or manufactures,
but it is rather this taste which leads men to embark in commerce and
manufactures, as a means by which they hope to satisfy themselves more
promptly and more completely. If commerce and manufactures increase the
desire of well-being, it is because every passion gathers strength in
proportion as it is cultivated, and is increased by all the efforts made
to satiate it. All the causes which make the love of worldly welfare
predominate in the heart of man are favorable to the growth of commerce
and manufactures. Equality of conditions is one of those causes; it
encourages trade, not directly by giving men a taste for business, but
indirectly by strengthening and expanding in their minds a taste for
prosperity.]

This spirit may be observed even amongst the richest members of the
community. In democratic countries, however opulent a man is supposed to
be, he is almost always discontented with his fortune, because he finds
that he is less rich than his father was, and he fears that his sons
will be less rich than himself. Most rich men in democracies are
therefore constantly haunted by the desire of obtaining wealth, and they
naturally turn their attention to trade and manufactures, which appear
to offer the readiest and most powerful means of success. In this
respect they share the instincts of the poor, without feeling the
same necessities; say rather, they feel the most imperious of all
necessities, that of not sinking in the world.

In aristocracies the rich are at the same time those who govern. The
attention which they unceasingly devote to important public affairs
diverts them from the lesser cares which trade and manufactures
demand. If the will of an individual happens, nevertheless, to turn his
attention to business, the will of the body to which he belongs will
immediately debar him from pursuing it; for however men may declaim
against the rule of numbers, they cannot wholly escape their sway; and
even amongst those aristocratic bodies which most obstinately refuse to
acknowledge the rights of the majority of the nation, a private majority
is formed which governs the rest. *b

[Footnote b: Some aristocracies, however, have devoted themselves
eagerly to commerce, and have cultivated manufactures with success. The
history of the world might furnish several conspicuous examples. But,
generally speaking, it may be affirmed that the aristocratic principle
is not favorable to the growth of trade and manufactures. Moneyed
aristocracies are the only exception to the rule. Amongst such
aristocracies there are hardly any desires which do not require wealth
to satisfy them; the love of riches becomes, so to speak, the high road
of human passions, which is crossed by or connected with all lesser
tracks. The love of money and the thirst for that distinction which
attaches to power, are then so closely intermixed in the same souls,
that it becomes difficult to discover whether men grow covetous from
ambition, or whether they are ambitious from covetousness. This is
the case in England, where men seek to get rich in order to arrive at
distinction, and seek distinctions as a manifestation of their wealth.
The mind is then seized by both ends, and hurried into trade and
manufactures, which are the shortest roads that lead to opulence.

This, however, strikes me as an exceptional and transitory circumstance.
When wealth is become the only symbol of aristocracy, it is very
difficult for the wealthy to maintain sole possession of political
power, to the exclusion of all other men. The aristocracy of birth and
pure democracy are at the two extremes of the social and political state
of nations: between them moneyed aristocracy finds its place. The latter
approximates to the aristocracy of birth by conferring great privileges
on a small number of persons; it so far belongs to the democratic
element, that these privileges may be successively acquired by all. It
frequently forms a natural transition between these two conditions
of society, and it is difficult to say whether it closes the reign of
aristocratic institutions, or whether it already opens the new era of
democracy.]

In democratic countries, where money does not lead those who possess it
to political power, but often removes them from it, the rich do not
know how to spend their leisure. They are driven into active life by the
inquietude and the greatness of their desires, by the extent of their
resources, and by the taste for what is extraordinary, which is almost
always felt by those who rise, by whatsoever means, above the crowd.
Trade is the only road open to them. In democracies nothing is more
great or more brilliant than commerce: it attracts the attention of
the public, and fills the imagination of the multitude; all energetic
passions are directed towards it. Neither their own prejudices, nor
those of anybody else, can prevent the rich from devoting themselves
to it. The wealthy members of democracies never form a body which has
manners and regulations of its own; the opinions peculiar to their class
do not restrain them, and the common opinions of their country urge them
on. Moreover, as all the large fortunes which are to be met with in a
democratic community are of commercial growth, many generations must
succeed each other before their possessors can have entirely laid aside
their habits of business.

Circumscribed within the narrow space which politics leave them, rich
men in democracies eagerly embark in commercial enterprise: there they
can extend and employ their natural advantages; and indeed it is even by
the boldness and the magnitude of their industrial speculations that we
may measure the slight esteem in which productive industry would have
been held by them, if they had been born amidst an aristocracy.

A similar observation is likewise applicable to all men living in
democracies, whether they be poor or rich. Those who live in the midst
of democratic fluctuations have always before their eyes the phantom of
chance; and they end by liking all undertakings in which chance plays a
part. They are therefore all led to engage in commerce, not only for
the sake of the profit it holds out to them, but for the love of the
constant excitement occasioned by that pursuit.

The United States of America have only been emancipated for half a
century [in 1840] from the state of colonial dependence in which they
stood to Great Britain; the number of large fortunes there is small, and
capital is still scarce. Yet no people in the world has made such rapid
progress in trade and manufactures as the Americans: they constitute at
the present day the second maritime nation in the world; and although
their manufactures have to struggle with almost insurmountable natural
impediments, they are not prevented from making great and daily
advances. In the United States the greatest undertakings and
speculations are executed without difficulty, because the whole
population is engaged in productive industry, and because the poorest
as well as the most opulent members of the commonwealth are ready to
combine their efforts for these purposes. The consequence is, that a
stranger is constantly amazed by the immense public works executed by a
nation which contains, so to speak, no rich men. The Americans arrived
but as yesterday on the territory which they inhabit, and they have
already changed the whole order of nature for their own advantage. They
have joined the Hudson to the Mississippi, and made the Atlantic Ocean
communicate with the Gulf of Mexico, across a continent of more than
five hundred leagues in extent which separates the two seas. The longest
railroads which have been constructed up to the present time are in
America. But what most astonishes me in the United States, is not so
much the marvellous grandeur of some undertakings, as the innumerable
multitude of small ones. Almost all the farmers of the United States
combine some trade with agriculture; most of them make agriculture
itself a trade. It seldom happens that an American farmer settles for
good upon the land which he occupies: especially in the districts of the
Far West he brings land into tillage in order to sell it again, and not
to farm it: he builds a farmhouse on the speculation that, as the state
of the country will soon be changed by the increase of population, a
good price will be gotten for it. Every year a swarm of the inhabitants
of the North arrive in the Southern States, and settle in the parts
where the cotton plant and the sugar-cane grow. These men cultivate the
soil in order to make it produce in a few years enough to enrich them;
and they already look forward to the time when they may return home
to enjoy the competency thus acquired. Thus the Americans carry their
business-like qualities into agriculture; and their trading passions are
displayed in that as in their other pursuits.

The Americans make immense progress in productive industry, because they
all devote themselves to it at once; and for this same reason they are
exposed to very unexpected and formidable embarrassments. As they are
all engaged in commerce, their commercial affairs are affected by
such various and complex causes that it is impossible to foresee
what difficulties may arise. As they are all more or less engaged in
productive industry, at the least shock given to business all private
fortunes are put in jeopardy at the same time, and the State is shaken.
I believe that the return of these commercial panics is an endemic
disease of the democratic nations of our age. It may be rendered less
dangerous, but it cannot be cured; because it does not originate in
accidental circumstances, but in the temperament of these nations.




Chapter XX: That Aristocracy May Be Engendered By Manufactures

I have shown that democracy is favorable to the growth of manufactures,
and that it increases without limit the numbers of the manufacturing
classes: we shall now see by what side road manufacturers may possibly
in their turn bring men back to aristocracy. It is acknowledged that
when a workman is engaged every day upon the same detail, the whole
commodity is produced with greater ease, promptitude, and economy. It
is likewise acknowledged that the cost of the production of manufactured
goods is diminished by the extent of the establishment in which they are
made, and by the amount of capital employed or of credit. These truths
had long been imperfectly discerned, but in our time they have been
demonstrated. They have been already applied to many very important
kinds of manufactures, and the humblest will gradually be governed by
them. I know of nothing in politics which deserves to fix the attention
of the legislator more closely than these two new axioms of the science
of manufactures.

When a workman is unceasingly and exclusively engaged in the fabrication
of one thing, he ultimately does his work with singular dexterity; but
at the same time he loses the general faculty of applying his mind to
the direction of the work. He every day becomes more adroit and less
industrious; so that it may be said of him, that in proportion as the
workman improves the man is degraded. What can be expected of a man who
has spent twenty years of his life in making heads for pins? and to
what can that mighty human intelligence, which has so often stirred the
world, be applied in him, except it be to investigate the best method of
making pins' heads? When a workman has spent a considerable portion
of his existence in this manner, his thoughts are forever set upon the
object of his daily toil; his body has contracted certain fixed habits,
which it can never shake off: in a word, he no longer belongs to
himself, but to the calling which he has chosen. It is in vain that laws
and manners have been at the pains to level all barriers round such
a man, and to open to him on every side a thousand different paths to
fortune; a theory of manufactures more powerful than manners and laws
binds him to a craft, and frequently to a spot, which he cannot leave:
it assigns to him a certain place in society, beyond which he cannot go:
in the midst of universal movement it has rendered him stationary.

In proportion as the principle of the division of labor is more
extensively applied, the workman becomes more weak, more narrow-minded,
and more dependent. The art advances, the artisan recedes. On the other
hand, in proportion as it becomes more manifest that the productions of
manufactures are by so much the cheaper and better as the manufacture is
larger and the amount of capital employed more considerable, wealthy
and educated men come forward to embark in manufactures which were
heretofore abandoned to poor or ignorant handicraftsmen. The magnitude
of the efforts required, and the importance of the results to be
obtained, attract them. Thus at the very time at which the science
of manufactures lowers the class of workmen, it raises the class of
masters.

Whereas the workman concentrates his faculties more and more upon the
study of a single detail, the master surveys a more extensive whole, and
the mind of the latter is enlarged in proportion as that of the former
is narrowed. In a short time the one will require nothing but physical
strength without intelligence; the other stands in need of science, and
almost of genius, to insure success. This man resembles more and more
the administrator of a vast empire--that man, a brute. The master and
the workman have then here no similarity, and their differences increase
every day. They are only connected as the two rings at the extremities
of a long chain. Each of them fills the station which is made for him,
and out of which he does not get: the one is continually, closely, and
necessarily dependent upon the other, and seems as much born to obey as
that other is to command. What is this but aristocracy?

As the conditions of men constituting the nation become more and more
equal, the demand for manufactured commodities becomes more general and
more extensive; and the cheapness which places these objects within
the reach of slender fortunes becomes a great element of success. Hence
there are every day more men of great opulence and education who devote
their wealth and knowledge to manufactures; and who seek, by opening
large establishments, and by a strict division of labor, to meet the
fresh demands which are made on all sides. Thus, in proportion as the
mass of the nation turns to democracy, that particular class which is
engaged in manufactures becomes more aristocratic. Men grow more alike
in the one--more different in the other; and inequality increases in
the less numerous class in the same ratio in which it decreases in
the community. Hence it would appear, on searching to the bottom, that
aristocracy should naturally spring out of the bosom of democracy.

But this kind of aristocracy by no means resembles those kinds which
preceded it. It will be observed at once, that as it applies exclusively
to manufactures and to some manufacturing callings, it is a monstrous
exception in the general aspect of society. The small aristocratic
societies which are formed by some manufacturers in the midst of the
immense democracy of our age, contain, like the great aristocratic
societies of former ages, some men who are very opulent, and a multitude
who are wretchedly poor. The poor have few means of escaping from their
condition and becoming rich; but the rich are constantly becoming poor,
or they give up business when they have realized a fortune. Thus the
elements of which the class of the poor is composed are fixed; but the
elements of which the class of the rich is composed are not so. To say
the truth, though there are rich men, the class of rich men does not
exist; for these rich individuals have no feelings or purposes in
common, no mutual traditions or mutual hopes; there are therefore
members, but no body.

Not only are the rich not compactly united amongst themselves, but there
is no real bond between them and the poor. Their relative position is
not a permanent one; they are constantly drawn together or separated by
their interests. The workman is generally dependent on the master, but
not on any particular master; these two men meet in the factory, but
know not each other elsewhere; and whilst they come into contact on one
point, they stand very wide apart on all others. The manufacturer asks
nothing of the workman but his labor; the workman expects nothing from
him but his wages. The one contracts no obligation to protect, nor the
other to defend; and they are not permanently connected either by habit
or by duty. The aristocracy created by business rarely settles in the
midst of the manufacturing population which it directs; the object
is not to govern that population, but to use it. An aristocracy thus
constituted can have no great hold upon those whom it employs; and even
if it succeed in retaining them at one moment, they escape the next; it
knows not how to will, and it cannot act. The territorial aristocracy of
former ages was either bound by law, or thought itself bound by
usage, to come to the relief of its serving-men, and to succor
their distresses. But the manufacturing aristocracy of our age first
impoverishes and debases the men who serve it, and then abandons them to
be supported by the charity of the public. This is a natural consequence
of what has been said before. Between the workmen and the master there
are frequent relations, but no real partnership.

I am of opinion, upon the whole, that the manufacturing aristocracy
which is growing up under our eyes is one of the harshest which ever
existed in the world; but at the same time it is one of the most
confined and least dangerous. Nevertheless the friends of democracy
should keep their eyes anxiously fixed in this direction; for if ever a
permanent inequality of conditions and aristocracy again penetrate into
the world, it may be predicted that this is the channel by which they
will enter.




Book Three: Influence Of Democracy On Manners, Properly So Called




Chapter I: That Manners Are Softened As Social Conditions Become More
Equal

We perceive that for several ages social conditions have tended to
equality, and we discover that in the course of the same period the
manners of society have been softened. Are these two things merely
contemporaneous, or does any secret link exist between them, so that the
one cannot go on without making the other advance? Several causes may
concur to render the manners of a people less rude; but, of all
these causes, the most powerful appears to me to be the equality of
conditions. Equality of conditions and growing civility in manners are,
then, in my eyes, not only contemporaneous occurrences, but correlative
facts. When the fabulists seek to interest us in the actions of beasts,
they invest them with human notions and passions; the poets who sing of
spirits and angels do the same; there is no wretchedness so deep, nor
any happiness so pure, as to fill the human mind and touch the heart,
unless we are ourselves held up to our own eyes under other features.

This is strictly applicable to the subject upon which we are at present
engaged. When all men are irrevocably marshalled in an aristocratic
community, according to their professions, their property, and their
birth, the members of each class, considering themselves as children
of the same family, cherish a constant and lively sympathy towards each
other, which can never be felt in an equal degree by the citizens of
a democracy. But the same feeling does not exist between the several
classes towards each other. Amongst an aristocratic people each caste
has its own opinions, feelings, rights, manners, and modes of living.
Thus the men of whom each caste is composed do not resemble the mass of
their fellow-citizens; they do not think or feel in the same manner,
and they scarcely believe that they belong to the same human race. They
cannot, therefore, thoroughly understand what others feel, nor judge of
others by themselves. Yet they are sometimes eager to lend each other
mutual aid; but this is not contrary to my previous observation. These
aristocratic institutions, which made the beings of one and the same
race so different, nevertheless bound them to each other by close
political ties. Although the serf had no natural interest in the fate of
nobles, he did not the less think himself obliged to devote his person
to the service of that noble who happened to be his lord; and although
the noble held himself to be of a different nature from that of his
serfs, he nevertheless held that his duty and his honor constrained
him to defend, at the risk of his own life, those who dwelt upon his
domains.

It is evident that these mutual obligations did not originate in the law
of nature, but in the law of society; and that the claim of social duty
was more stringent than that of mere humanity. These services were not
supposed to be due from man to man, but to the vassal or to the lord.
Feudal institutions awakened a lively sympathy for the sufferings of
certain men, but none at all for the miseries of mankind. They infused
generosity rather than mildness into the manners of the time, and
although they prompted men to great acts of self-devotion, they
engendered no real sympathies; for real sympathies can only exist
between those who are alike; and in aristocratic ages men acknowledge
none but the members of their own caste to be like themselves.

When the chroniclers of the Middle Ages, who all belonged to the
aristocracy by birth or education, relate the tragical end of a noble,
their grief flows apace; whereas they tell you at a breath, and without
wincing, of massacres and tortures inflicted on the common sort of
people. Not that these writers felt habitual hatred or systematic
disdain for the people; war between the several classes of the community
was not yet declared. They were impelled by an instinct rather than by a
passion; as they had formed no clear notion of a poor man's sufferings,
they cared but little for his fate. The same feelings animated the lower
orders whenever the feudal tie was broken. The same ages which witnessed
so many heroic acts of self-devotion on the part of vassals for their
lords, were stained with atrocious barbarities, exercised from time to
time by the lower classes on the higher. It must not be supposed that
this mutual insensibility arose solely from the absence of public
order and education; for traces of it are to be found in the following
centuries, which became tranquil and enlightened whilst they remained
aristocratic. In 1675 the lower classes in Brittany revolted at
the imposition of a new tax. These disturbances were put down with
unexampled atrocity. Observe the language in which Madame de Sevigne, a
witness of these horrors, relates them to her daughter:--

"Aux Rochers, 30 Octobre, 1675.

"Mon Dieu, ma fille, que votre lettre d'Aix est plaisante! Au moins
relisez vos lettres avant que de les envoyer; laissez-vous surpendre a
leur agrement, et consolez-vous par ce plaisir de la peine que vous avez
d'en tant ecrire. Vous avez donc baise toute la Provence? il n'y aurait
pas satisfaction a baiser toute la Bretagne, a moins qu'on n'aimat a
sentir le vin. . . . Voulez-vous savoir des nouvelles de Rennes? On a
fait une taxe de cent mille ecus sur le bourgeois; et si on ne trouve
point cette somme dans vingt-quatre heures, elle sera doublee et
exigible par les soldats. On a chasse et banni toute une grand rue, et
defendu de les recueillir sous peine de la vie; de sorte qu'on voyait
tous ces miserables, veillards, femmes accouchees, enfans, errer en
pleurs au sortir de cette ville sans savoir ou aller. On roua avant-hier
un violon, qui avait commence la danse et la pillerie du papier timbre;
il a ete ecartele apres sa mort, et ses quatre quartiers exposes aux
quatre coins de la ville. On a pris soixante bourgeois, et on commence
demain les punitions. Cette province est un bel exemple pour les autres,
et surtout de respecter les gouverneurs et les gouvernantes, et de ne
point jeter de pierres dans leur jardin." *a

[Footnote a: To feel the point of this joke the reader should recollect
that Madame de Grignan was Gouvernante de Provence.] "Madame de Tarente
etait hier dans ces bois par un temps enchante: il n'est question ni de
chambre ni de collation; elle entre par la barriere et s'en retourne de
meme. . . ."

In another letter she adds:--

"Vous me parlez bien plaisamment de nos miseres; nous ne sommes plus si
roues; un en huit jours, pour entretenir la justice. Il est vrai que la
penderie me parait maintenant un refraichissement. J'ai une tout autre
idee de la justice, depuis que je suis en ce pays. Vos galeriens me
paraissent une societe d'honnetes gens qui se sont retires du monde pour
mener une vie douce."

It would be a mistake to suppose that Madame de Sevigne, who wrote these
lines, was a selfish or cruel person; she was passionately attached
to her children, and very ready to sympathize in the sorrows of her
friends; nay, her letters show that she treated her vassals and servants
with kindness and indulgence. But Madame de Sevigne had no clear notion
of suffering in anyone who was not a person of quality.

In our time the harshest man writing to the most insensible person of
his acquaintance would not venture wantonly to indulge in the cruel
jocularity which I have quoted; and even if his own manners allowed him
to do so, the manners of society at large would forbid it. Whence does
this arise? Have we more sensibility than our forefathers? I know not
that we have; but I am sure that our insensibility is extended to a far
greater range of objects. When all the ranks of a community are nearly
equal, as all men think and feel in nearly the same manner, each of them
may judge in a moment of the sensations of all the others; he casts a
rapid glance upon himself, and that is enough. There is no wretchedness
into which he cannot readily enter, and a secret instinct reveals to him
its extent. It signifies not that strangers or foes be the sufferers;
imagination puts him in their place; something like a personal feeling
is mingled with his pity, and makes himself suffer whilst the body
of his fellow-creature is in torture. In democratic ages men rarely
sacrifice themselves for one another; but they display general
compassion for the members of the human race. They inflict no useless
ills; and they are happy to relieve the griefs of others, when they can
do so without much hurting themselves; they are not disinterested, but
they are humane.

Although the Americans have, in a manner, reduced egotism to a social
and philosophical theory, they are nevertheless extremely open to
compassion. In no country is criminal justice administered with more
mildness than in the United States. Whilst the English seem disposed
carefully to retain the bloody traces of the dark ages in their penal
legislation, the Americans have almost expunged capital punishment from
their codes. North America is, I think, the only one country upon earth
in which the life of no one citizen has been taken for a political
offence in the course of the last fifty years. The circumstance which
conclusively shows that this singular mildness of the Americans arises
chiefly from their social condition, is the manner in which they treat
their slaves. Perhaps there is not, upon the whole, a single European
colony in the New World in which the physical condition of the blacks
is less severe than in the United States; yet the slaves still endure
horrid sufferings there, and are constantly exposed to barbarous
punishments. It is easy to perceive that the lot of these unhappy beings
inspires their masters with but little compassion, and that they look
upon slavery, not only as an institution which is profitable to them,
but as an evil which does not affect them. Thus the same man who is full
of humanity towards his fellow-creatures when they are at the same time
his equals, becomes insensible to their afflictions as soon as that
equality ceases. His mildness should therefore be attributed to the
equality of conditions, rather than to civilization and education.

What I have here remarked of individuals is, to a certain extent,
applicable to nations. When each nation has its distinct opinions,
belief, laws, and customs, it looks upon itself as the whole of mankind,
and is moved by no sorrows but its own. Should war break out between
two nations animated by this feeling, it is sure to be waged with great
cruelty. At the time of their highest culture, the Romans slaughtered
the generals of their enemies, after having dragged them in triumph
behind a car; and they flung their prisoners to the beasts of the Circus
for the amusement of the people. Cicero, who declaimed so vehemently at
the notion of crucifying a Roman citizen, had not a word to say against
these horrible abuses of victory. It is evident that in his eyes a
barbarian did not belong to the same human race as a Roman. On the
contrary, in proportion as nations become more like each other, they
become reciprocally more compassionate, and the law of nations is
mitigated.




Chapter II: That Democracy Renders The Habitual Intercourse Of The
Americans Simple And Easy

Democracy does not attach men strongly to each other; but it places
their habitual intercourse upon an easier footing. If two Englishmen
chance to meet at the Antipodes, where they are surrounded by strangers
whose language and manners are almost unknown to them, they will first
stare at each other with much curiosity and a kind of secret uneasiness;
they will then turn away, or, if one accosts the other, they will
take care only to converse with a constrained and absent air upon very
unimportant subjects. Yet there is no enmity between these men; they
have never seen each other before, and each believes the other to be a
respectable person. Why then should they stand so cautiously apart? We
must go back to England to learn the reason.

When it is birth alone, independent of wealth, which classes men in
society, everyone knows exactly what his own position is upon the
social scale; he does not seek to rise, he does not fear to sink. In
a community thus organized, men of different castes communicate very
little with each other; but if accident brings them together, they are
ready to converse without hoping or fearing to lose their own position.
Their intercourse is not upon a footing of equality, but it is not
constrained. When moneyed aristocracy succeeds to aristocracy of birth,
the case is altered. The privileges of some are still extremely great,
but the possibility of acquiring those privileges is open to all: whence
it follows that those who possess them are constantly haunted by the
apprehension of losing them, or of other men's sharing them; those who
do not yet enjoy them long to possess them at any cost, or, if they
fail to appear at least to possess them--which is not impossible. As the
social importance of men is no longer ostensibly and permanently fixed
by blood, and is infinitely varied by wealth, ranks still exist, but it
is not easy clearly to distinguish at a glance those who respectively
belong to them. Secret hostilities then arise in the community; one set
of men endeavor by innumerable artifices to penetrate, or to appear to
penetrate, amongst those who are above them; another set are constantly
in arms against these usurpers of their rights; or rather the same
individual does both at once, and whilst he seeks to raise himself into
a higher circle, he is always on the defensive against the intrusion of
those below him.

Such is the condition of England at the present time; and I am of
opinion that the peculiarity before adverted to is principally to be
attributed to this cause. As aristocratic pride is still extremely great
amongst the English, and as the limits of aristocracy are ill-defined,
everybody lives in constant dread lest advantage should be taken of his
familiarity. Unable to judge at once of the social position of those
he meets, an Englishman prudently avoids all contact with them. Men
are afraid lest some slight service rendered should draw them into
an unsuitable acquaintance; they dread civilities, and they avoid the
obtrusive gratitude of a stranger quite as much as his hatred. Many
people attribute these singular anti-social propensities, and the
reserved and taciturn bearing of the English, to purely physical causes.
I may admit that there is something of it in their race, but much more
of it is attributable to their social condition, as is proved by the
contrast of the Americans.

In America, where the privileges of birth never existed, and where
riches confer no peculiar rights on their possessors, men unacquainted
with each other are very ready to frequent the same places, and find
neither peril nor advantage in the free interchange of their thoughts.
If they meet by accident, they neither seek nor avoid intercourse; their
manner is therefore natural, frank, and open: it is easy to see that
they hardly expect or apprehend anything from each other, and that they
do not care to display, any more than to conceal, their position in the
world. If their demeanor is often cold and serious, it is never haughty
or constrained; and if they do not converse, it is because they are
not in a humor to talk, not because they think it their interest to be
silent. In a foreign country two Americans are at once friends, simply
because they are Americans. They are repulsed by no prejudice; they are
attracted by their common country. For two Englishmen the same blood
is not enough; they must be brought together by the same rank. The
Americans remark this unsociable mood of the English as much as the
French do, and they are not less astonished by it. Yet the Americans are
connected with England by their origin, their religion, their language,
and partially by their manners; they only differ in their social
condition. It may therefore be inferred that the reserve of the English
proceeds from the constitution of their country much more than from that
of its inhabitants.




Chapter III: Why The Americans Show So Little Sensitiveness In Their Own
Country, And Are So Sensitive In Europe

The temper of the Americans is vindictive, like that of all serious and
reflecting nations. They hardly ever forget an offence, but it is not
easy to offend them; and their resentment is as slow to kindle as it is
to abate. In aristocratic communities where a small number of persons
manage everything, the outward intercourse of men is subject to settled
conventional rules. Everyone then thinks he knows exactly what marks of
respect or of condescension he ought to display, and none are presumed
to be ignorant of the science of etiquette. These usages of the first
class in society afterwards serve as a model to all the others; besides
which each of the latter lays down a code of its own, to which all
its members are bound to conform. Thus the rules of politeness form a
complex system of legislation, which it is difficult to be perfectly
master of, but from which it is dangerous for anyone to deviate; so that
men are constantly exposed involuntarily to inflict or to receive
bitter affronts. But as the distinctions of rank are obliterated, as men
differing in education and in birth meet and mingle in the same places
of resort, it is almost impossible to agree upon the rules of good
breeding. As its laws are uncertain, to disobey them is not a crime,
even in the eyes of those who know what they are; men attach more
importance to intentions than to forms, and they grow less civil, but at
the same time less quarrelsome. There are many little attentions which
an American does not care about; he thinks they are not due to him, or
he presumes that they are not known to be due: he therefore either
does not perceive a rudeness or he forgives it; his manners become less
courteous, and his character more plain and masculine.

The mutual indulgence which the Americans display, and the manly
confidence with which they treat each other, also result from another
deeper and more general cause, which I have already adverted to in the
preceding chapter. In the United States the distinctions of rank
in civil society are slight, in political society they are null; an
American, therefore, does not think himself bound to pay particular
attentions to any of his fellow-citizens, nor does he require such
attentions from them towards himself. As he does not see that it is his
interest eagerly to seek the company of any of his countrymen, he is
slow to fancy that his own company is declined: despising no one on
account of his station, he does not imagine that anyone can despise him
for that cause; and until he has clearly perceived an insult, he does
not suppose that an affront was intended. The social condition of the
Americans naturally accustoms them not to take offence in small
matters; and, on the other hand, the democratic freedom which they
enjoy transfuses this same mildness of temper into the character of the
nation. The political institutions of the United States constantly bring
citizens of all ranks into contact, and compel them to pursue great
undertakings in concert. People thus engaged have scarcely time to
attend to the details of etiquette, and they are besides too strongly
interested in living harmoniously for them to stick at such things. They
therefore soon acquire a habit of considering the feelings and opinions
of those whom they meet more than their manners, and they do not allow
themselves to be annoyed by trifles.

I have often remarked in the United States that it is not easy to make
a man understand that his presence may be dispensed with; hints will not
always suffice to shake him off. I contradict an American at every word
he says, to show him that his conversation bores me; he instantly labors
with fresh pertinacity to convince me; I preserve a dogged silence, and
he thinks I am meditating deeply on the truths which he is uttering; at
last I rush from his company, and he supposes that some urgent business
hurries me elsewhere. This man will never understand that he wearies me
to extinction unless I tell him so: and the only way to get rid of him
is to make him my enemy for life.

It appears surprising at first sight that the same man transported to
Europe suddenly becomes so sensitive and captious, that I often find
it as difficult to avoid offending him here as it was to put him out
of countenance. These two opposite effects proceed from the same cause.
Democratic institutions generally give men a lofty notion of their
country and of themselves. An American leaves his country with a heart
swollen with pride; on arriving in Europe he at once finds out that we
are not so engrossed by the United States and the great people which
inhabits them as he had supposed, and this begins to annoy him. He has
been informed that the conditions of society are not equal in our part
of the globe, and he observes that among the nations of Europe the
traces of rank are not wholly obliterated; that wealth and birth still
retain some indeterminate privileges, which force themselves upon his
notice whilst they elude definition. He is therefore profoundly ignorant
of the place which he ought to occupy in this half-ruined scale of
classes, which are sufficiently distinct to hate and despise each other,
yet sufficiently alike for him to be always confounding them. He is
afraid of ranging himself too high--still more is he afraid of being
ranged too low; this twofold peril keeps his mind constantly on the
stretch, and embarrasses all he says and does. He learns from tradition
that in Europe ceremonial observances were infinitely varied according
to different ranks; this recollection of former times completes his
perplexity, and he is the more afraid of not obtaining those marks of
respect which are due to him, as he does not exactly know in what
they consist. He is like a man surrounded by traps: society is not a
recreation for him, but a serious toil: he weighs your least actions,
interrogates your looks, and scrutinizes all you say, lest there should
be some hidden allusion to affront him. I doubt whether there was ever
a provincial man of quality so punctilious in breeding as he is: he
endeavors to attend to the slightest rules of etiquette, and does not
allow one of them to be waived towards himself: he is full of scruples
and at the same time of pretensions; he wishes to do enough, but fears
to do too much; and as he does not very well know the limits of the one
or of the other, he keeps up a haughty and embarrassed air of reserve.

But this is not all: here is yet another double of the human heart. An
American is forever talking of the admirable equality which prevails in
the United States; aloud he makes it the boast of his country, but in
secret he deplores it for himself; and he aspires to show that, for his
part, he is an exception to the general state of things which he vaunts.
There is hardly an American to be met with who does not claim some
remote kindred with the first founders of the colonies; and as for the
scions of the noble families of England, America seemed to me to be
covered with them. When an opulent American arrives in Europe, his first
care is to surround himself with all the luxuries of wealth: he is so
afraid of being taken for the plain citizen of a democracy, that he
adopts a hundred distorted ways of bringing some new instance of his
wealth before you every day. His house will be in the most fashionable
part of the town: he will always be surrounded by a host of servants.
I have heard an American complain, that in the best houses of Paris the
society was rather mixed; the taste which prevails there was not pure
enough for him; and he ventured to hint that, in his opinion, there was
a want of elegance of manner; he could not accustom himself to see wit
concealed under such unpretending forms.

These contrasts ought not to surprise us. If the vestiges of former
aristocratic distinctions were not so completely effaced in the United
States, the Americans would be less simple and less tolerant in their
own country--they would require less, and be less fond of borrowed
manners in ours.




Chapter IV: Consequences Of The Three Preceding Chapters

When men feel a natural compassion for their mutual sufferings--when
they are brought together by easy and frequent intercourse, and no
sensitive feelings keep them asunder--it may readily be supposed that
they will lend assistance to one another whenever it is needed. When an
American asks for the co-operation of his fellow-citizens it is seldom
refused, and I have often seen it afforded spontaneously and with great
goodwill. If an accident happens on the highway, everybody hastens to
help the sufferer; if some great and sudden calamity befalls a family,
the purses of a thousand strangers are at once willingly opened, and
small but numerous donations pour in to relieve their distress. It often
happens amongst the most civilized nations of the globe, that a poor
wretch is as friendless in the midst of a crowd as the savage in his
wilds: this is hardly ever the case in the United States. The Americans,
who are always cold and often coarse in their manners, seldom show
insensibility; and if they do not proffer services eagerly, yet they do
not refuse to render them.

All this is not in contradiction to what I have said before on the
subject of individualism. The two things are so far from combating each
other, that I can see how they agree. Equality of conditions, whilst it
makes men feel their independence, shows them their own weakness: they
are free, but exposed to a thousand accidents; and experience soon
teaches them that, although they do not habitually require the
assistance of others, a time almost always comes when they cannot do
without it. We constantly see in Europe that men of the same profession
are ever ready to assist each other; they are all exposed to the same
ills, and that is enough to teach them to seek mutual preservatives,
however hard-hearted and selfish they may otherwise be. When one of
them falls into danger, from which the others may save him by a slight
transient sacrifice or a sudden effort, they do not fail to make the
attempt. Not that they are deeply interested in his fate; for if, by
chance, their exertions are unavailing, they immediately forget the
object of them, and return to their own business; but a sort of tacit
and almost involuntary agreement has been passed between them, by which
each one owes to the others a temporary support which he may claim for
himself in turn. Extend to a people the remark here applied to a class,
and you will understand my meaning. A similar covenant exists in fact
between all the citizens of a democracy: they all feel themselves
subject to the same weakness and the same dangers; and their interest,
as well as their sympathy, makes it a rule with them to lend each
other mutual assistance when required. The more equal social conditions
become, the more do men display this reciprocal disposition to oblige
each other. In democracies no great benefits are conferred, but good
offices are constantly rendered: a man seldom displays self-devotion,
but all men are ready to be of service to one another.




Chapter V: How Democracy Affects the Relation Of Masters And Servants

An American who had travelled for a long time in Europe once said to me,
"The English treat their servants with a stiffness and imperiousness
of manner which surprise us; but on the other hand the French sometimes
treat their attendants with a degree of familiarity or of politeness
which we cannot conceive. It looks as if they were afraid to give
orders: the posture of the superior and the inferior is ill-maintained."
The remark was a just one, and I have often made it myself. I have
always considered England as the country in the world where, in our
time, the bond of domestic service is drawn most tightly, and France as
the country where it is most relaxed. Nowhere have I seen masters stand
so high or so low as in these two countries. Between these two extremes
the Americans are to be placed. Such is the fact as it appears upon the
surface of things: to discover the causes of that fact, it is necessary
to search the matter thoroughly.

No communities have ever yet existed in which social conditions have
been so equal that there were neither rich nor poor, and consequently
neither masters nor servants. Democracy does not prevent the existence
of these two classes, but it changes their dispositions and modifies
their mutual relations. Amongst aristocratic nations servants form a
distinct class, not more variously composed than that of masters. A
settled order is soon established; in the former as well as in the
latter class a scale is formed, with numerous distinctions or marked
gradations of rank, and generations succeed each other thus without any
change of position. These two communities are superposed one above the
other, always distinct, but regulated by analogous principles. This
aristocratic constitution does not exert a less powerful influence
on the notions and manners of servants than on those of masters; and,
although the effects are different, the same cause may easily be traced.
Both classes constitute small communities in the heart of the nation,
and certain permanent notions of right and wrong are ultimately
engendered amongst them. The different acts of human life are viewed by
one particular and unchanging light. In the society of servants, as in
that of masters, men exercise a great influence over each other: they
acknowledge settled rules, and in the absence of law they are guided by
a sort of public opinion: their habits are settled, and their conduct is
placed under a certain control.

These men, whose destiny is to obey, certainly do not understand fame,
virtue, honesty, and honor in the same manner as their masters; but they
have a pride, a virtue, and an honesty pertaining to their condition;
and they have a notion, if I may use the expression, of a sort of
servile honor. *a Because a class is mean, it must not be supposed that
all who belong to it are mean-hearted; to think so would be a great
mistake. However lowly it may be, he who is foremost there, and who
has no notion of quitting it, occupies an aristocratic position which
inspires him with lofty feelings, pride, and self-respect, that fit
him for the higher virtues and actions above the common. Amongst
aristocratic nations it was by no means rare to find men of noble and
vigorous minds in the service of the great, who felt not the servitude
they bore, and who submitted to the will of their masters without any
fear of their displeasure. But this was hardly ever the case amongst
the inferior ranks of domestic servants. It may be imagined that he
who occupies the lowest stage of the order of menials stands very low
indeed. The French created a word on purpose to designate the servants
of the aristocracy--they called them lackeys. This word "lackey"
served as the strongest expression, when all others were exhausted, to
designate human meanness. Under the old French monarchy, to denote by
a single expression a low-spirited contemptible fellow, it was usual to
say that he had the "soul of a lackey"; the term was enough to convey
all that was intended. [Footnote a: If the principal opinions by which
men are guided are examined closely and in detail, the analogy appears
still more striking, and one is surprised to find amongst them, just as
much as amongst the haughtiest scions of a feudal race, pride of birth,
respect for their ancestry and their descendants, disdain of their
inferiors, a dread of contact, a taste for etiquette, precedents, and
antiquity.]

The permanent inequality of conditions not only gives servants certain
peculiar virtues and vices, but it places them in a peculiar relation
with respect to their masters. Amongst aristocratic nations the poor man
is familiarized from his childhood with the notion of being commanded:
to whichever side he turns his eyes the graduated structure of society
and the aspect of obedience meet his view. Hence in those countries the
master readily obtains prompt, complete, respectful, and easy obedience
from his servants, because they revere in him not only their master but
the class of masters. He weighs down their will by the whole weight of
the aristocracy. He orders their actions--to a certain extent he even
directs their thoughts. In aristocracies the master often exercises,
even without being aware of it, an amazing sway over the opinions, the
habits, and the manners of those who obey him, and his influence extends
even further than his authority.

In aristocratic communities there are not only hereditary families of
servants as well as of masters, but the same families of servants
adhere for several generations to the same families of masters (like two
parallel lines which neither meet nor separate); and this considerably
modifies the mutual relations of these two classes of persons. Thus,
although in aristocratic society the master and servant have no natural
resemblance--although, on the contrary, they are placed at an immense
distance on the scale of human beings by their fortune, education, and
opinions--yet time ultimately binds them together. They are connected
by a long series of common reminiscences, and however different they
may be, they grow alike; whilst in democracies, where they are naturally
almost alike, they always remain strangers to each other. Amongst an
aristocratic people the master gets to look upon his servants as an
inferior and secondary part of himself, and he often takes an interest
in their lot by a last stretch of egotism.

Servants, on their part, are not averse to regard themselves in the same
light; and they sometimes identify themselves with the person of the
master, so that they become an appendage to him in their own eyes as
well as in his. In aristocracies a servant fills a subordinate position
which he cannot get out of; above him is another man, holding a superior
rank which he cannot lose. On one side are obscurity, poverty, obedience
for life; on the other, and also for life, fame, wealth, and command.
The two conditions are always distinct and always in propinquity; the
tie that connects them is as lasting as they are themselves. In this
predicament the servant ultimately detaches his notion of interest from
his own person; he deserts himself, as it were, or rather he transports
himself into the character of his master, and thus assumes an imaginary
personality. He complacently invests himself with the wealth of those
who command him; he shares their fame, exalts himself by their rank,
and feeds his mind with borrowed greatness, to which he attaches
more importance than those who fully and really possess it. There is
something touching, and at the same time ridiculous, in this strange
confusion of two different states of being. These passions of masters,
when they pass into the souls of menials, assume the natural dimensions
of the place they occupy--they are contracted and lowered. What was
pride in the former becomes puerile vanity and paltry ostentation in the
latter. The servants of a great man are commonly most punctilious as to
the marks of respect due to him, and they attach more importance to his
slightest privileges than he does himself. In France a few of these old
servants of the aristocracy are still to be met with here and there;
they have survived their race, which will soon disappear with them
altogether. In the United States I never saw anyone at all like them.
The Americans are not only unacquainted with the kind of man, but it is
hardly possible to make them understand that such ever existed. It is
scarcely less difficult for them to conceive it, than for us to form a
correct notion of what a slave was amongst the Romans, or a serf in the
Middle Ages. All these men were in fact, though in different degrees,
results of the same cause: they are all retiring from our sight, and
disappearing in the obscurity of the past, together with the social
condition to which they owed their origin.

Equality of conditions turns servants and masters into new beings, and
places them in new relative positions. When social conditions are nearly
equal, men are constantly changing their situations in life: there is
still a class of menials and a class of masters, but these classes are
not always composed of the same individuals, still less of the same
families; and those who command are not more secure of perpetuity than
those who obey. As servants do not form a separate people, they have
no habits, prejudices, or manners peculiar to themselves; they are not
remarkable for any particular turn of mind or moods of feeling. They
know no vices or virtues of their condition, but they partake of the
education, the opinions, the feelings, the virtues, and the vices of
their contemporaries; and they are honest men or scoundrels in the same
way as their masters are. The conditions of servants are not less equal
than those of masters. As no marked ranks or fixed subordination are to
be found amongst them, they will not display either the meanness or the
greatness which characterizes the aristocracy of menials as well as all
other aristocracies. I never saw a man in the United States who reminded
me of that class of confidential servants of which we still retain a
reminiscence in Europe, neither did I ever meet with such a thing as a
lackey: all traces of the one and of the other have disappeared.

In democracies servants are not only equal amongst themselves, but it
may be said that they are in some sort the equals of their masters. This
requires explanation in order to be rightly understood. At any moment a
servant may become a master, and he aspires to rise to that condition:
the servant is therefore not a different man from the master. Why
then has the former a right to command, and what compels the latter to
obey?--the free and temporary consent of both their wills. Neither of
them is by nature inferior to the other; they only become so for a time
by covenant. Within the terms of this covenant, the one is a
servant, the other a master; beyond it they are two citizens of the
commonwealth--two men. I beg the reader particularly to observe that
this is not only the notion which servants themselves entertain of their
own condition; domestic service is looked upon by masters in the same
light; and the precise limits of authority and obedience are as clearly
settled in the mind of the one as in that of the other.

When the greater part of the community have long attained a condition
nearly alike, and when equality is an old and acknowledged fact, the
public mind, which is never affected by exceptions, assigns certain
general limits to the value of man, above or below which no man can
long remain placed. It is in vain that wealth and poverty, authority
and obedience, accidentally interpose great distances between two men;
public opinion, founded upon the usual order of things, draws them to a
common level, and creates a species of imaginary equality between them,
in spite of the real inequality of their conditions. This all-powerful
opinion penetrates at length even into the hearts of those whose
interest might arm them to resist it; it affects their judgment whilst
it subdues their will. In their inmost convictions the master and the
servant no longer perceive any deep-seated difference between them, and
they neither hope nor fear to meet with any such at any time. They are
therefore neither subject to disdain nor to anger, and they discern in
each other neither humility nor pride. The master holds the contract of
service to be the only source of his power, and the servant regards
it as the only cause of his obedience. They do not quarrel about their
reciprocal situations, but each knows his own and keeps it.

In the French army the common soldier is taken from nearly the same
classes as the officer, and may hold the same commissions; out of the
ranks he considers himself entirely equal to his military superiors, and
in point of fact he is so; but when under arms he does not hesitate to
obey, and his obedience is not the less prompt, precise, and ready,
for being voluntary and defined. This example may give a notion of what
takes place between masters and servants in democratic communities.

It would be preposterous to suppose that those warm and deep-seated
affections, which are sometimes kindled in the domestic service of
aristocracy, will ever spring up between these two men, or that they
will exhibit strong instances of self-sacrifice. In aristocracies
masters and servants live apart, and frequently their only intercourse
is through a third person; yet they commonly stand firmly by one
another. In democratic countries the master and the servant are close
together; they are in daily personal contact, but their minds do not
intermingle; they have common occupations, hardly ever common interests.
Amongst such a people the servant always considers himself as a
sojourner in the dwelling of his masters. He knew nothing of their
forefathers--he will see nothing of their descendants--he has nothing
lasting to expect from their hand. Why then should he confound his
life with theirs, and whence should so strange a surrender of himself
proceed? The reciprocal position of the two men is changed--their mutual
relations must be so too.

I would fain illustrate all these reflections by the example of the
Americans; but for this purpose the distinctions of persons and places
must be accurately traced. In the South of the Union, slavery exists;
all that I have just said is consequently inapplicable there. In the
North, the majority of servants are either freedmen or the children
of freedmen; these persons occupy a contested position in the public
estimation; by the laws they are brought up to the level of their
masters--by the manners of the country they are obstinately detruded
from it. They do not themselves clearly know their proper place, and
they are almost always either insolent or craven. But in the Northern
States, especially in New England, there are a certain number of whites,
who agree, for wages, to yield a temporary obedience to the will of
their fellow-citizens. I have heard that these servants commonly perform
the duties of their situation with punctuality and intelligence; and
that without thinking themselves naturally inferior to the person who
orders them, they submit without reluctance to obey him. They appear to
me to carry into service some of those manly habits which independence
and equality engender. Having once selected a hard way of life, they do
not seek to escape from it by indirect means; and they have sufficient
respect for themselves, not to refuse to their master that obedience
which they have freely promised. On their part, masters require nothing
of their servants but the faithful and rigorous performance of the
covenant: they do not ask for marks of respect, they do not claim their
love or devoted attachment; it is enough that, as servants, they
are exact and honest. It would not then be true to assert that,
in democratic society, the relation of servants and masters is
disorganized: it is organized on another footing; the rule is different,
but there is a rule.

It is not my purpose to inquire whether the new state of things which
I have just described is inferior to that which preceded it, or simply
different. Enough for me that it is fixed and determined: for what is
most important to meet with among men is not any given ordering, but
order. But what shall I say of those sad and troubled times at which
equality is established in the midst of the tumult of revolution--when
democracy, after having been introduced into the state of society, still
struggles with difficulty against the prejudices and manners of the
country? The laws, and partially public opinion, already declare that
no natural or permanent inferiority exists between the servant and
the master. But this new belief has not yet reached the innermost
convictions of the latter, or rather his heart rejects it; in the secret
persuasion of his mind the master thinks that he belongs to a peculiar
and superior race; he dares not say so, but he shudders whilst he allows
himself to be dragged to the same level. His authority over his servants
becomes timid and at the same time harsh: he has already ceased to
entertain for them the feelings of patronizing kindness which long
uncontested power always engenders, and he is surprised that, being
changed himself, his servant changes also. He wants his attendants to
form regular and permanent habits, in a condition of domestic service
which is only temporary: he requires that they should appear contented
with and proud of a servile condition, which they will one day shake
off--that they should sacrifice themselves to a man who can neither
protect nor ruin them--and in short that they should contract an
indissoluble engagement to a being like themselves, and one who will
last no longer than they will.

Amongst aristocratic nations it often happens that the condition of
domestic service does not degrade the character of those who enter upon
it, because they neither know nor imagine any other; and the amazing
inequality which is manifest between them and their master appears to
be the necessary and unavoidable consequence of some hidden law of
Providence. In democracies the condition of domestic service does not
degrade the character of those who enter upon it, because it is freely
chosen, and adopted for a time only; because it is not stigmatized by
public opinion, and creates no permanent inequality between the servant
and the master. But whilst the transition from one social condition
to another is going on, there is almost always a time when men's
minds fluctuate between the aristocratic notion of subjection and
the democratic notion of obedience. Obedience then loses its moral
importance in the eyes of him who obeys; he no longer considers it as
a species of divine obligation, and he does not yet view it under
its purely human aspect; it has to him no character of sanctity or
of justice, and he submits to it as to a degrading but profitable
condition. At that moment a confused and imperfect phantom of equality
haunts the minds of servants; they do not at once perceive whether the
equality to which they are entitled is to be found within or without
the pale of domestic service; and they rebel in their hearts against a
subordination to which they have subjected themselves, and from which
they derive actual profit. They consent to serve, and they blush to
obey; they like the advantages of service, but not the master; or
rather, they are not sure that they ought not themselves to be masters,
and they are inclined to consider him who orders them as an unjust
usurper of their own rights. Then it is that the dwelling of every
citizen offers a spectacle somewhat analogous to the gloomy aspect of
political society. A secret and intestine warfare is going on there
between powers, ever rivals and suspicious of one another: the master is
ill-natured and weak, the servant ill-natured and intractable; the one
constantly attempts to evade by unfair restrictions his obligation to
protect and to remunerate--the other his obligation to obey. The reins
of domestic government dangle between them, to be snatched at by one
or the other. The lines which divide authority from oppression, liberty
from license, and right from might, are to their eyes so jumbled
together and confused, that no one knows exactly what he is, or what he
may be, or what he ought to be. Such a condition is not democracy, but
revolution.




Chapter VI: That Democratic Institutions And Manners Tend To Raise Rents
And Shorten The Terms Of Leases

What has been said of servants and masters is applicable, to a certain
extent, to landowners and farming tenants; but this subject deserves
to be considered by itself. In America there are, properly speaking, no
tenant farmers; every man owns the ground he tills. It must be admitted
that democratic laws tend greatly to increase the number of landowners,
and to diminish that of farming tenants. Yet what takes place in the
United States is much less attributable to the institutions of the
country than to the country itself. In America land is cheap, and anyone
may easily become a landowner; its returns are small, and its produce
cannot well be divided between a landowner and a farmer. America
therefore stands alone in this as well as in many other respects, and it
would be a mistake to take it as an example.

I believe that in democratic as well as in aristocratic countries there
will be landowners and tenants, but the connection existing between them
will be of a different kind. In aristocracies the hire of a farm is paid
to the landlord, not only in rent, but in respect, regard, and duty;
in democracies the whole is paid in cash. When estates are divided and
passed from hand to hand, and the permanent connection which existed
between families and the soil is dissolved, the landowner and the tenant
are only casually brought into contact. They meet for a moment to settle
the conditions of the agreement, and then lose sight of each other; they
are two strangers brought together by a common interest, and who keenly
talk over a matter of business, the sole object of which is to make
money.

In proportion as property is subdivided and wealth distributed over the
country, the community is filled with people whose former opulence is
declining, and with others whose fortunes are of recent growth and whose
wants increase more rapidly than their resources. For all such persons
the smallest pecuniary profit is a matter of importance, and none of
them feel disposed to waive any of their claims, or to lose any portion
of their income. As ranks are intermingled, and as very large as well
as very scanty fortunes become more rare, every day brings the social
condition of the landowner nearer to that of the farmer; the one has not
naturally any uncontested superiority over the other; between two men
who are equal, and not at ease in their circumstances, the contract of
hire is exclusively an affair of money. A man whose estate extends over
a whole district, and who owns a hundred farms, is well aware of the
importance of gaining at the same time the affections of some thousands
of men; this object appears to call for his exertions, and to attain it
he will readily make considerable sacrifices. But he who owns a hundred
acres is insensible to similar considerations, and he cares but little
to win the private regard of his tenant.

An aristocracy does not expire like a man in a single day; the
aristocratic principle is slowly undermined in men's opinion, before it
is attacked in their laws. Long before open war is declared against it,
the tie which had hitherto united the higher classes to the lower may be
seen to be gradually relaxed. Indifference and contempt are betrayed by
one class, jealousy and hatred by the others; the intercourse between
rich and poor becomes less frequent and less kind, and rents are raised.
This is not the consequence of a democratic revolution, but its certain
harbinger; for an aristocracy which has lost the affections of the
people, once and forever, is like a tree dead at the root, which is the
more easily torn up by the winds the higher its branches have spread.

In the course of the last fifty years the rents of farms have amazingly
increased, not only in France but throughout the greater part of Europe.
The remarkable improvements which have taken place in agriculture and
manufactures within the same period do not suffice in my opinion to
explain this fact; recourse must be had to another cause more powerful
and more concealed. I believe that cause is to be found in the
democratic institutions which several European nations have adopted, and
in the democratic passions which more or less agitate all the rest. I
have frequently heard great English landowners congratulate themselves
that, at the present day, they derive a much larger income from their
estates than their fathers did. They have perhaps good reasons to be
glad; but most assuredly they know not what they are glad of. They think
they are making a clear gain, when it is in reality only an exchange;
their influence is what they are parting with for cash; and what they
gain in money will ere long be lost in power.

There is yet another sign by which it is easy to know that a great
democratic revolution is going on or approaching. In the Middle Ages
almost all lands were leased for lives, or for very long terms; the
domestic economy of that period shows that leases for ninety-nine years
were more frequent then than leases for twelve years are now. Men then
believed that families were immortal; men's conditions seemed settled
forever, and the whole of society appeared to be so fixed, that it
was not supposed that anything would ever be stirred or shaken in its
structure. In ages of equality, the human mind takes a different bent;
the prevailing notion is that nothing abides, and man is haunted by
the thought of mutability. Under this impression the landowner and
the tenant himself are instinctively averse to protracted terms of
obligation; they are afraid of being tied up to-morrow by the contract
which benefits them today. They have vague anticipations of some sudden
and unforeseen change in their conditions; they mistrust themselves;
they fear lest their taste should change, and lest they should lament
that they cannot rid themselves of what they coveted; nor are such fears
unfounded, for in democratic ages that which is most fluctuating amidst
the fluctuation of all around is the heart of man.




Chapter VII: Influence Of Democracy On Wages

Most of the remarks which I have already made in speaking of servants
and masters, may be applied to masters and workmen. As the gradations
of the social scale come to be less observed, whilst the great sink the
humble rise, and as poverty as well as opulence ceases to be hereditary,
the distance both in reality and in opinion, which heretofore separated
the workman from the master, is lessened every day. The workman
conceives a more lofty opinion of his rights, of his future, of himself;
he is filled with new ambition and with new desires, he is harassed by
new wants. Every instant he views with longing eyes the profits of his
employer; and in order to share them, he strives to dispose of his labor
at a higher rate, and he generally succeeds at length in the attempt.
In democratic countries, as well as elsewhere, most of the branches
of productive industry are carried on at a small cost, by men little
removed by their wealth or education above the level of those whom they
employ. These manufacturing speculators are extremely numerous; their
interests differ; they cannot therefore easily concert or combine their
exertions. On the other hand the workmen have almost always some sure
resources, which enable them to refuse to work when they cannot get
what they conceive to be the fair price of their labor. In the constant
struggle for wages which is going on between these two classes, their
strength is divided, and success alternates from one to the other. It
is even probable that in the end the interest of the working class must
prevail; for the high wages which they have already obtained make
them every day less dependent on their masters; and as they grow more
independent, they have greater facilities for obtaining a further
increase of wages.

I shall take for example that branch of productive industry which is
still at the present day the most generally followed in France, and in
almost all the countries of the world--I mean the cultivation of the
soil. In France most of those who labor for hire in agriculture, are
themselves owners of certain plots of ground, which just enable them
to subsist without working for anyone else. When these laborers come to
offer their services to a neighboring landowner or farmer, if he refuses
them a certain rate of wages, they retire to their own small property
and await another opportunity.

I think that, upon the whole, it may be asserted that a slow and gradual
rise of wages is one of the general laws of democratic communities. In
proportion as social conditions become more equal, wages rise; and as
wages are higher, social conditions become more equal. But a great and
gloomy exception occurs in our own time. I have shown in a preceding
chapter that aristocracy, expelled from political society, has
taken refuge in certain departments of productive industry, and has
established its sway there under another form; this powerfully affects
the rate of wages. As a large capital is required to embark in the great
manufacturing speculations to which I allude, the number of persons who
enter upon them is exceedingly limited: as their number is small, they
can easily concert together, and fix the rate of wages as they please.
Their workmen on the contrary are exceedingly numerous, and the number
of them is always increasing; for, from time to time, an extraordinary
run of business takes place, during which wages are inordinately high,
and they attract the surrounding population to the factories. But, when
once men have embraced that line of life, we have already seen that they
cannot quit it again, because they soon contract habits of body and mind
which unfit them for any other sort of toil. These men have generally
but little education and industry, with but few resources; they stand
therefore almost at the mercy of the master. When competition, or other
fortuitous circumstances, lessen his profits, he can reduce the wages of
his workmen almost at pleasure, and make from them what he loses by the
chances of business. Should the workmen strike, the master, who is a
rich man, can very well wait without being ruined until necessity brings
them back to him; but they must work day by day or they die, for their
only property is in their hands. They have long been impoverished by
oppression, and the poorer they become the more easily may they be
oppressed: they can never escape from this fatal circle of cause
and consequence. It is not then surprising that wages, after having
sometimes suddenly risen, are permanently lowered in this branch of
industry; whereas in other callings the price of labor, which generally
increases but little, is nevertheless constantly augmented.

This state of dependence and wretchedness, in which a part of the
manufacturing population of our time lives, forms an exception to the
general rule, contrary to the state of all the rest of the community;
but, for this very reason, no circumstance is more important or more
deserving of the especial consideration of the legislator; for when the
whole of society is in motion, it is difficult to keep any one class
stationary; and when the greater number of men are opening new paths to
fortune, it is no less difficult to make the few support in peace their
wants and their desires.




Chapter VIII: Influence Of Democracy On Kindred

I have just examined the changes which the equality of conditions
produces in the mutual relations of the several members of the community
amongst democratic nations, and amongst the Americans in particular.
I would now go deeper, and inquire into the closer ties of kindred: my
object here is not to seek for new truths, but to show in what manner
facts already known are connected with my subject.

It has been universally remarked, that in our time the several members
of a family stand upon an entirely new footing towards each other; that
the distance which formerly separated a father from his sons has been
lessened; and that paternal authority, if not destroyed, is at least
impaired. Something analogous to this, but even more striking, may be
observed in the United States. In America the family, in the Roman and
aristocratic signification of the word, does not exist. All that remains
of it are a few vestiges in the first years of childhood, when the
father exercises, without opposition, that absolute domestic authority,
which the feebleness of his children renders necessary, and which their
interest, as well as his own incontestable superiority, warrants. But
as soon as the young American approaches manhood, the ties of filial
obedience are relaxed day by day: master of his thoughts, he is soon
master of his conduct. In America there is, strictly speaking, no
adolescence: at the close of boyhood the man appears, and begins to
trace out his own path. It would be an error to suppose that this is
preceded by a domestic struggle, in which the son has obtained by a
sort of moral violence the liberty that his father refused him. The
same habits, the same principles which impel the one to assert
his independence, predispose the other to consider the use of that
independence as an incontestable right. The former does not exhibit any
of those rancorous or irregular passions which disturb men long after
they have shaken off an established authority; the latter feels none of
that bitter and angry regret which is apt to survive a bygone power. The
father foresees the limits of his authority long beforehand, and when
the time arrives he surrenders it without a struggle: the son looks
forward to the exact period at which he will be his own master; and he
enters upon his freedom without precipitation and without effort, as a
possession which is his own and which no one seeks to wrest from him. *a

[Footnote a: The Americans, however, have not yet thought fit to strip
the parent, as has been done in France, of one of the chief elements of
parental authority, by depriving him of the power of disposing of his
property at his death. In the United States there are no restrictions on
the powers of a testator. In this respect, as in almost all others, it
is easy to perceive, that if the political legislation of the Americans
is much more democratic than that of the French, the civil legislation
of the latter is infinitely more democratic than that of the former.
This may easily be accounted for. The civil legislation of France
was the work of a man who saw that it was his interest to satisfy the
democratic passions of his contemporaries in all that was not directly
and immediately hostile to his own power. He was willing to allow some
popular principles to regulate the distribution of property and the
government of families, provided they were not to be introduced into
the administration of public affairs. Whilst the torrent of democracy
overwhelmed the civil laws of the country, he hoped to find an easy
shelter behind its political institutions. This policy was at once both
adroit and selfish; but a compromise of this kind could not last; for
in the end political institutions never fail to become the image and
expression of civil society; and in this sense it may be said that
nothing is more political in a nation than its civil legislation.]

It may perhaps not be without utility to show how these changes which
take place in family relations, are closely connected with the social
and political revolution which is approaching its consummation under
our own observation. There are certain great social principles, which a
people either introduces everywhere, or tolerates nowhere. In countries
which are aristocratically constituted with all the gradations of rank,
the government never makes a direct appeal to the mass of the governed:
as men are united together, it is enough to lead the foremost, the
rest will follow. This is equally applicable to the family, as to all
aristocracies which have a head. Amongst aristocratic nations, social
institutions recognize, in truth, no one in the family but the father;
children are received by society at his hands; society governs him,
he governs them. Thus the parent has not only a natural right, but he
acquires a political right, to command them: he is the author and
the support of his family; but he is also its constituted ruler. In
democracies, where the government picks out every individual singly from
the mass, to make him subservient to the general laws of the community,
no such intermediate person is required: a father is there, in the eye
of the law, only a member of the community, older and richer than his
sons.

When most of the conditions of life are extremely unequal, and the
inequality of these conditions is permanent, the notion of a superior
grows upon the imaginations of men: if the law invested him with no
privileges, custom and public opinion would concede them. When, on
the contrary, men differ but little from each other, and do not always
remain in dissimilar conditions of life, the general notion of a
superior becomes weaker and less distinct: it is vain for legislation
to strive to place him who obeys very much beneath him who commands; the
manners of the time bring the two men nearer to one another, and draw
them daily towards the same level. Although the legislation of an
aristocratic people should grant no peculiar privileges to the heads
of families; I shall not be the less convinced that their power is
more respected and more extensive than in a democracy; for I know that,
whatsoever the laws may be, superiors always appear higher and inferiors
lower in aristocracies than amongst democratic nations.


When men live more for the remembrance of what has been than for the
care of what is, and when they are more given to attend to what their
ancestors thought than to think themselves, the father is the natural
and necessary tie between the past and the present--the link by which
the ends of these two chains are connected. In aristocracies, then, the
father is not only the civil head of the family, but the oracle of its
traditions, the expounder of its customs, the arbiter of its manners.
He is listened to with deference, he is addressed with respect, and
the love which is felt for him is always tempered with fear. When the
condition of society becomes democratic, and men adopt as their general
principle that it is good and lawful to judge of all things for one's
self, using former points of belief not as a rule of faith but simply
as a means of information, the power which the opinions of a father
exercise over those of his sons diminishes as well as his legal power.

Perhaps the subdivision of estates which democracy brings with it
contributes more than anything else to change the relations existing
between a father and his children. When the property of the father of a
family is scanty, his son and himself constantly live in the same place,
and share the same occupations: habit and necessity bring them
together, and force them to hold constant communication: the inevitable
consequence is a sort of familiar intimacy, which renders authority less
absolute, and which can ill be reconciled with the external forms
of respect. Now in democratic countries the class of those who are
possessed of small fortunes is precisely that which gives strength
to the notions, and a particular direction to the manners, of the
community. That class makes its opinions preponderate as universally as
its will, and even those who are most inclined to resist its commands
are carried away in the end by its example. I have known eager opponents
of democracy who allowed their children to address them with perfect
colloquial equality.

Thus, at the same time that the power of aristocracy is declining, the
austere, the conventional, and the legal part of parental authority
vanishes, and a species of equality prevails around the domestic hearth.
I know not, upon the whole, whether society loses by the change, but I
am inclined to believe that man individually is a gainer by it. I think
that, in proportion as manners and laws become more democratic, the
relation of father and son becomes more intimate and more affectionate;
rules and authority are less talked of; confidence and tenderness are
oftentimes increased, and it would seem that the natural bond is drawn
closer in proportion as the social bond is loosened. In a democratic
family the father exercises no other power than that with which men
love to invest the affection and the experience of age; his orders would
perhaps be disobeyed, but his advice is for the most part authoritative.
Though he be not hedged in with ceremonial respect, his sons at least
accost him with confidence; no settled form of speech is appropriated
to the mode of addressing him, but they speak to him constantly, and are
ready to consult him day by day; the master and the constituted ruler
have vanished--the father remains. Nothing more is needed, in order
to judge of the difference between the two states of society in this
respect, than to peruse the family correspondence of aristocratic ages.
The style is always correct, ceremonious, stiff, and so cold that the
natural warmth of the heart can hardly be felt in the language.
The language, on the contrary, addressed by a son to his father in
democratic countries is always marked by mingled freedom, familiarity
and affection, which at once show that new relations have sprung up in
the bosom of the family.

A similar revolution takes place in the mutual relations of children. In
aristocratic families, as well as in aristocratic society, every place
is marked out beforehand. Not only does the father occupy a separate
rank, in which he enjoys extensive privileges, but even the children
are not equal amongst themselves. The age and sex of each irrevocably
determine his rank, and secure to him certain privileges: most of these
distinctions are abolished or diminished by democracy. In aristocratic
families the eldest son, inheriting the greater part of the property,
and almost all the rights of the family, becomes the chief, and, to a
certain extent, the master, of his brothers. Greatness and power are for
him--for them, mediocrity and dependence. Nevertheless it would be wrong
to suppose that, amongst aristocratic nations, the privileges of the
eldest son are advantageous to himself alone, or that they excite
nothing but envy and hatred in those around him. The eldest son commonly
endeavors to procure wealth and power for his brothers, because the
general splendor of the house is reflected back on him who represents
it; the younger sons seek to back the elder brother in all his
undertakings, because the greatness and power of the head of the family
better enable him to provide for all its branches. The different members
of an aristocratic family are therefore very closely bound together;
their interests are connected, their minds agree, but their hearts are
seldom in harmony.

Democracy also binds brothers to each other, but by very different
means. Under democratic laws all the children are perfectly equal, and
consequently independent; nothing brings them forcibly together, but
nothing keeps them apart; and as they have the same origin, as they are
trained under the same roof, as they are treated with the same care, and
as no peculiar privilege distinguishes or divides them, the affectionate
and youthful intimacy of early years easily springs up between them.
Scarcely any opportunities occur to break the tie thus formed at the
outset of life; for their brotherhood brings them daily together,
without embarrassing them. It is not, then, by interest, but by common
associations and by the free sympathy of opinion and of taste, that
democracy unites brothers to each other. It divides their inheritance,
but it allows their hearts and minds to mingle together. Such is
the charm of these democratic manners, that even the partisans of
aristocracy are caught by it; and after having experienced it for some
time, they are by no means tempted to revert to the respectful and
frigid observance of aristocratic families. They would be glad to retain
the domestic habits of democracy, if they might throw off its social
conditions and its laws; but these elements are indissolubly united, and
it is impossible to enjoy the former without enduring the latter.
The remarks I have made on filial love and fraternal affection are
applicable to all the passions which emanate spontaneously from human
nature itself. If a certain mode of thought or feeling is the result of
some peculiar condition of life, when that condition is altered nothing
whatever remains of the thought or feeling. Thus a law may bind two
members of the community very closely to one another; but that law being
abolished, they stand asunder. Nothing was more strict than the tie
which united the vassal to the lord under the feudal system; at the
present day the two men know not each other; the fear, the gratitude,
and the affection which formerly connected them have vanished, and not
a vestige of the tie remains. Such, however, is not the case with those
feelings which are natural to mankind. Whenever a law attempts to tutor
these feelings in any particular manner, it seldom fails to weaken them;
by attempting to add to their intensity, it robs them of some of their
elements, for they are never stronger than when left to themselves.

Democracy, which destroys or obscures almost all the old conventional
rules of society, and which prevents men from readily assenting to new
ones, entirely effaces most of the feelings to which these conventional
rules have given rise; but it only modifies some others, and frequently
imparts to them a degree of energy and sweetness unknown before. Perhaps
it is not impossible to condense into a single proposition the whole
meaning of this chapter, and of several others that preceded it.
Democracy loosens social ties, but it draws the ties of nature more
tight; it brings kindred more closely together, whilst it places the
various members of the community more widely apart.




Chapter IX: Education Of Young Women In The United States

No free communities ever existed without morals; and, as I observed
in the former part of this work, morals are the work of woman.
Consequently, whatever affects the condition of women, their habits
and their opinions, has great political importance in my eyes. Amongst
almost all Protestant nations young women are far more the mistresses of
their own actions than they are in Catholic countries. This independence
is still greater in Protestant countries, like England, which have
retained or acquired the right of self-government; the spirit of freedom
is then infused into the domestic circle by political habits and by
religious opinions. In the United States the doctrines of Protestantism
are combined with great political freedom and a most democratic state
of society; and nowhere are young women surrendered so early or so
completely to their own guidance. Long before an American girl arrives
at the age of marriage, her emancipation from maternal control begins;
she has scarcely ceased to be a child when she already thinks for
herself, speaks with freedom, and acts on her own impulse. The great
scene of the world is constantly open to her view; far from seeking
concealment, it is every day disclosed to her more completely, and she
is taught to survey it with a firm and calm gaze. Thus the vices and
dangers of society are early revealed to her; as she sees them clearly,
she views them without illusions, and braves them without fear; for she
is full of reliance on her own strength, and her reliance seems to be
shared by all who are about her. An American girl scarcely ever displays
that virginal bloom in the midst of young desires, or that innocent
and ingenuous grace which usually attends the European woman in the
transition from girlhood to youth. It is rarely that an American woman
at any age displays childish timidity or ignorance. Like the young women
of Europe, she seeks to please, but she knows precisely the cost of
pleasing. If she does not abandon herself to evil, at least she knows
that it exists; and she is remarkable rather for purity of manners
than for chastity of mind. I have been frequently surprised, and almost
frightened, at the singular address and happy boldness with which young
women in America contrive to manage their thoughts and their language
amidst all the difficulties of stimulating conversation; a philosopher
would have stumbled at every step along the narrow path which they trod
without accidents and without effort. It is easy indeed to perceive
that, even amidst the independence of early youth, an American woman
is always mistress of herself; she indulges in all permitted pleasures,
without yielding herself up to any of them; and her reason never allows
the reins of self-guidance to drop, though it often seems to hold them
loosely.

In France, where remnants of every age are still so strangely mingled
in the opinions and tastes of the people, women commonly receive a
reserved, retired, and almost cloistral education, as they did in
aristocratic times; and then they are suddenly abandoned, without a
guide and without assistance, in the midst of all the irregularities
inseparable from democratic society. The Americans are more consistent.
They have found out that in a democracy the independence of individuals
cannot fail to be very great, youth premature, tastes ill-restrained,
customs fleeting, public opinion often unsettled and powerless,
paternal authority weak, and marital authority contested. Under these
circumstances, believing that they had little chance of repressing in
woman the most vehement passions of the human heart, they held that
the surer way was to teach her the art of combating those passions for
herself. As they could not prevent her virtue from being exposed to
frequent danger, they determined that she should know how best to defend
it; and more reliance was placed on the free vigor of her will than
on safeguards which have been shaken or overthrown. Instead, then, of
inculcating mistrust of herself, they constantly seek to enhance their
confidence in her own strength of character. As it is neither possible
nor desirable to keep a young woman in perpetual or complete ignorance,
they hasten to give her a precocious knowledge on all subjects. Far
from hiding the corruptions of the world from her, they prefer that she
should see them at once and train herself to shun them; and they hold it
of more importance to protect her conduct than to be over-scrupulous of
her innocence.

Although the Americans are a very religious people, they do not rely
on religion alone to defend the virtue of woman; they seek to arm her
reason also. In this they have followed the same method as in several
other respects; they first make the most vigorous efforts to bring
individual independence to exercise a proper control over itself, and
they do not call in the aid of religion until they have reached the
utmost limits of human strength. I am aware that an education of this
kind is not without danger; I am sensible that it tends to invigorate
the judgment at the expense of the imagination, and to make cold and
virtuous women instead of affectionate wives and agreeable companions
to man. Society may be more tranquil and better regulated, but domestic
life has often fewer charms. These, however, are secondary evils, which
may be braved for the sake of higher interests. At the stage at which we
are now arrived the time for choosing is no longer within our control; a
democratic education is indispensable to protect women from the dangers
with which democratic institutions and manners surround them.




Chapter X: The Young Woman In The Character Of A Wife

In America the independence of woman is irrevocably lost in the bonds
of matrimony: if an unmarried woman is less constrained there than
elsewhere, a wife is subjected to stricter obligations. The former makes
her father's house an abode of freedom and of pleasure; the latter
lives in the home of her husband as if it were a cloister. Yet these
two different conditions of life are perhaps not so contrary as may be
supposed, and it is natural that the American women should pass through
the one to arrive at the other.

Religious peoples and trading nations entertain peculiarly serious
notions of marriage: the former consider the regularity of woman's life
as the best pledge and most certain sign of the purity of her morals;
the latter regard it as the highest security for the order and
prosperity of the household. The Americans are at the same time a
puritanical people and a commercial nation: their religious opinions,
as well as their trading habits, consequently lead them to require
much abnegation on the part of woman, and a constant sacrifice of her
pleasures to her duties which is seldom demanded of her in Europe. Thus
in the United States the inexorable opinion of the public carefully
circumscribes woman within the narrow circle of domestic interest and
duties, and forbids her to step beyond it.

Upon her entrance into the world a young American woman finds these
notions firmly established; she sees the rules which are derived from
them; she is not slow to perceive that she cannot depart for an instant
from the established usages of her contemporaries, without putting in
jeopardy her peace of mind, her honor, nay even her social existence;
and she finds the energy required for such an act of submission in
the firmness of her understanding and in the virile habits which her
education has given her. It may be said that she has learned by the use
of her independence to surrender it without a struggle and without a
murmur when the time comes for making the sacrifice. But no American
woman falls into the toils of matrimony as into a snare held out to
her simplicity and ignorance. She has been taught beforehand what is
expected of her, and voluntarily and freely does she enter upon this
engagement. She supports her new condition with courage, because she
chose it. As in America paternal discipline is very relaxed and the
conjugal tie very strict, a young woman does not contract the latter
without considerable circumspection and apprehension. Precocious
marriages are rare. Thus American women do not marry until their
understandings are exercised and ripened; whereas in other countries
most women generally only begin to exercise and to ripen their
understandings after marriage.

I by no means suppose, however, that the great change which takes place
in all the habits of women in the United States, as soon as they are
married, ought solely to be attributed to the constraint of public
opinion: it is frequently imposed upon themselves by the sole effort of
their own will. When the time for choosing a husband is arrived, that
cold and stern reasoning power which has been educated and invigorated
by the free observation of the world, teaches an American woman that a
spirit of levity and independence in the bonds of marriage is a constant
subject of annoyance, not of pleasure; it tells her that the amusements
of the girl cannot become the recreations of the wife, and that the
sources of a married woman's happiness are in the home of her husband.
As she clearly discerns beforehand the only road which can lead to
domestic happiness, she enters upon it at once, and follows it to the
end without seeking to turn back.

The same strength of purpose which the young wives of America display,
in bending themselves at once and without repining to the austere duties
of their new condition, is no less manifest in all the great trials
of their lives. In no country in the world are private fortunes more
precarious than in the United States. It is not uncommon for the same
man, in the course of his life, to rise and sink again through all the
grades which lead from opulence to poverty. American women support these
vicissitudes with calm and unquenchable energy: it would seem that their
desires contract, as easily as they expand, with their fortunes. *a

[Footnote a: See Appendix S.]

The greater part of the adventurers who migrate every year to people the
western wilds, belong, as I observed in the former part of this work, to
the old Anglo-American race of the Northern States. Many of these men,
who rush so boldly onwards in pursuit of wealth, were already in the
enjoyment of a competency in their own part of the country. They take
their wives along with them, and make them share the countless
perils and privations which always attend the commencement of these
expeditions. I have often met, even on the verge of the wilderness, with
young women, who after having been brought up amidst all the comforts
of the large towns of New England, had passed, almost without any
intermediate stage, from the wealthy abode of their parents to a
comfortless hovel in a forest. Fever, solitude, and a tedious life had
not broken the springs of their courage. Their features were impaired
and faded, but their looks were firm: they appeared to be at once
sad and resolute. I do not doubt that these young American women had
amassed, in the education of their early years, that inward strength
which they displayed under these circumstances. The early culture of
the girl may still therefore be traced, in the United States, under the
aspect of marriage: her part is changed, her habits are different, but
her character is the same.




Chapter XI: That The Equality Of Conditions Contributes To The
Maintenance Of Good Morals In America

Some philosophers and historians have said, or have hinted, that the
strictness of female morality was increased or diminished simply by the
distance of a country from the equator. This solution of the difficulty
was an easy one; and nothing was required but a globe and a pair of
compasses to settle in an instant one of the most difficult problems in
the condition of mankind. But I am not aware that this principle of the
materialists is supported by facts. The same nations have been chaste or
dissolute at different periods of their history; the strictness or the
laxity of their morals depended therefore on some variable cause, not
only on the natural qualities of their country, which were invariable.
I do not deny that in certain climates the passions which are occasioned
by the mutual attraction of the sexes are peculiarly intense; but I
am of opinion that this natural intensity may always be excited or
restrained by the condition of society and by political institutions.

Although the travellers who have visited North America differ on a great
number of points, they all agree in remarking that morals are far
more strict there than elsewhere. It is evident that on this point
the Americans are very superior to their progenitors the English.
A superficial glance at the two nations will establish the fact.
In England, as in all other countries of Europe, public malice is
constantly attacking the frailties of women. Philosophers and statesmen
are heard to deplore that morals are not sufficiently strict, and the
literary productions of the country constantly lead one to suppose so.
In America all books, novels not excepted, suppose women to be chaste,
and no one thinks of relating affairs of gallantry. No doubt this great
regularity of American morals originates partly in the country, in the
race of the people, and in their religion: but all these causes, which
operate elsewhere, do not suffice to account for it; recourse must
be had to some special reason. This reason appears to me to be the
principle of equality and the institutions derived from it. Equality
of conditions does not of itself engender regularity of morals, but
it unquestionably facilitates and increases it. *a [Footnote a: See
Appendix T.]

Amongst aristocratic nations birth and fortune frequently make two such
different beings of man and woman, that they can never be united to each
other. Their passions draw them together, but the condition of society,
and the notions suggested by it, prevent them from contracting a
permanent and ostensible tie. The necessary consequence is a great
number of transient and clandestine connections. Nature secretly avenges
herself for the constraint imposed upon her by the laws of man. This is
not so much the case when the equality of conditions has swept away all
the imaginary, or the real, barriers which separated man from woman. No
girl then believes that she cannot become the wife of the man who loves
her; and this renders all breaches of morality before marriage very
uncommon: for, whatever be the credulity of the passions, a woman will
hardly be able to persuade herself that she is beloved, when her lover
is perfectly free to marry her and does not.

The same cause operates, though more indirectly, on married life.
Nothing better serves to justify an illicit passion, either to the minds
of those who have conceived it or to the world which looks on, than
compulsory or accidental marriages. *b In a country in which a woman is
always free to exercise her power of choosing, and in which education
has prepared her to choose rightly, public opinion is inexorable to her
faults. The rigor of the Americans arises in part from this cause.
They consider marriages as a covenant which is often onerous, but every
condition of which the parties are strictly bound to fulfil, because
they knew all those conditions beforehand, and were perfectly free not
to have contracted them.

[Footnote b: The literature of Europe sufficiently corroborates this
remark. When a European author wishes to depict in a work of imagination
any of these great catastrophes in matrimony which so frequently occur
amongst us, he takes care to bespeak the compassion of the reader by
bringing before him ill-assorted or compulsory marriages. Although
habitual tolerance has long since relaxed our morals, an author could
hardly succeed in interesting us in the misfortunes of his characters,
if he did not first palliate their faults. This artifice seldom fails:
the daily scenes we witness prepare us long beforehand to be indulgent.
But American writers could never render these palliations probable to
their readers; their customs and laws are opposed to it; and as they
despair of rendering levity of conduct pleasing, they cease to depict
it. This is one of the causes to which must be attributed the small
number of novels published in the United States.]

The very circumstances which render matrimonial fidelity more obligatory
also render it more easy. In aristocratic countries the object of
marriage is rather to unite property than persons; hence the husband is
sometimes at school and the wife at nurse when they are betrothed. It
cannot be wondered at if the conjugal tie which holds the fortunes of
the pair united allows their hearts to rove; this is the natural result
of the nature of the contract. When, on the contrary, a man always
chooses a wife for himself, without any external coercion or even
guidance, it is generally a conformity of tastes and opinions which
brings a man and a woman together, and this same conformity keeps and
fixes them in close habits of intimacy.

Our forefathers had conceived a very strange notion on the subject of
marriage: as they had remarked that the small number of love-matches
which occurred in their time almost always turned out ill, they
resolutely inferred that it was exceedingly dangerous to listen to the
dictates of the heart on the subject. Accident appeared to them to be a
better guide than choice. Yet it was not very difficult to perceive that
the examples which they witnessed did in fact prove nothing at all. For
in the first place, if democratic nations leave a woman at liberty
to choose her husband, they take care to give her mind sufficient
knowledge, and her will sufficient strength, to make so important a
choice: whereas the young women who, amongst aristocratic nations,
furtively elope from the authority of their parents to throw themselves
of their own accord into the arms of men whom they have had neither time
to know, nor ability to judge of, are totally without those securities.
It is not surprising that they make a bad use of their freedom of action
the first time they avail themselves of it; nor that they fall into such
cruel mistakes, when, not having received a democratic education, they
choose to marry in conformity to democratic customs. But this is
not all. When a man and woman are bent upon marriage in spite of the
differences of an aristocratic state of society, the difficulties to
be overcome are enormous. Having broken or relaxed the bonds of filial
obedience, they have then to emancipate themselves by a final effort
from the sway of custom and the tyranny of opinion; and when at length
they have succeeded in this arduous task, they stand estranged from
their natural friends and kinsmen: the prejudice they have crossed
separates them from all, and places them in a situation which soon
breaks their courage and sours their hearts. If, then, a couple married
in this manner are first unhappy and afterwards criminal, it ought not
to be attributed to the freedom of their choice, but rather to their
living in a community in which this freedom of choice is not admitted.

Moreover it should not be forgotten that the same effort which makes a
man violently shake off a prevailing error, commonly impels him beyond
the bounds of reason; that, to dare to declare war, in however just
a cause, against the opinion of one's age and country, a violent and
adventurous spirit is required, and that men of this character seldom
arrive at happiness or virtue, whatever be the path they follow. And
this, it may be observed by the way, is the reason why in the most
necessary and righteous revolutions, it is so rare to meet with virtuous
or moderate revolutionary characters. There is then no just ground
for surprise if a man, who in an age of aristocracy chooses to consult
nothing but his own opinion and his own taste in the choice of a wife,
soon finds that infractions of morality and domestic wretchedness invade
his household: but when this same line of action is in the natural and
ordinary course of things, when it is sanctioned by parental authority
and backed by public opinion, it cannot be doubted that the internal
peace of families will be increased by it, and conjugal fidelity more
rigidly observed.

Almost all men in democracies are engaged in public or professional
life; and on the other hand the limited extent of common incomes obliges
a wife to confine herself to the house, in order to watch in person and
very closely over the details of domestic economy. All these distinct
and compulsory occupations are so many natural barriers, which, by
keeping the two sexes asunder, render the solicitations of the one less
frequent and less ardent--the resistance of the other more easy.

Not indeed that the equality of conditions can ever succeed in making
men chaste, but it may impart a less dangerous character to their
breaches of morality. As no one has then either sufficient time or
opportunity to assail a virtue armed in self-defence, there will be
at the same time a great number of courtesans and a great number
of virtuous women. This state of things causes lamentable cases of
individual hardship, but it does not prevent the body of society from
being strong and alert: it does not destroy family ties, or enervate the
morals of the nation. Society is endangered not by the great profligacy
of a few, but by laxity of morals amongst all. In the eyes of a
legislator, prostitution is less to be dreaded than intrigue.

The tumultuous and constantly harassed life which equality makes men
lead, not only distracts them from the passion of love, by denying
them time to indulge in it, but it diverts them from it by another more
secret but more certain road. All men who live in democratic ages more
or less contract the ways of thinking of the manufacturing and trading
classes; their minds take a serious, deliberate, and positive turn; they
are apt to relinquish the ideal, in order to pursue some visible and
proximate object, which appears to be the natural and necessary aim
of their desires. Thus the principle of equality does not destroy the
imagination, but lowers its flight to the level of the earth. No men are
less addicted to reverie than the citizens of a democracy; and few of
them are ever known to give way to those idle and solitary meditations
which commonly precede and produce the great emotions of the heart. It
is true they attach great importance to procuring for themselves that
sort of deep, regular, and quiet affection which constitutes the charm
and safeguard of life, but they are not apt to run after those violent
and capricious sources of excitement which disturb and abridge it.

I am aware that all this is only applicable in its full extent to
America, and cannot at present be extended to Europe. In the course of
the last half-century, whilst laws and customs have impelled several
European nations with unexampled force towards democracy, we have not
had occasion to observe that the relations of man and woman have become
more orderly or more chaste. In some places the very reverse may be
detected: some classes are more strict--the general morality of the
people appears to be more lax. I do not hesitate to make the remark, for
I am as little disposed to flatter my contemporaries as to malign them.
This fact must distress, but it ought not to surprise us. The propitious
influence which a democratic state of society may exercise upon orderly
habits, is one of those tendencies which can only be discovered after
a time. If the equality of conditions is favorable to purity of morals,
the social commotion by which conditions are rendered equal is adverse
to it. In the last fifty years, during which France has been undergoing
this transformation, that country has rarely had freedom, always
disturbance. Amidst this universal confusion of notions and this general
stir of opinions--amidst this incoherent mixture of the just and unjust,
of truth and falsehood, of right and might--public virtue has become
doubtful, and private morality wavering. But all revolutions, whatever
may have been their object or their agents, have at first produced
similar consequences; even those which have in the end drawn the bonds
of morality more tightly began by loosening them. The violations of
morality which the French frequently witness do not appear to me to have
a permanent character; and this is already betokened by some curious
signs of the times.

Nothing is more wretchedly corrupt than an aristocracy which retains its
wealth when it has lost its power, and which still enjoys a vast deal
of leisure after it is reduced to mere vulgar pastimes. The energetic
passions and great conceptions which animated it heretofore, leave it
then; and nothing remains to it but a host of petty consuming vices,
which cling about it like worms upon a carcass. No one denies that the
French aristocracy of the last century was extremely dissolute; whereas
established habits and ancient belief still preserved some respect for
morality amongst the other classes of society. Nor will it be contested
that at the present day the remnants of that same aristocracy exhibit
a certain severity of morals; whilst laxity of morals appears to have
spread amongst the middle and lower ranks. So that the same families
which were most profligate fifty years ago are nowadays the most
exemplary, and democracy seems only to have strengthened the morality
of the aristocratic classes. The French Revolution, by dividing the
fortunes of the nobility, by forcing them to attend assiduously to their
affairs and to their families, by making them live under the same roof
with their children, and in short by giving a more rational and serious
turn to their minds, has imparted to them, almost without their being
aware of it, a reverence for religious belief, a love of order, of
tranquil pleasures, of domestic endearments, and of comfort; whereas the
rest of the nation, which had naturally these same tastes, was carried
away into excesses by the effort which was required to overthrow the
laws and political habits of the country. The old French aristocracy has
undergone the consequences of the Revolution, but it neither felt the
revolutionary passions nor shared in the anarchical excitement which
produced that crisis; it may easily be conceived that this aristocracy
feels the salutary influence of the Revolution in its manners, before
those who achieve it. It may therefore be said, though at first it seems
paradoxical, that, at the present day, the most anti-democratic classes
of the nation principally exhibit the kind of morality which may
reasonably be anticipated from democracy. I cannot but think that when
we shall have obtained all the effects of this democratic Revolution,
after having got rid of the tumult it has caused, the observations which
are now only applicable to the few will gradually become true of the
whole community.




Chapter XII: How The Americans Understand The Equality Of The Sexes

I Have shown how democracy destroys or modifies the different
inequalities which originate in society; but is this all? or does it
not ultimately affect that great inequality of man and woman which has
seemed, up to the present day, to be eternally based in human nature? I
believe that the social changes which bring nearer to the same level
the father and son, the master and servant, and superiors and inferiors
generally speaking, will raise woman and make her more and more the
equal of man. But here, more than ever, I feel the necessity of making
myself clearly understood; for there is no subject on which the coarse
and lawless fancies of our age have taken a freer range.

There are people in Europe who, confounding together the different
characteristics of the sexes, would make of man and woman beings not
only equal but alike. They would give to both the same functions, impose
on both the same duties, and grant to both the same rights; they would
mix them in all things--their occupations, their pleasures, their
business. It may readily be conceived, that by thus attempting to make
one sex equal to the other, both are degraded; and from so preposterous
a medley of the works of nature nothing could ever result but weak men
and disorderly women. It is not thus that the Americans understand that
species of democratic equality which may be established between the
sexes. They admit, that as nature has appointed such wide differences
between the physical and moral constitution of man and woman, her
manifest design was to give a distinct employment to their various
faculties; and they hold that improvement does not consist in making
beings so dissimilar do pretty nearly the same things, but in getting
each of them to fulfil their respective tasks in the best possible
manner. The Americans have applied to the sexes the great principle
of political economy which governs the manufactures of our age, by
carefully dividing the duties of man from those of woman, in order that
the great work of society may be the better carried on.

In no country has such constant care been taken as in America to trace
two clearly distinct lines of action for the two sexes, and to make
them keep pace one with the other, but in two pathways which are always
different. American women never manage the outward concerns of the
family, or conduct a business, or take a part in political life; nor are
they, on the other hand, ever compelled to perform the rough labor of
the fields, or to make any of those laborious exertions which demand
the exertion of physical strength. No families are so poor as to form
an exception to this rule. If on the one hand an American woman cannot
escape from the quiet circle of domestic employments, on the other
hand she is never forced to go beyond it. Hence it is that the women of
America, who often exhibit a masculine strength of understanding and a
manly energy, generally preserve great delicacy of personal appearance
and always retain the manners of women, although they sometimes show
that they have the hearts and minds of men.

Nor have the Americans ever supposed that one consequence of democratic
principles is the subversion of marital power, of the confusion of the
natural authorities in families. They hold that every association must
have a head in order to accomplish its object, and that the natural head
of the conjugal association is man. They do not therefore deny him the
right of directing his partner; and they maintain, that in the smaller
association of husband and wife, as well as in the great social
community, the object of democracy is to regulate and legalize the
powers which are necessary, not to subvert all power. This opinion is
not peculiar to one sex, and contested by the other: I never observed
that the women of America consider conjugal authority as a fortunate
usurpation of their rights, nor that they thought themselves degraded by
submitting to it. It appeared to me, on the contrary, that they attach a
sort of pride to the voluntary surrender of their own will, and make it
their boast to bend themselves to the yoke, not to shake it off. Such
at least is the feeling expressed by the most virtuous of their sex; the
others are silent; and in the United States it is not the practice for
a guilty wife to clamor for the rights of women, whilst she is trampling
on her holiest duties.

It has often been remarked that in Europe a certain degree of contempt
lurks even in the flattery which men lavish upon women: although a
European frequently affects to be the slave of woman, it may be seen
that he never sincerely thinks her his equal. In the United States men
seldom compliment women, but they daily show how much they esteem them.
They constantly display an entire confidence in the understanding of a
wife, and a profound respect for her freedom; they have decided that her
mind is just as fitted as that of a man to discover the plain truth, and
her heart as firm to embrace it; and they have never sought to place her
virtue, any more than his, under the shelter of prejudice, ignorance,
and fear. It would seem that in Europe, where man so easily submits to
the despotic sway of women, they are nevertheless curtailed of some of
the greatest qualities of the human species, and considered as seductive
but imperfect beings; and (what may well provoke astonishment) women
ultimately look upon themselves in the same light, and almost consider
it as a privilege that they are entitled to show themselves futile,
feeble, and timid. The women of America claim no such privileges.

Again, it may be said that in our morals we have reserved strange
immunities to man; so that there is, as it were, one virtue for his use,
and another for the guidance of his partner; and that, according to the
opinion of the public, the very same act may be punished alternately
as a crime or only as a fault. The Americans know not this iniquitous
division of duties and rights; amongst them the seducer is as much
dishonored as his victim. It is true that the Americans rarely lavish
upon women those eager attentions which are commonly paid them in
Europe; but their conduct to women always implies that they suppose them
to be virtuous and refined; and such is the respect entertained for
the moral freedom of the sex, that in the presence of a woman the
most guarded language is used, lest her ear should be offended by an
expression. In America a young unmarried woman may, alone and without
fear, undertake a long journey.

The legislators of the United States, who have mitigated almost all the
penalties of criminal law, still make rape a capital offence, and no
crime is visited with more inexorable severity by public opinion.
This may be accounted for; as the Americans can conceive nothing more
precious than a woman's honor, and nothing which ought so much to be
respected as her independence, they hold that no punishment is too
severe for the man who deprives her of them against her will. In France,
where the same offence is visited with far milder penalties, it is
frequently difficult to get a verdict from a jury against the prisoner.
Is this a consequence of contempt of decency or contempt of women? I
cannot but believe that it is a contempt of one and of the other.

Thus the Americans do not think that man and woman have either the duty
or the right to perform the same offices, but they show an equal regard
for both their respective parts; and though their lot is different, they
consider both of them as beings of equal value. They do not give to the
courage of woman the same form or the same direction as to that of man;
but they never doubt her courage: and if they hold that man and his
partner ought not always to exercise their intellect and understanding
in the same manner, they at least believe the understanding of the one
to be as sound as that of the other, and her intellect to be as clear.
Thus, then, whilst they have allowed the social inferiority of woman
to subsist, they have done all they could to raise her morally and
intellectually to the level of man; and in this respect they appear
to me to have excellently understood the true principle of democratic
improvement. As for myself, I do not hesitate to avow that, although
the women of the United States are confined within the narrow circle of
domestic life, and their situation is in some respects one of extreme
dependence, I have nowhere seen woman occupying a loftier position; and
if I were asked, now that I am drawing to the close of this work, in
which I have spoken of so many important things done by the Americans,
to what the singular prosperity and growing strength of that people
ought mainly to be attributed, I should reply--to the superiority of
their women.




Chapter XIII: That The Principle Of Equality Naturally Divides The
Americans Into A Number Of Small Private Circles

It may probably be supposed that the final consequence and necessary
effect of democratic institutions is to confound together all the
members of the community in private as well as in public life, and to
compel them all to live in common; but this would be to ascribe a
very coarse and oppressive form to the equality which originates in
democracy. No state of society or laws can render men so much alike,
but that education, fortune, and tastes will interpose some differences
between them; and, though different men may sometimes find it their
interest to combine for the same purposes, they will never make it their
pleasure. They will therefore always tend to evade the provisions of
legislation, whatever they may be; and departing in some one respect
from the circle within which they were to be bounded, they will set up,
close by the great political community, small private circles, united
together by the similitude of their conditions, habits, and manners.

In the United States the citizens have no sort of pre-eminence over each
other; they owe each other no mutual obedience or respect; they all meet
for the administration of justice, for the government of the State, and
in general to treat of the affairs which concern their common welfare;
but I never heard that attempts have been made to bring them all to
follow the same diversions, or to amuse themselves promiscuously in the
same places of recreation. The Americans, who mingle so readily in their
political assemblies and courts of justice, are wont on the contrary
carefully to separate into small distinct circles, in order to indulge
by themselves in the enjoyments of private life. Each of them is willing
to acknowledge all his fellow-citizens as his equals, but he will only
receive a very limited number of them amongst his friends or his guests.
This appears to me to be very natural. In proportion as the circle of
public society is extended, it may be anticipated that the sphere of
private intercourse will be contracted; far from supposing that the
members of modern society will ultimately live in common, I am afraid
that they may end by forming nothing but small coteries.

Amongst aristocratic nations the different classes are like vast
chambers, out of which it is impossible to get, into which it is
impossible to enter. These classes have no communication with each
other, but within their pale men necessarily live in daily contact;
even though they would not naturally suit, the general conformity of a
similar condition brings them nearer together. But when neither law nor
custom professes to establish frequent and habitual relations between
certain men, their intercourse originates in the accidental analogy
of opinions and tastes; hence private society is infinitely varied. In
democracies, where the members of the community never differ much from
each other, and naturally stand in such propinquity that they may all
at any time be confounded in one general mass, numerous artificial and
arbitrary distinctions spring up, by means of which every man hopes to
keep himself aloof, lest he should be carried away in the crowd against
his will. This can never fail to be the case; for human institutions
may be changed, but not man: whatever may be the general endeavor of a
community to render its members equal and alike, the personal pride
of individuals will always seek to rise above the line, and to form
somewhere an inequality to their own advantage.

In aristocracies men are separated from each other by lofty stationary
barriers; in democracies they are divided by a number of small and
almost invisible threads, which are constantly broken or moved from
place to place. Thus, whatever may be the progress of equality, in
democratic nations a great number of small private communities will
always be formed within the general pale of political society; but none
of them will bear any resemblance in its manners to the highest class in
aristocracies.




Chapter XIV: Some Reflections On American Manners

Nothing seems at first sight less important than the outward form of
human actions, yet there is nothing upon which men set more store: they
grow used to everything except to living in a society which has not
their own manners. The influence of the social and political state of
a country upon manners is therefore deserving of serious examination.
Manners are, generally, the product of the very basis of the character
of a people, but they are also sometimes the result of an arbitrary
convention between certain men; thus they are at once natural and
acquired. When certain men perceive that they are the foremost persons
in society, without contestation and without effort--when they are
constantly engaged on large objects, leaving the more minute details to
others--and when they live in the enjoyment of wealth which they did not
amass and which they do not fear to lose, it may be supposed that they
feel a kind of haughty disdain of the petty interests and practical
cares of life, and that their thoughts assume a natural greatness, which
their language and their manners denote. In democratic countries manners
are generally devoid of dignity, because private life is there extremely
petty in its character; and they are frequently low, because the mind
has few opportunities of rising above the engrossing cares of domestic
interests. True dignity in manners consists in always taking one's
proper station, neither too high nor too low; and this is as much within
the reach of a peasant as of a prince. In democracies all stations
appear doubtful; hence it is that the manners of democracies, though
often full of arrogance, are commonly wanting in dignity, and, moreover,
they are never either well disciplined or accomplished.

The men who live in democracies are too fluctuating for a certain number
of them ever to succeed in laying down a code of good breeding, and in
forcing people to follow it. Every man therefore behaves after his own
fashion, and there is always a certain incoherence in the manners of
such times, because they are moulded upon the feelings and notions of
each individual, rather than upon an ideal model proposed for general
imitation. This, however, is much more perceptible at the time when
an aristocracy has just been overthrown than after it has long been
destroyed. New political institutions and new social elements then bring
to the same places of resort, and frequently compel to live in common,
men whose education and habits are still amazingly dissimilar, and
this renders the motley composition of society peculiarly visible. The
existence of a former strict code of good breeding is still remembered,
but what it contained or where it is to be found is already forgotten.
Men have lost the common law of manners, and they have not yet made up
their minds to do without it; but everyone endeavors to make to himself
some sort of arbitrary and variable rule, from the remnant of former
usages; so that manners have neither the regularity and the dignity
which they often display amongst aristocratic nations, nor the
simplicity and freedom which they sometimes assume in democracies; they
are at once constrained and without constraint.

This, however, is not the normal state of things. When the equality of
conditions is long established and complete, as all men entertain nearly
the same notions and do nearly the same things, they do not require to
agree or to copy from one another in order to speak or act in the same
manner: their manners are constantly characterized by a number of lesser
diversities, but not by any great differences. They are never perfectly
alike, because they do not copy from the same pattern; they are never
very unlike, because their social condition is the same. At first sight
a traveller would observe that the manners of all the Americans
are exactly similar; it is only upon close examination that the
peculiarities in which they differ may be detected.

The English make game of the manners of the Americans; but it is
singular that most of the writers who have drawn these ludicrous
delineations belonged themselves to the middle classes in England, to
whom the same delineations are exceedingly applicable: so that these
pitiless censors for the most part furnish an example of the very thing
they blame in the United States; they do not perceive that they are
deriding themselves, to the great amusement of the aristocracy of their
own country.

Nothing is more prejudicial to democracy than its outward forms of
behavior: many men would willingly endure its vices, who cannot support
its manners. I cannot, however, admit that there is nothing commendable
in the manners of a democratic people. Amongst aristocratic nations, all
who live within reach of the first class in society commonly strain to
be like it, which gives rise to ridiculous and insipid imitations. As a
democratic people does not possess any models of high breeding, at least
it escapes the daily necessity of seeing wretched copies of them.
In democracies manners are never so refined as amongst aristocratic
nations, but on the other hand they are never so coarse. Neither the
coarse oaths of the populace, nor the elegant and choice expressions
of the nobility are to be heard there: the manners of such a people
are often vulgar, but they are neither brutal nor mean. I have already
observed that in democracies no such thing as a regular code of good
breeding can be laid down; this has some inconveniences and some
advantages. In aristocracies the rules of propriety impose the same
demeanor on everyone; they make all the members of the same class appear
alike, in spite of their private inclinations; they adorn and they
conceal the natural man. Amongst a democratic people manners are neither
so tutored nor so uniform, but they are frequently more sincere. They
form, as it were, a light and loosely woven veil, through which the real
feelings and private opinions of each individual are easily discernible.
The form and the substance of human actions often, therefore, stand
in closer relation; and if the great picture of human life be less
embellished, it is more true. Thus it may be said, in one sense, that
the effect of democracy is not exactly to give men any particular
manners, but to prevent them from having manners at all.

The feelings, the passions, the virtues, and the vices of an aristocracy
may sometimes reappear in a democracy, but not its manners; they are
lost, and vanish forever, as soon as the democratic revolution is
completed. It would seem that nothing is more lasting than the manners
of an aristocratic class, for they are preserved by that class for some
time after it has lost its wealth and its power--nor so fleeting, for
no sooner have they disappeared than not a trace of them is to be found;
and it is scarcely possible to say what they have been as soon as they
have ceased to be. A change in the state of society works this
miracle, and a few generations suffice to consummate it. The principal
characteristics of aristocracy are handed down by history after an
aristocracy is destroyed, but the light and exquisite touches of manners
are effaced from men's memories almost immediately after its fall. Men
can no longer conceive what these manners were when they have ceased to
witness them; they are gone, and their departure was unseen, unfelt; for
in order to feel that refined enjoyment which is derived from choice and
distinguished manners, habit and education must have prepared the heart,
and the taste for them is lost almost as easily as the practice of them.
Thus not only a democratic people cannot have aristocratic manners, but
they neither comprehend nor desire them; and as they never have thought
of them, it is to their minds as if such things had never been. Too
much importance should not be attached to this loss, but it may well be
regretted.

I am aware that it has not unfrequently happened that the same men have
had very high-bred manners and very low-born feelings: the interior of
courts has sufficiently shown what imposing externals may conceal the
meanest hearts. But though the manners of aristocracy did not constitute
virtue, they sometimes embellish virtue itself. It was no ordinary sight
to see a numerous and powerful class of men, whose every outward action
seemed constantly to be dictated by a natural elevation of thought
and feeling, by delicacy and regularity of taste, and by urbanity
of manners. Those manners threw a pleasing illusory charm over human
nature; and though the picture was often a false one, it could not be
viewed without a noble satisfaction.




Chapter XV: Of The Gravity Of The Americans, And Why It Does Not Prevent
Them From Often Committing Inconsiderate Actions

Men who live in democratic countries do not value the simple, turbulent,
or coarse diversions in which the people indulge in aristocratic
communities: such diversions are thought by them to be puerile or
insipid. Nor have they a greater inclination for the intellectual and
refined amusements of the aristocratic classes. They want something
productive and substantial in their pleasures; they want to mix actual
fruition with their joy. In aristocratic communities the people readily
give themselves up to bursts of tumultuous and boisterous gayety, which
shake off at once the recollection of their privations: the natives of
democracies are not fond of being thus violently broken in upon, and
they never lose sight of their own selves without regret. They prefer to
these frivolous delights those more serious and silent amusements which
are like business, and which do not drive business wholly from their
minds. An American, instead of going in a leisure hour to dance merrily
at some place of public resort, as the fellows of his calling continue
to do throughout the greater part of Europe, shuts himself up at home
to drink. He thus enjoys two pleasures; he can go on thinking of his
business, and he can get drunk decently by his own fireside.

I thought that the English constituted the most serious nation on the
face of the earth, but I have since seen the Americans and have changed
my opinion. I do not mean to say that temperament has not a great deal
to do with the character of the inhabitants of the United States, but
I think that their political institutions are a still more influential
cause. I believe the seriousness of the Americans arises partly from
their pride. In democratic countries even poor men entertain a lofty
notion of their personal importance: they look upon themselves with
complacency, and are apt to suppose that others are looking at them,
too. With this disposition they watch their language and their actions
with care, and do not lay themselves open so as to betray their
deficiencies; to preserve their dignity they think it necessary to
retain their gravity.

But I detect another more deep-seated and powerful cause which
instinctively produces amongst the Americans this astonishing gravity.
Under a despotism communities give way at times to bursts of vehement
joy; but they are generally gloomy and moody, because they are afraid.
Under absolute monarchies tempered by the customs and manners of the
country, their spirits are often cheerful and even, because as they have
some freedom and a good deal of security, they are exempted from the
most important cares of life; but all free peoples are serious, because
their minds are habitually absorbed by the contemplation of some
dangerous or difficult purpose. This is more especially the case amongst
those free nations which form democratic communities. Then there are
in all classes a very large number of men constantly occupied with the
serious affairs of the government; and those whose thoughts are not
engaged in the direction of the commonwealth are wholly engrossed by
the acquisition of a private fortune. Amongst such a people a serious
demeanor ceases to be peculiar to certain men, and becomes a habit of
the nation.

We are told of small democracies in the days of antiquity, in which the
citizens met upon the public places with garlands of roses, and spent
almost all their time in dancing and theatrical amusements. I do not
believe in such republics any more than in that of Plato; or, if the
things we read of really happened, I do not hesitate to affirm that
these supposed democracies were composed of very different elements from
ours, and that they had nothing in common with the latter except their
name. But it must not be supposed that, in the midst of all their toils,
the people who live in democracies think themselves to be pitied; the
contrary is remarked to be the case. No men are fonder of their own
condition. Life would have no relish for them if they were delivered
from the anxieties which harass them, and they show more attachment to
their cares than aristocratic nations to their pleasures.

I am next led to inquire how it is that these same democratic nations,
which are so serious, sometimes act in so inconsiderate a manner. The
Americans, who almost always preserve a staid demeanor and a frigid air,
nevertheless frequently allow themselves to be borne away, far beyond
the bound of reason, by a sudden passion or a hasty opinion, and they
sometimes gravely commit strange absurdities. This contrast ought not to
surprise us. There is one sort of ignorance which originates in extreme
publicity. In despotic States men know not how to act, because they are
told nothing; in democratic nations they often act at random, because
nothing is to be left untold. The former do not know--the latter
forget; and the chief features of each picture are lost to them in a
bewilderment of details.

It is astonishing what imprudent language a public man may sometimes use
in free countries, and especially in democratic States, without being
compromised; whereas in absolute monarchies a few words dropped by
accident are enough to unmask him forever, and ruin him without hope of
redemption. This is explained by what goes before. When a man speaks
in the midst of a great crowd, many of his words are not heard, or are
forthwith obliterated from the memories of those who hear them; but
amidst the silence of a mute and motionless throng the slightest whisper
strikes the ear.

In democracies men are never stationary; a thousand chances waft them
to and fro, and their life is always the sport of unforeseen or (so to
speak) extemporaneous circumstances. Thus they are often obliged to
do things which they have imperfectly learned, to say things they
imperfectly understand, and to devote themselves to work for which they
are unprepared by long apprenticeship. In aristocracies every man has
one sole object which he unceasingly pursues, but amongst democratic
nations the existence of man is more complex; the same mind will almost
always embrace several objects at the same time, and these objects are
frequently wholly foreign to each other: as it cannot know them all
well, the mind is readily satisfied with imperfect notions of each.

When the inhabitant of democracies is not urged by his wants, he is so
at least by his desires; for of all the possessions which he sees around
him, none are wholly beyond his reach. He therefore does everything in a
hurry, he is always satisfied with "pretty well," and never pauses more
than an instant to consider what he has been doing. His curiosity is at
once insatiable and cheaply satisfied; for he cares more to know a great
deal quickly than to know anything well: he has no time and but little
taste to search things to the bottom. Thus then democratic peoples are
grave, because their social and political condition constantly leads
them to engage in serious occupations; and they act inconsiderately,
because they give but little time and attention to each of these
occupations. The habit of inattention must be considered as the greatest
bane of the democratic character.




Chapter XVI: Why The National Vanity Of The Americans Is More Restless
And Captious Than That Of The English

All free nations are vainglorious, but national pride is not displayed
by all in the same manner. The Americans in their intercourse with
strangers appear impatient of the smallest censure and insatiable
of praise. The most slender eulogium is acceptable to them; the most
exalted seldom contents them; they unceasingly harass you to extort
praise, and if you resist their entreaties they fall to praising
themselves. It would seem as if, doubting their own merit, they wished
to have it constantly exhibited before their eyes. Their vanity is not
only greedy, but restless and jealous; it will grant nothing, whilst it
demands everything, but is ready to beg and to quarrel at the same time.
If I say to an American that the country he lives in is a fine one,
"Ay," he replies, "there is not its fellow in the world." If I applaud
the freedom which its inhabitants enjoy, he answers, "Freedom is a fine
thing, but few nations are worthy to enjoy it." If I remark the purity
of morals which distinguishes the United States, "I can imagine," says
he, "that a stranger, who has been struck by the corruption of all other
nations, is astonished at the difference." At length I leave him to the
contemplation of himself; but he returns to the charge, and does not
desist till he has got me to repeat all I had just been saying. It is
impossible to conceive a more troublesome or more garrulous patriotism;
it wearies even those who are disposed to respect it. *a

[Footnote a: See Appendix U.]

Such is not the case with the English. An Englishman calmly enjoys the
real or imaginary advantages which in his opinion his country possesses.
If he grants nothing to other nations, neither does he solicit anything
for his own. The censure of foreigners does not affect him, and their
praise hardly flatters him; his position with regard to the rest of the
world is one of disdainful and ignorant reserve: his pride requires no
sustenance, it nourishes itself. It is remarkable that two nations,
so recently sprung from the same stock, should be so opposite to one
another in their manner of feeling and conversing.

In aristocratic countries the great possess immense privileges, upon
which their pride rests, without seeking to rely upon the lesser
advantages which accrue to them. As these privileges came to them by
inheritance, they regard them in some sort as a portion of themselves,
or at least as a natural right inherent in their own persons. They
therefore entertain a calm sense of their superiority; they do not dream
of vaunting privileges which everyone perceives and no one contests,
and these things are not sufficiently new to them to be made topics
of conversation. They stand unmoved in their solitary greatness, well
assured that they are seen of all the world without any effort to show
themselves off, and that no one will attempt to drive them from that
position. When an aristocracy carries on the public affairs, its
national pride naturally assumes this reserved, indifferent, and haughty
form, which is imitated by all the other classes of the nation.

When, on the contrary, social conditions differ but little, the
slightest privileges are of some importance; as every man sees around
himself a million of people enjoying precisely similar or analogous
advantages, his pride becomes craving and jealous, he clings to mere
trifles, and doggedly defends them. In democracies, as the conditions of
life are very fluctuating, men have almost always recently acquired the
advantages which they possess; the consequence is that they feel extreme
pleasure in exhibiting them, to show others and convince themselves that
they really enjoy them. As at any instant these same advantages may be
lost, their possessors are constantly on the alert, and make a point
of showing that they still retain them. Men living in democracies love
their country just as they love themselves, and they transfer the habits
of their private vanity to their vanity as a nation. The restless and
insatiable vanity of a democratic people originates so entirely in the
equality and precariousness of social conditions, that the members of
the haughtiest nobility display the very same passion in those lesser
portions of their existence in which there is anything fluctuating or
contested. An aristocratic class always differs greatly from the other
classes of the nation, by the extent and perpetuity of its privileges;
but it often happens that the only differences between the members who
belong to it consist in small transient advantages, which may any day be
lost or acquired. The members of a powerful aristocracy, collected in
a capital or a court, have been known to contest with virulence those
frivolous privileges which depend on the caprice of fashion or the
will of their master. These persons then displayed towards each
other precisely the same puerile jealousies which animate the men of
democracies, the same eagerness to snatch the smallest advantages which
their equals contested, and the same desire to parade ostentatiously
those of which they were in possession. If national pride ever entered
into the minds of courtiers, I do not question that they would display
it in the same manner as the members of a democratic community.




Chapter XVII: That The Aspect Of Society In The United States Is At Once
Excited And Monotonous

It would seem that nothing can be more adapted to stimulate and to feed
curiosity than the aspect of the United States. Fortunes, opinions,
and laws are there in ceaseless variation: it is as if immutable nature
herself were mutable, such are the changes worked upon her by the hand
of man. Yet in the end the sight of this excited community becomes
monotonous, and after having watched the moving pageant for a time the
spectator is tired of it. Amongst aristocratic nations every man is
pretty nearly stationary in his own sphere; but men are astonishingly
unlike each other--their passions, their notions, their habits, and
their tastes are essentially different: nothing changey, but everything
differs. In democracies, on the contrary, all men are alike and do
things pretty nearly alike. It is true that they are subject to great
and frequent vicissitudes; but as the same events of good or adverse
fortune are continually recurring, the name of the actors only is
changed, the piece is always the same. The aspect of American society
is animated, because men and things are always changing; but it is
monotonous, because all these changes are alike.

Men living in democratic ages have many passions, but most of their
passions either end in the love of riches or proceed from it. The cause
of this is, not that their souls are narrower, but that the importance
of money is really greater at such times. When all the members of
a community are independent of or indifferent to each other, the
co-operation of each of them can only be obtained by paying for it: this
infinitely multiplies the purposes to which wealth may be applied, and
increases its value. When the reverence which belonged to what is old
has vanished, birth, condition, and profession no longer distinguish
men, or scarcely distinguish them at all: hardly anything but money
remains to create strongly marked differences between them, and to raise
some of them above the common level. The distinction originating in
wealth is increased by the disappearance and diminution of all other
distinctions. Amongst aristocratic nations money only reaches to a few
points on the vast circle of man's desires--in democracies it seems to
lead to all. The love of wealth is therefore to be traced, either as
a principal or an accessory motive, at the bottom of all that the
Americans do: this gives to all their passions a sort of family
likeness, and soon renders the survey of them exceedingly wearisome.
This perpetual recurrence of the same passion is monotonous; the
peculiar methods by which this passion seeks its own gratification are
no less so.

In an orderly and constituted democracy like the United States, where
men cannot enrich themselves by war, by public office, or by political
confiscation, the love of wealth mainly drives them into business and
manufactures. Although these pursuits often bring about great commotions
and disasters, they cannot prosper without strictly regular habits and
a long routine of petty uniform acts. The stronger the passion is, the
more regular are these habits, and the more uniform are these acts. It
may be said that it is the vehemence of their desires which makes the
Americans so methodical; it perturbs their minds, but it disciplines
their lives.

The remark I here apply to America may indeed be addressed to almost
all our contemporaries. Variety is disappearing from the human race; the
same ways of acting, thinking, and feeling are to be met with all over
the world. This is not only because nations work more upon each other,
and are more faithful in their mutual imitation; but as the men of each
country relinquish more and more the peculiar opinions and feelings of
a caste, a profession, or a family, they simultaneously arrive at
something nearer to the constitution of man, which is everywhere the
same. Thus they become more alike, even without having imitated each
other. Like travellers scattered about some large wood, which is
intersected by paths converging to one point, if all of them keep, their
eyes fixed upon that point and advance towards it, they insensibly draw
nearer together--though they seek not, though they see not, though
they know not each other; and they will be surprised at length to find
themselves all collected on the same spot. All the nations which
take, not any particular man, but man himself, as the object of their
researches and their imitations, are tending in the end to a similar
state of society, like these travellers converging to the central plot
of the forest.




Chapter XVIII: Of Honor In The United States And In Democratic
Communities

It would seem that men employ two very distinct methods in the public
estimation *a of the actions of their fellowmen; at one time they judge
them by those simple notions of right and wrong which are diffused
all over the world; at another they refer their decision to a few very
special notions which belong exclusively to some particular age and
country. It often happens that these two rules differ; they sometimes
conflict: but they are never either entirely identified or entirely
annulled by one another. Honor, at the periods of its greatest power,
sways the will more than the belief of men; and even whilst they yield
without hesitation and without a murmur to its dictates, they feel
notwithstanding, by a dim but mighty instinct, the existence of a more
general, more ancient, and more holy law, which they sometimes disobey
although they cease not to acknowledge it. Some actions have been held
to be at the same time virtuous and dishonorable--a refusal to fight a
duel is a case in point.

[Footnote a: The word "honor" is not always used in the same sense
either in French or English. I. It first signifies the dignity, glory,
or reverence which a man receives from his kind; and in this sense a
man is said to acquire honor. 2. Honor signifies the aggregate of those
rules by the assistance of which this dignity, glory, or reverence is
obtained. Thus we say that a man has always strictly obeyed the laws
of honor; or a man has violated his honor. In this chapter the word is
always used in the latter sense.]

I think these peculiarities may be otherwise explained than by the mere
caprices of certain individuals and nations, as has hitherto been
the customary mode of reasoning on the subject. Mankind is subject
to general and lasting wants that have engendered moral laws, to the
neglect of which men have ever and in all places attached the notion of
censure and shame: to infringe them was "to do ill"--"to do well" was to
conform to them. Within the bosom of this vast association of the human
race, lesser associations have been formed which are called nations;
and amidst these nations further subdivisions have assumed the names
of classes or castes. Each of these associations forms, as it were,
a separate species of the human race; and though it has no essential
difference from the mass of mankind, to a certain extent it stands apart
and has certain wants peculiar to itself. To these special wants must
be attributed the modifications which affect in various degrees and
in different countries the mode of considering human actions, and
the estimate which ought to be formed of them. It is the general and
permanent interest of mankind that men should not kill each other: but
it may happen to be the peculiar and temporary interest of a people or a
class to justify, or even to honor, homicide.

Honor is simply that peculiar rule, founded upon a peculiar state of
society, by the application of which a people or a class allot praise or
blame. Nothing is more unproductive to the mind than an abstract idea; I
therefore hasten to call in the aid of facts and examples to illustrate
my meaning.

I select the most extraordinary kind of honor which was ever known
in the world, and that which we are best acquainted with, viz.,
aristocratic honor springing out of feudal society. I shall explain it
by means of the principle already laid down, and I shall explain the
principle by means of the illustration. I am not here led to inquire
when and how the aristocracy of the Middle Ages came into existence,
why it was so deeply severed from the remainder of the nation, or
what founded and consolidated its power. I take its existence as an
established fact, and I am endeavoring to account for the peculiar view
which it took of the greater part of human actions. The first thing that
strikes me is, that in the feudal world actions were not always praised
or blamed with reference to their intrinsic worth, but that they were
sometimes appreciated exclusively with reference to the person who
was the actor or the object of them, which is repugnant to the general
conscience of mankind. Thus some of the actions which were indifferent
on the part of a man in humble life, dishonored a noble; others changed
their whole character according as the person aggrieved by them belonged
or did not belong to the aristocracy. When these different notions first
arose, the nobility formed a distinct body amidst the people, which
it commanded from the inaccessible heights where it was ensconced. To
maintain this peculiar position, which constituted its strength, it not
only required political privileges, but it required a standard of right
and wrong for its own especial use. That some particular virtue or vice
belonged to the nobility rather than to the humble classes--that certain
actions were guiltless when they affected the villain, which were
criminal when they touched the noble--these were often arbitrary
matters; but that honor or shame should be attached to a man's actions
according to his condition, was a result of the internal constitution
of an aristocratic community. This has been actually the case in all
the countries which have had an aristocracy; as long as a trace of the
principle remains, these peculiarities will still exist; to debauch a
woman of color scarcely injures the reputation of an American--to marry
her dishonors him.

In some cases feudal honor enjoined revenge, and stigmatized the
forgiveness of insults; in others it imperiously commanded men to
conquer their own passions, and imposed forgetfulness of self. It did
not make humanity or kindness its law, but it extolled generosity; it
set more store on liberality than on benevolence; it allowed men to
enrich themselves by gambling or by war, but not by labor; it preferred
great crimes to small earnings; cupidity was less distasteful to it
than avarice; violence it often sanctioned, but cunning and treachery it
invariably reprobated as contemptible. These fantastical notions did not
proceed exclusively from the caprices of those who entertained them. A
class which has succeeded in placing itself at the head of and above
all others, and which makes perpetual exertions to maintain this lofty
position, must especially honor those virtues which are conspicuous for
their dignity and splendor, and which may be easily combined with pride
and the love of power. Such men would not hesitate to invert the natural
order of the conscience in order to give those virtues precedence before
all others. It may even be conceived that some of the more bold and
brilliant vices would readily be set above the quiet, unpretending
virtues. The very existence of such a class in society renders these
things unavoidable.

The nobles of the Middle Ages placed military courage foremost amongst
virtues, and in lieu of many of them. This was again a peculiar opinion
which arose necessarily from the peculiarity of the state of society.
Feudal aristocracy existed by war and for war; its power had been
founded by arms, and by arms that power was maintained; it therefore
required nothing more than military courage, and that quality was
naturally exalted above all others; whatever denoted it, even at the
expense of reason and humanity, was therefore approved and frequently
enjoined by the manners of the time. Such was the main principle; the
caprice of man was only to be traced in minuter details. That a man
should regard a tap on the cheek as an unbearable insult, and should be
obliged to kill in single combat the person who struck him thus lightly,
is an arbitrary rule; but that a noble could not tranquilly receive an
insult, and was dishonored if he allowed himself to take a blow without
fighting, were direct consequences of the fundamental principles and the
wants of military aristocracy.

Thus it was true to a certain extent to assert that the laws of honor
were capricious; but these caprices of honor were always confined within
certain necessary limits. The peculiar rule, which was called honor by
our forefathers, is so far from being an arbitrary law in my eyes, that
I would readily engage to ascribe its most incoherent and fantastical
injunctions to a small number of fixed and invariable wants inherent in
feudal society.

If I were to trace the notion of feudal honor into the domain of
politics, I should not find it more difficult to explain its dictates.
The state of society and the political institutions of the Middle Ages
were such, that the supreme power of the nation never governed the
community directly. That power did not exist in the eyes of the people:
every man looked up to a certain individual whom he was bound to obey;
by that intermediate personage he was connected with all the others.
Thus in feudal society the whole system of the commonwealth rested upon
the sentiment of fidelity to the person of the lord: to destroy that
sentiment was to open the sluices of anarchy. Fidelity to a political
superior was, moreover, a sentiment of which all the members of the
aristocracy had constant opportunities of estimating the importance; for
every one of them was a vassal as well as a lord, and had to command as
well as to obey. To remain faithful to the lord, to sacrifice one's self
for him if called upon, to share his good or evil fortunes, to stand
by him in his undertakings whatever they might be--such were the first
injunctions of feudal honor in relation to the political institutions
of those times. The treachery of a vassal was branded with extraordinary
severity by public opinion, and a name of peculiar infamy was invented
for the offence which was called "felony."

On the contrary, few traces are to be found in the Middle Ages of the
passion which constituted the life of the nations of antiquity--I mean
patriotism; the word itself is not of very ancient date in the language.
*b Feudal institutions concealed the country at large from men's sight,
and rendered the love of it less necessary. The nation was forgotten in
the passions which attached men to persons. Hence it was no part of
the strict law of feudal honor to remain faithful to one's country. Not
indeed that the love of their country did not exist in the hearts of
our forefathers; but it constituted a dim and feeble instinct, which has
grown more clear and strong in proportion as aristocratic classes have
been abolished, and the supreme power of the nation centralized. This
may be clearly seen from the contrary judgments which European nations
have passed upon the various events of their histories, according to the
generations by which such judgments have been formed. The circumstance
which most dishonored the Constable de Bourbon in the eyes of his
contemporaries was that he bore arms against his king: that which most
dishonors him in our eyes, is that he made war against his country; we
brand him as deeply as our forefathers did, but for different reasons.

[Footnote b: Even the word "patrie" was not used by the French writers
until the sixteenth century.]

I have chosen the honor of feudal times by way of illustration of my
meaning, because its characteristics are more distinctly marked and more
familiar to us than those of any other period; but I might have taken
an example elsewhere, and I should have reached the same conclusion by
a different road. Although we are less perfectly acquainted with the
Romans than with our own ancestors, yet we know that certain peculiar
notions of glory and disgrace obtained amongst them, which were not
solely derived from the general principles of right and wrong. Many
human actions were judged differently, according as they affected a
Roman citizen or a stranger, a freeman or a slave; certain vices were
blazoned abroad, certain virtues were extolled above all others. "In
that age," says Plutarch in the life of Coriolanus, "martial prowess
was more honored and prized in Rome than all the other virtues, insomuch
that it was called virtus, the name of virtue itself, by applying the
name of the kind to this particular species; so that virtue in Latin was
as much as to say valor." Can anyone fail to recognize the peculiar
want of that singular community which was formed for the conquest of the
world?

Any nation would furnish us with similar grounds of observation; for,
as I have already remarked, whenever men collect together as a distinct
community, the notion of honor instantly grows up amongst them; that
is to say, a system of opinions peculiar to themselves as to what is
blamable or commendable; and these peculiar rules always originate
in the special habits and special interests of the community. This is
applicable to a certain extent to democratic communities as well as
to others, as we shall now proceed to prove by the example of the
Americans. *c Some loose notions of the old aristocratic honor of Europe
are still to be found scattered amongst the opinions of the Americans;
but these traditional opinions are few in number, they have but little
root in the country, and but little power. They are like a religion
which has still some temples left standing, though men have ceased
to believe in it. But amidst these half-obliterated notions of exotic
honor, some new opinions have sprung up, which constitute what may be
termed in our days American honor. I have shown how the Americans are
constantly driven to engage in commerce and industry. Their origin,
their social condition, their political institutions, and even the spot
they inhabit, urge them irresistibly in this direction. Their present
condition is then that of an almost exclusively manufacturing and
commercial association, placed in the midst of a new and boundless
country, which their principal object is to explore for purposes of
profit. This is the characteristic which most peculiarly distinguishes
the American people from all others at the present time. All those quiet
virtues which tend to give a regular movement to the community, and to
encourage business, will therefore be held in peculiar honor by that
people, and to neglect those virtues will be to incur public contempt.
All the more turbulent virtues, which often dazzle, but more frequently
disturb society, will on the contrary occupy a subordinate rank in the
estimation of this same people: they may be neglected without forfeiting
the esteem of the community--to acquire them would perhaps be to run a
risk of losing it.

[Footnote c: I speak here of the Americans inhabiting those States where
slavery does not exist; they alone can be said to present a complete
picture of democratic society.]

The Americans make a no less arbitrary classification of men's vices.
There are certain propensities which appear censurable to the general
reason and the universal conscience of mankind, but which happen to
agree with the peculiar and temporary wants of the American community:
these propensities are lightly reproved, sometimes even encouraged; for
instance, the love of wealth and the secondary propensities connected
with it may be more particularly cited. To clear, to till, and to
transform the vast uninhabited continent which is his domain, the
American requires the daily support of an energetic passion; that
passion can only be the love of wealth; the passion for wealth is
therefore not reprobated in America, and provided it does not go beyond
the bounds assigned to it for public security, it is held in honor.
The American lauds as a noble and praiseworthy ambition what our own
forefathers in the Middle Ages stigmatized as servile cupidity, just
as he treats as a blind and barbarous frenzy that ardor of conquest and
martial temper which bore them to battle. In the United States fortunes
are lost and regained without difficulty; the country is boundless, and
its resources inexhaustible. The people have all the wants and cravings
of a growing creature; and whatever be their efforts, they are always
surrounded by more than they can appropriate. It is not the ruin of a
few individuals which may be soon repaired, but the inactivity and
sloth of the community at large which would be fatal to such a people.
Boldness of enterprise is the foremost cause of its rapid progress, its
strength, and its greatness. Commercial business is there like a vast
lottery, by which a small number of men continually lose, but the State
is always a gainer; such a people ought therefore to encourage and do
honor to boldness in commercial speculations. But any bold speculation
risks the fortune of the speculator and of all those who put their trust
in him. The Americans, who make a virtue of commercial temerity, have
no right in any case to brand with disgrace those who practise it. Hence
arises the strange indulgence which is shown to bankrupts in the United
States; their honor does not suffer by such an accident. In this respect
the Americans differ, not only from the nations of Europe, but from all
the commercial nations of our time, and accordingly they resemble none
of them in their position or their wants.

In America all those vices which tend to impair the purity of morals,
and to destroy the conjugal tie, are treated with a degree of severity
which is unknown in the rest of the world. At first sight this seems
strangely at variance with the tolerance shown there on other subjects,
and one is surprised to meet with a morality so relaxed and so austere
amongst the selfsame people. But these things are less incoherent
than they seem to be. Public opinion in the United States very gently
represses that love of wealth which promotes the commercial greatness
and the prosperity of the nation, and it especially condemns that laxity
of morals which diverts the human mind from the pursuit of well-being,
and disturbs the internal order of domestic life which is so necessary
to success in business. To earn the esteem of their countrymen, the
Americans are therefore constrained to adapt themselves to orderly
habits--and it may be said in this sense that they make it a matter of
honor to live chastely.

On one point American honor accords with the notions of honor
acknowledged in Europe; it places courage as the highest virtue, and
treats it as the greatest of the moral necessities of man; but the
notion of courage itself assumes a different aspect. In the United
States martial valor is but little prized; the courage which is best
known and most esteemed is that which emboldens men to brave the
dangers of the ocean, in order to arrive earlier in port--to support the
privations of the wilderness without complaint, and solitude more cruel
than privations--the courage which renders them almost insensible to the
loss of a fortune laboriously acquired, and instantly prompts to fresh
exertions to make another. Courage of this kind is peculiarly necessary
to the maintenance and prosperity of the American communities, and it is
held by them in peculiar honor and estimation; to betray a want of it is
to incur certain disgrace.

I have yet another characteristic point which may serve to place the
idea of this chapter in stronger relief. In a democratic society like
that of the United States, where fortunes are scanty and insecure,
everybody works, and work opens a way to everything: this has changed
the point of honor quite round, and has turned it against idleness.
I have sometimes met in America with young men of wealth, personally
disinclined to all laborious exertion, but who had been compelled to
embrace a profession. Their disposition and their fortune allowed them
to remain without employment; public opinion forbade it, too imperiously
to be disobeyed. In the European countries, on the contrary, where
aristocracy is still struggling with the flood which overwhelms it, I
have often seen men, constantly spurred on by their wants and desires,
remain in idleness, in order not to lose the esteem of their equals; and
I have known them submit to ennui and privations rather than to work.
No one can fail to perceive that these opposite obligations are two
different rules of conduct, both nevertheless originating in the notion
of honor.

What our forefathers designated as honor absolutely was in reality only
one of its forms; they gave a generic name to what was only a species.
Honor therefore is to be found in democratic as well as in aristocratic
ages, but it will not be difficult to show that it assumes a different
aspect in the former. Not only are its injunctions different, but we
shall shortly see that they are less numerous, less precise, and that
its dictates are less rigorously obeyed. The position of a caste is
always much more peculiar than that of a people. Nothing is so much out
of the way of the world as a small community invariably composed of the
same families (as was for instance the aristocracy of the Middle
Ages), whose object is to concentrate and to retain, exclusively and
hereditarily, education, wealth, and power amongst its own members. But
the more out of the way the position of a community happens to be, the
more numerous are its special wants, and the more extensive are its
notions of honor corresponding to those wants. The rules of honor will
therefore always be less numerous amongst a people not divided into
castes than amongst any other. If ever any nations are constituted in
which it may even be difficult to find any peculiar classes of society,
the notion of honor will be confined to a small number of precepts,
which will be more and more in accordance with the moral laws adopted
by the mass of mankind. Thus the laws of honor will be less peculiar and
less multifarious amongst a democratic people than in an aristocracy.
They will also be more obscure; and this is a necessary consequence
of what goes before; for as the distinguishing marks of honor are less
numerous and less peculiar, it must often be difficult to distinguish
them. To this, other reasons may be added. Amongst the aristocratic
nations of the Middle Ages, generation succeeded generation in vain;
each family was like a never-dying, ever-stationary man, and the state
of opinions was hardly more changeable than that of conditions. Everyone
then had always the same objects before his eyes, which he contemplated
from the same point; his eyes gradually detected the smallest details,
and his discernment could not fail to become in the end clear and
accurate. Thus not only had the men of feudal times very extraordinary
opinions in matters of honor, but each of those opinions was present to
their minds under a clear and precise form.

This can never be the case in America, where all men are in constant
motion; and where society, transformed daily by its own operations,
changes its opinions together with its wants. In such a country men
have glimpses of the rules of honor, but they have seldom time to fix
attention upon them.

But even if society were motionless, it would still be difficult to
determine the meaning which ought to be attached to the word "honor." In
the Middle Ages, as each class had its own honor, the same opinion
was never received at the same time by a large number of men; and this
rendered it possible to give it a determined and accurate form, which
was the more easy, as all those by whom it was received, having a
perfectly identical and most peculiar position, were naturally disposed
to agree upon the points of a law which was made for themselves alone.
Thus the code of honor became a complete and detailed system, in which
everything was anticipated and provided for beforehand, and a fixed
and always palpable standard was applied to human actions. Amongst a
democratic nation, like the Americans, in which ranks are identified,
and the whole of society forms one single mass, composed of elements
which are all analogous though not entirely similar, it is impossible
ever to agree beforehand on what shall or shall not be allowed by the
laws of honor. Amongst that people, indeed, some national wants do exist
which give rise to opinions common to the whole nation on points of
honor; but these opinions never occur at the same time, in the same
manner, or with the same intensity to the minds of the whole community;
the law of honor exists, but it has no organs to promulgate it.

The confusion is far greater still in a democratic country like France,
where the different classes of which the former fabric of society was
composed, being brought together but not yet mingled, import day by day
into each other's circles various and sometimes conflicting notions
of honor--where every man, at his own will and pleasure, forsakes one
portion of his forefathers' creed, and retains another; so that, amidst
so many arbitrary measures, no common rule can ever be established, and
it is almost impossible to predict which actions will be held in honor
and which will be thought disgraceful. Such times are wretched, but they
are of short duration.

As honor, amongst democratic nations, is imperfectly defined, its
influence is of course less powerful; for it is difficult to apply
with certainty and firmness a law which is not distinctly known. Public
opinion, the natural and supreme interpreter of the laws of honor, not
clearly discerning to which side censure or approval ought to lean,
can only pronounce a hesitating judgment. Sometimes the opinion of the
public may contradict itself; more frequently it does not act, and lets
things pass.

The weakness of the sense of honor in democracies also arises from
several other causes. In aristocratic countries, the same notions of
honor are always entertained by only a few persons, always limited in
number, often separated from the rest of their fellow-citizens. Honor is
easily mingled and identified in their minds with the idea of all
that distinguishes their own position; it appears to them as the chief
characteristic of their own rank; they apply its different rules with
all the warmth of personal interest, and they feel (if I may use the
expression) a passion for complying with its dictates. This truth is
extremely obvious in the old black-letter lawbooks on the subject of
"trial by battel." The nobles, in their disputes, were bound to use
the lance and sword; whereas the villains used only sticks amongst
themselves, "inasmuch as," to use the words of the old books, "villains
have no honor." This did not mean, as it may be imagined at the present
day, that these people were contemptible; but simply that their actions
were not to be judged by the same rules which were applied to the
actions of the aristocracy.

It is surprising, at first sight, that when the sense of honor is most
predominant, its injunctions are usually most strange; so that the
further it is removed from common reason the better it is obeyed; whence
it has sometimes been inferred that the laws of honor were strengthened
by their own extravagance. The two things indeed originate from the
same source, but the one is not derived from the other. Honor becomes
fantastical in proportion to the peculiarity of the wants which it
denotes, and the paucity of the men by whom those wants are felt; and
it is because it denotes wants of this kind that its influence is great.
Thus the notion of honor is not the stronger for being fantastical, but
it is fantastical and strong from the selfsame cause.

Further, amongst aristocratic nations each rank is different, but all
ranks are fixed; every man occupies a place in his own sphere which he
cannot relinquish, and he lives there amidst other men who are bound by
the same ties. Amongst these nations no man can either hope or fear to
escape being seen; no man is placed so low but that he has a stage of
his own, and none can avoid censure or applause by his obscurity.
In democratic States on the contrary, where all the members of the
community are mingled in the same crowd and in constant agitation,
public opinion has no hold on men; they disappear at every instant, and
elude its power. Consequently the dictates of honor will be there less
imperious and less stringent; for honor acts solely for the public
eye--differing in this respect from mere virtue, which lives upon itself
contented with its own approval.

If the reader has distinctly apprehended all that goes before, he will
understand that there is a close and necessary relation between the
inequality of social conditions and what has here been styled honor--a
relation which, if I am not mistaken, had not before been clearly
pointed out. I shall therefore make one more attempt to illustrate it
satisfactorily. Suppose a nation stands apart from the rest of mankind:
independently of certain general wants inherent in the human race, it
will also have wants and interests peculiar to itself: certain opinions
of censure or approbation forthwith arise in the community, which are
peculiar to itself, and which are styled honor by the members of that
community. Now suppose that in this same nation a caste arises, which,
in its turn, stands apart from all the other classes, and contracts
certain peculiar wants, which give rise in their turn to special
opinions. The honor of this caste, composed of a medley of the peculiar
notions of the nation, and the still more peculiar notions of the caste,
will be as remote as it is possible to conceive from the simple and
general opinions of men.

Having reached this extreme point of the argument, I now return. When
ranks are commingled and privileges abolished, the men of whom a nation
is composed being once more equal and alike, their interests and wants
become identical, and all the peculiar notions which each caste styled
honor successively disappear: the notion of honor no longer proceeds
from any other source than the wants peculiar to the nation at large,
and it denotes the individual character of that nation to the world.
Lastly, if it be allowable to suppose that all the races of mankind
should be commingled, and that all the peoples of earth should
ultimately come to have the same interests, the same wants,
undistinguished from each other by any characteristic peculiarities,
no conventional value whatever would then be attached to men's actions;
they would all be regarded by all in the same light; the general
necessities of mankind, revealed by conscience to every man, would
become the common standard. The simple and general notions of right and
wrong only would then be recognized in the world, to which, by a natural
and necessary tie, the idea of censure or approbation would be
attached. Thus, to comprise all my meaning in a single proposition,
the dissimilarities and inequalities of men gave rise to the notion of
honor; that notion is weakened in proportion as these differences are
obliterated, and with them it would disappear.




Chapter XIX: Why So Many Ambitious Men And So Little Lofty Ambition Are
To Be Found In The United States

The first thing which strikes a traveller in the United States is the
innumerable multitude of those who seek to throw off their original
condition; and the second is the rarity of lofty ambition to be observed
in the midst of the universally ambitious stir of society. No Americans
are devoid of a yearning desire to rise; but hardly any appear to
entertain hopes of great magnitude, or to drive at very lofty aims. All
are constantly seeking to acquire property, power, and reputation--few
contemplate these things upon a great scale; and this is the more
surprising, as nothing is to be discerned in the manners or laws of
America to limit desire, or to prevent it from spreading its impulses in
every direction. It seems difficult to attribute this singular state
of things to the equality of social conditions; for at the instant when
that same equality was established in France, the flight of ambition
became unbounded. Nevertheless, I think that the principal cause which
may be assigned to this fact is to be found in the social condition and
democratic manners of the Americans.

All revolutions enlarge the ambition of men: this proposition is more
peculiarly true of those revolutions which overthrow an aristocracy.
When the former barriers which kept back the multitude from fame and
power are suddenly thrown down, a violent and universal rise takes place
towards that eminence so long coveted and at length to be enjoyed. In
this first burst of triumph nothing seems impossible to anyone: not only
are desires boundless, but the power of satisfying them seems almost
boundless, too. Amidst the general and sudden renewal of laws and
customs, in this vast confusion of all men and all ordinances, the
various members of the community rise and sink again with excessive
rapidity; and power passes so quickly from hand to hand that none need
despair of catching it in turn. It must be recollected, moreover, that
the people who destroy an aristocracy have lived under its laws; they
have witnessed its splendor, and they have unconsciously imbibed the
feelings and notions which it entertained. Thus at the moment when an
aristocracy is dissolved, its spirit still pervades the mass of the
community, and its tendencies are retained long after it has been
defeated. Ambition is therefore always extremely great as long as a
democratic revolution lasts, and it will remain so for some time after
the revolution is consummated. The reminiscence of the extraordinary
events which men have witnessed is not obliterated from their memory in
a day. The passions which a revolution has roused do not disappear at
its close. A sense of instability remains in the midst of re-established
order: a notion of easy success survives the strange vicissitudes which
gave it birth; desires still remain extremely enlarged, when the means
of satisfying them are diminished day by day. The taste for large
fortunes subsists, though large fortunes are rare: and on every side we
trace the ravages of inordinate and hapless ambition kindled in hearts
which they consume in secret and in vain.

At length, however, the last vestiges of the struggle are effaced; the
remains of aristocracy completely disappear; the great events by which
its fall was attended are forgotten; peace succeeds to war, and the sway
of order is restored in the new realm; desires are again adapted to the
means by which they may be fulfilled; the wants, the opinions, and
the feelings of men cohere once more; the level of the community is
permanently determined, and democratic society established. A democratic
nation, arrived at this permanent and regular state of things, will
present a very different spectacle from that which we have just
described; and we may readily conclude that, if ambition becomes great
whilst the conditions of society are growing equal, it loses that
quality when they have grown so. As wealth is subdivided and knowledge
diffused, no one is entirely destitute of education or of property;
the privileges and disqualifications of caste being abolished, and
men having shattered the bonds which held them fixed, the notion of
advancement suggests itself to every mind, the desire to rise swells in
every heart, and all men want to mount above their station: ambition is
the universal feeling.

But if the equality of conditions gives some resources to all the
members of the community, it also prevents any of them from having
resources of great extent, which necessarily circumscribes their desires
within somewhat narrow limits. Thus amongst democratic nations ambition
is ardent and continual, but its aim is not habitually lofty; and life
is generally spent in eagerly coveting small objects which are within
reach. What chiefly diverts the men of democracies from lofty ambition
is not the scantiness of their fortunes, but the vehemence of the
exertions they daily make to improve them. They strain their faculties
to the utmost to achieve paltry results, and this cannot fail speedily
to limit their discernment and to circumscribe their powers. They
might be much poorer and still be greater. The small number of opulent
citizens who are to be found amidst a democracy do not constitute an
exception to this rule. A man who raises himself by degrees to wealth
and power, contracts, in the course of this protracted labor, habits
of prudence and restraint which he cannot afterwards shake off. A man
cannot enlarge his mind as he would his house. The same observation is
applicable to the sons of such a man; they are born, it is true, in a
lofty position, but their parents were humble; they have grown up amidst
feelings and notions which they cannot afterwards easily get rid of;
and it may be presumed that they will inherit the propensities of their
father as well as his wealth. It may happen, on the contrary, that
the poorest scion of a powerful aristocracy may display vast ambition,
because the traditional opinions of his race and the general spirit of
his order still buoy him up for some time above his fortune. Another
thing which prevents the men of democratic periods from easily indulging
in the pursuit of lofty objects, is the lapse of time which they foresee
must take place before they can be ready to approach them. "It is a
great advantage," says Pascal, "to be a man of quality, since it brings
one man as forward at eighteen or twenty as another man would be at
fifty, which is a clear gain of thirty years." Those thirty years
are commonly wanting to the ambitious characters of democracies. The
principle of equality, which allows every man to arrive at everything,
prevents all men from rapid advancement.

In a democratic society, as well as elsewhere, there are only a certain
number of great fortunes to be made; and as the paths which lead to them
are indiscriminately open to all, the progress of all must necessarily
be slackened. As the candidates appear to be nearly alike, and as it
is difficult to make a selection without infringing the principle of
equality, which is the supreme law of democratic societies, the first
idea which suggests itself is to make them all advance at the same rate
and submit to the same probation. Thus in proportion as men become
more alike, and the principle of equality is more peaceably and deeply
infused into the institutions and manners of the country, the rules
of advancement become more inflexible, advancement itself slower, the
difficulty of arriving quickly at a certain height far greater. From
hatred of privilege and from the embarrassment of choosing, all men are
at last constrained, whatever may be their standard, to pass the same
ordeal; all are indiscriminately subjected to a multitude of petty
preliminary exercises, in which their youth is wasted and their
imagination quenched, so that they despair of ever fully attaining
what is held out to them; and when at length they are in a condition to
perform any extraordinary acts, the taste for such things has forsaken
them.

In China, where the equality of conditions is exceedingly great and
very ancient, no man passes from one public office to another without
undergoing a probationary trial. This probation occurs afresh at every
stage of his career; and the notion is now so rooted in the manners of
the people that I remember to have read a Chinese novel, in which the
hero, after numberless crosses, succeeds at length in touching the
heart of his mistress by taking honors. A lofty ambition breathes with
difficulty in such an atmosphere.

The remark I apply to politics extends to everything; equality
everywhere produces the same effects; where the laws of a country do
not regulate and retard the advancement of men by positive enactment,
competition attains the same end. In a well-established democratic
community great and rapid elevation is therefore rare; it forms
an exception to the common rule; and it is the singularity of such
occurrences that makes men forget how rarely they happen. Men living in
democracies ultimately discover these things; they find out at last that
the laws of their country open a boundless field of action before them,
but that no one can hope to hasten across it. Between them and the final
object of their desires, they perceive a multitude of small intermediate
impediments, which must be slowly surmounted: this prospect wearies
and discourages their ambition at once. They therefore give up hopes so
doubtful and remote, to search nearer to themselves for less lofty
and more easy enjoyments. Their horizon is not bounded by the laws but
narrowed by themselves.

I have remarked that lofty ambitions are more rare in the ages of
democracy than in times of aristocracy: I may add that when, in spite of
these natural obstacles, they do spring into existence, their character
is different. In aristocracies the career of ambition is often wide, but
its boundaries are determined. In democracies ambition commonly ranges
in a narrower field, but if once it gets beyond that, hardly any limits
can be assigned to it. As men are individually weak--as they live
asunder, and in constant motion--as precedents are of little authority
and laws but of short duration, resistance to novelty is languid,
and the fabric of society never appears perfectly erect or firmly
consolidated. So that, when once an ambitious man has the power in his
grasp, there is nothing he may noted are; and when it is gone from him,
he meditates the overthrow of the State to regain it. This gives to
great political ambition a character of revolutionary violence, which
it seldom exhibits to an equal degree in aristocratic communities. The
common aspect of democratic nations will present a great number of
small and very rational objects of ambition, from amongst which a few
ill-controlled desires of a larger growth will at intervals break out:
but no such a thing as ambition conceived and contrived on a vast scale
is to be met with there.

I have shown elsewhere by what secret influence the principle of
equality makes the passion for physical gratifications and the exclusive
love of the present predominate in the human heart: these different
propensities mingle with the sentiment of ambition, and tinge it, as it
were, with their hues. I believe that ambitious men in democracies are
less engrossed than any others with the interests and the judgment of
posterity; the present moment alone engages and absorbs them. They are
more apt to complete a number of undertakings with rapidity than to
raise lasting monuments of their achievements; and they care much more
for success than for fame. What they most ask of men is obedience--what
they most covet is empire. Their manners have in almost all cases
remained below the height of their station; the consequence is that they
frequently carry very low tastes into their extraordinary fortunes, and
that they seem to have acquired the supreme power only to minister to
their coarse or paltry pleasures.

I think that in our time it is very necessary to cleanse, to regulate,
and to adapt the feeling of ambition, but that it would be extremely
dangerous to seek to impoverish and to repress it over-much. We should
attempt to lay down certain extreme limits, which it should never be
allowed to outstep; but its range within those established limits
should not be too much checked. I confess that I apprehend much less
for democratic society from the boldness than from the mediocrity of
desires. What appears to me most to be dreaded is that, in the midst of
the small incessant occupations of private life, ambition should lose
its vigor and its greatness--that the passions of man should abate, but
at the same time be lowered, so that the march of society should every
day become more tranquil and less aspiring. I think then that the
leaders of modern society would be wrong to seek to lull the community
by a state of too uniform and too peaceful happiness; and that it is
well to expose it from time to time to matters of difficulty and danger,
in order to raise ambition and to give it a field of action. Moralists
are constantly complaining that the ruling vice of the present time is
pride. This is true in one sense, for indeed no one thinks that he is
not better than his neighbor, or consents to obey his superior: but
it is extremely false in another; for the same man who cannot endure
subordination or equality, has so contemptible an opinion of himself
that he thinks he is only born to indulge in vulgar pleasures. He
willingly takes up with low desires, without daring to embark in lofty
enterprises, of which he scarcely dreams. Thus, far from thinking
that humility ought to be preached to our contemporaries, I would have
endeavors made to give them a more enlarged idea of themselves and of
their kind. Humility is unwholesome to them; what they most want is,
in my opinion, pride. I would willingly exchange several of our small
virtues for this one vice.




Chapter XX: The Trade Of Place-Hunting In Certain Democratic Countries

In the United States as soon as a man has acquired some education and
pecuniary resources, he either endeavors to get rich by commerce or
industry, or he buys land in the bush and turns pioneer. All that he
asks of the State is not to be disturbed in his toil, and to be secure
of his earnings. Amongst the greater part of European nations, when a
man begins to feel his strength and to extend his desires, the first
thing that occurs to him is to get some public employment. These
opposite effects, originating in the same cause, deserve our passing
notice.

When public employments are few in number, ill-paid and precarious,
whilst the different lines of business are numerous and lucrative, it is
to business, and not to official duties, that the new and eager desires
engendered by the principle of equality turn from every side. But if,
whilst the ranks of society are becoming more equal, the education of
the people remains incomplete, or their spirit the reverse of bold--if
commerce and industry, checked in their growth, afford only slow and
arduous means of making a fortune--the various members of the community,
despairing of ameliorating their own condition, rush to the head of the
State and demand its assistance. To relieve their own necessities at the
cost of the public treasury, appears to them to be the easiest and most
open, if not the only, way they have to rise above a condition which no
longer contents them; place-hunting becomes the most generally followed
of all trades. This must especially be the case, in those great
centralized monarchies in which the number of paid offices is immense,
and the tenure of them tolerably secure, so that no one despairs of
obtaining a place, and of enjoying it as undisturbedly as a hereditary
fortune.

I shall not remark that the universal and inordinate desire for place is
a great social evil; that it destroys the spirit of independence in the
citizen, and diffuses a venal and servile humor throughout the frame
of society; that it stifles the manlier virtues: nor shall I be at
the pains to demonstrate that this kind of traffic only creates an
unproductive activity, which agitates the country without adding to its
resources: all these things are obvious. But I would observe, that a
government which encourages this tendency risks its own tranquillity,
and places its very existence in great jeopardy. I am aware that at a
time like our own, when the love and respect which formerly clung to
authority are seen gradually to decline, it may appear necessary to
those in power to lay a closer hold on every man by his own interest,
and it may seem convenient to use his own passions to keep him in order
and in silence; but this cannot be so long, and what may appear to be a
source of strength for a certain time will assuredly become in the end a
great cause of embarrassment and weakness.

Amongst democratic nations, as well as elsewhere, the number of official
appointments has in the end some limits; but amongst those nations,
the number of aspirants is unlimited; it perpetually increases, with a
gradual and irresistible rise in proportion as social conditions become
more equal, and is only checked by the limits of the population.
Thus, when public employments afford the only outlet for ambition, the
government necessarily meets with a permanent opposition at last; for
it is tasked to satisfy with limited means unlimited desires. It is very
certain that of all people in the world the most difficult to restrain
and to manage are a people of solicitants. Whatever endeavors are made
by rulers, such a people can never be contented; and it is always to be
apprehended that they will ultimately overturn the constitution of the
country, and change the aspect of the State, for the sole purpose of
making a clearance of places. The sovereigns of the present age, who
strive to fix upon themselves alone all those novel desires which are
aroused by equality, and to satisfy them, will repent in the end, if I
am not mistaken, that they ever embarked in this policy: they will one
day discover that they have hazarded their own power, by making it so
necessary; and that the more safe and honest course would have been to
teach their subjects the art of providing for themselves. *a

[Footnote a: As a matter of fact, more recent experience has shown that
place-hunting is quite as intense in the United States as in any country
in Europe. It is regarded by the Americans themselves as one of the
great evils of their social condition, and it powerfully affects their
political institutions. But the American who seeks a place seeks not so
much a means of subsistence as the distinction which office and public
employment confer. In the absence of any true aristocracy, the public
service creates a spurious one, which is as much an object of ambition
as the distinctions of rank in aristocratic countries.--Translator's
Note.]




Chapter XXI: Why Great Revolutions Will Become More Rare

A people which has existed for centuries under a system of castes and
classes can only arrive at a democratic state of society by passing
through a long series of more or less critical transformations,
accomplished by violent efforts, and after numerous vicissitudes; in the
course of which, property, opinions, and power are rapidly transferred
from one hand to another. Even after this great revolution is
consummated, the revolutionary habits engendered by it may long be
traced, and it will be followed by deep commotion. As all this takes
place at the very time at which social conditions are becoming more
equal, it is inferred that some concealed relation and secret tie exist
between the principle of equality itself and revolution, insomuch that
the one cannot exist without giving rise to the other.

On this point reasoning may seem to lead to the same result as
experience. Amongst a people whose ranks are nearly equal, no ostensible
bond connects men together, or keeps them settled in their station.
None of them have either a permanent right or power to command--none
are forced by their condition to obey; but every man, finding himself
possessed of some education and some resources, may choose his won path
and proceed apart from all his fellow-men. The same causes which make
the members of the community independent of each other, continually
impel them to new and restless desires, and constantly spur them
onwards. It therefore seems natural that, in a democratic community,
men, things, and opinions should be forever changing their form and
place, and that democratic ages should be times of rapid and incessant
transformation.

But is this really the case? does the equality of social conditions
habitually and permanently lead men to revolution? does that state of
society contain some perturbing principle which prevents the community
from ever subsiding into calm, and disposes the citizens to alter
incessantly their laws, their principles, and their manners? I do not
believe it; and as the subject is important, I beg for the reader's
close attention. Almost all the revolutions which have changed the
aspect of nations have been made to consolidate or to destroy social
inequality. Remove the secondary causes which have produced the great
convulsions of the world, and you will almost always find the principle
of inequality at the bottom. Either the poor have attempted to plunder
the rich, or the rich to enslave the poor. If then a state of society
can ever be founded in which every man shall have something to keep, and
little to take from others, much will have been done for the peace of
the world. I am aware that amongst a great democratic people there will
always be some members of the community in great poverty, and others in
great opulence; but the poor, instead of forming the immense majority
of the nation, as is always the case in aristocratic communities, are
comparatively few in number, and the laws do not bind them together by
the ties of irremediable and hereditary penury. The wealthy, on their
side, are scarce and powerless; they have no privileges which attract
public observation; even their wealth, as it is no longer incorporated
and bound up with the soil, is impalpable, and as it were invisible. As
there is no longer a race of poor men, so there is no longer a race of
rich men; the latter spring up daily from the multitude, and relapse
into it again. Hence they do not form a distinct class, which may be
easily marked out and plundered; and, moreover, as they are connected
with the mass of their fellow-citizens by a thousand secret ties, the
people cannot assail them without inflicting an injury upon itself.
Between these two extremes of democratic communities stand an
innumerable multitude of men almost alike, who, without being exactly
either rich or poor, are possessed of sufficient property to desire the
maintenance of order, yet not enough to excite envy. Such men are the
natural enemies of violent commotions: their stillness keeps all beneath
them and above them still, and secures the balance of the fabric of
society. Not indeed that even these men are contented with what they
have gotten, or that they feel a natural abhorrence for a revolution in
which they might share the spoil without sharing the calamity; on the
contrary, they desire, with unexampled ardor, to get rich, but the
difficulty is to know from whom riches can be taken. The same state of
society which constantly prompts desires, restrains these desires
within necessary limits: it gives men more liberty of changing and less
interest in change.

Not only are the men of democracies not naturally desirous of
revolutions, but they are afraid of them. All revolutions more or
less threaten the tenure of property: but most of those who live in
democratic countries are possessed of property--not only are they
possessed of property, but they live in the condition of men who set the
greatest store upon their property. If we attentively consider each of
the classes of which society is composed, it is easy to see that the
passions engendered by property are keenest and most tenacious amongst
the middle classes. The poor often care but little for what they
possess, because they suffer much more from the want of what they have
not, than they enjoy the little they have. The rich have many other
passions besides that of riches to satisfy; and, besides, the long and
arduous enjoyment of a great fortune sometimes makes them in the end
insensible to its charms. But the men who have a competency, alike
removed from opulence and from penury, attach an enormous value to their
possessions. As they are still almost within the reach of poverty, they
see its privations near at hand, and dread them; between poverty and
themselves there is nothing but a scanty fortune, upon which they
immediately fix their apprehensions and their hopes. Every day increases
the interest they take in it, by the constant cares which it occasions;
and they are the more attached to it by their continual exertions to
increase the amount. The notion of surrendering the smallest part of it
is insupportable to them, and they consider its total loss as the worst
of misfortunes. Now these eager and apprehensive men of small property
constitute the class which is constantly increased by the equality of
conditions. Hence, in democratic communities, the majority of the people
do not clearly see what they have to gain by a revolution, but they
continually and in a thousand ways feel that they might lose by one.

I have shown in another part of this work that the equality of
conditions naturally urges men to embark in commercial and industrial
pursuits, and that it tends to increase and to distribute real property:
I have also pointed out the means by which it inspires every man with
an eager and constant desire to increase his welfare. Nothing is more
opposed to revolutionary passions than these things. It may happen
that the final result of a revolution is favorable to commerce and
manufactures; but its first consequence will almost always be the ruin
of manufactures and mercantile men, because it must always change at
once the general principles of consumption, and temporarily upset the
existing proportion between supply and demand. I know of nothing more
opposite to revolutionary manners than commercial manners. Commerce is
naturally adverse to all the violent passions; it loves to temporize,
takes delight in compromise, and studiously avoids irritation. It
is patient, insinuating, flexible, and never has recourse to extreme
measures until obliged by the most absolute necessity. Commerce renders
men independent of each other, gives them a lofty notion of their
personal importance, leads them to seek to conduct their own affairs,
and teaches how to conduct them well; it therefore prepares men for
freedom, but preserves them from revolutions. In a revolution the owners
of personal property have more to fear than all others; for on the one
hand their property is often easy to seize, and on the other it may
totally disappear at any moment--a subject of alarm to which the owners
of real property are less exposed, since, although they may lose the
income of their estates, they may hope to preserve the land itself
through the greatest vicissitudes. Hence the former are much more
alarmed at the symptoms of revolutionary commotion than the latter. Thus
nations are less disposed to make revolutions in proportion as personal
property is augmented and distributed amongst them, and as the number
of those possessing it increases. Moreover, whatever profession men
may embrace, and whatever species of property they may possess, one
characteristic is common to them all. No one is fully contented with
his present fortune--all are perpetually striving in a thousand ways to
improve it. Consider any one of them at any period of his life, and
he will be found engaged with some new project for the purpose of
increasing what he has; talk not to him of the interests and the rights
of mankind: this small domestic concern absorbs for the time all his
thoughts, and inclines him to defer political excitement to some other
season. This not only prevents men from making revolutions, but deters
men from desiring them. Violent political passions have but little hold
on those who have devoted all their faculties to the pursuit of their
well-being. The ardor which they display in small matters calms their
zeal for momentous undertakings.

From time to time indeed, enterprising and ambitious men will arise in
democratic communities, whose unbounded aspirations cannot be contented
by following the beaten track. Such men like revolutions and hail their
approach; but they have great difficulty in bringing them about, unless
unwonted events come to their assistance. No man can struggle with
advantage against the spirit of his age and country; and, however
powerful he may be supposed to be, he will find it difficult to make his
contemporaries share in feelings and opinions which are repugnant to t
all their feelings and desires.

It is a mistake to believe that, when once the equality of conditions
has become the old and uncontested state of society, and has imparted
its characteristics to the manners of a nation, men will easily allow
themselves to be thrust into perilous risks by an imprudent leader or
a bold innovator. Not indeed that they will resist him openly, by
well-contrived schemes, or even by a premeditated plan of resistance.
They will not struggle energetically against him, sometimes they will
even applaud him--but they do not follow him. To his vehemence they
secretly oppose their inertia; to his revolutionary tendencies their
conservative interests; their homely tastes to his adventurous passions;
their good sense to the flights of his genius; to his poetry their
prose. With immense exertion he raises them for an instant, but they
speedily escape from him, and fall back, as it were, by their own
weight. He strains himself to rouse the indifferent and distracted
multitude, and finds at last that he is reduced to impotence, not
because he is conquered, but because he is alone.

I do not assert that men living in democratic communities are naturally
stationary; I think, on the contrary, that a perpetual stir prevails
in the bosom of those societies, and that rest is unknown there; but I
think that men bestir themselves within certain limits beyond which
they hardly ever go. They are forever varying, altering, and restoring
secondary matters; but they carefully abstain from touching what is
fundamental. They love change, but they dread revolutions. Although the
Americans are constantly modifying or abrogating some of their laws,
they by no means display revolutionary passions. It may be easily seen,
from the promptitude with which they check and calm themselves when
public excitement begins to grow alarming, and at the very moment when
passions seem most roused, that they dread a revolution as the worst
of misfortunes, and that every one of them is inwardly resolved to make
great sacrifices to avoid such a catastrophe. In no country in the world
is the love of property more active and more anxious than in the United
States; nowhere does the majority display less inclination for those
principles which threaten to alter, in whatever manner, the laws
of property. I have often remarked that theories which are of a
revolutionary nature, since they cannot be put in practice without a
complete and sometimes a sudden change in the state of property and
persons, are much less favorably viewed in the United States than in
the great monarchical countries of Europe: if some men profess them,
the bulk of the people reject them with instinctive abhorrence. I do not
hesitate to say that most of the maxims commonly called democratic in
France would be proscribed by the democracy of the United States. This
may easily be understood: in America men have the opinions and passions
of democracy, in Europe we have still the passions and opinions of
revolution. If ever America undergoes great revolutions, they will
be brought about by the presence of the black race on the soil of the
United States--that is to say, they will owe their origin, not to the
equality, but to the inequality, of conditions.

When social conditions are equal, every man is apt to live apart,
centred in himself and forgetful of the public. If the rulers of
democratic nations were either to neglect to correct this fatal
tendency, or to encourage it from a notion that it weans men from
political passions and thus wards off revolutions, they might eventually
produce the evil they seek to avoid, and a time might come when the
inordinate passions of a few men, aided by the unintelligent selfishness
or the pusillanimity of the greater number, would ultimately compel
society to pass through strange vicissitudes. In democratic communities
revolutions are seldom desired except by a minority; but a minority
may sometimes effect them. I do not assert that democratic nations are
secure from revolutions; I merely say that the state of society in
those nations does not lead to revolutions, but rather wards them off.
A democratic people left to itself will not easily embark in great
hazards; it is only led to revolutions unawares; it may sometimes
undergo them, but it does not make them; and I will add that, when
such a people has been allowed to acquire sufficient knowledge and
experience, it will not suffer them to be made. I am well aware that
it this respect public institutions may themselves do much; they may
encourage or repress the tendencies which originate in the state of
society. I therefore do not maintain, I repeat, that a people is secure
from revolutions simply because conditions are equal in the community;
but I think that, whatever the institutions of such a people may be,
great revolutions will always be far less violent and less frequent than
is supposed; and I can easily discern a state of polity, which, when
combined with the principle of equality, would render society more
stationary than it has ever been in our western apart of the world.

The observations I have here made on events may also be applied in
part to opinions. Two things are surprising in the United States--the
mutability of the greater part of human actions, and the singular
stability of certain principles. Men are in constant motion; the mind
of man appears almost unmoved. When once an opinion has spread over the
country and struck root there, it would seem that no power on earth is
strong enough to eradicate it. In the United States, general principles
in religion, philosophy, morality, and even politics, do not vary, or at
least are only modified by a hidden and often an imperceptible process:
even the grossest prejudices are obliterated with incredible slowness,
amidst the continual friction of men and things. I hear it said that it
is in the nature and the habits of democracies to be constantly changing
their opinions and feelings. This may be true of small democratic
nations, like those of the ancient world, in which the whole community
could be assembled in a public place and then excited at will by an
orator. But I saw nothing of the kind amongst the great democratic
people which dwells upon the opposite shores of the Atlantic Ocean.
What struck me in the United States was the difficulty in shaking the
majority in an opinion once conceived, or of drawing it off from a
leader once adopted. Neither speaking nor writing can accomplish it;
nothing but experience will avail, and even experience must be repeated.
This is surprising at first sight, but a more attentive investigation
explains the fact. I do not think that it is as easy as is supposed to
uproot the prejudices of a democratic people--to change its belief--to
supersede principles once established, by new principles in religion,
politics, and morals--in a word, to make great and frequent changes in
men's minds. Not that the human mind is there at rest--it is in constant
agitation; but it is engaged in infinitely varying the consequences of
known principles, and in seeking for new consequences, rather than in
seeking for new principles. Its motion is one of rapid circumvolution,
rather than of straightforward impulse by rapid and direct effort; it
extends its orbit by small continual and hasty movements, but it does
not suddenly alter its position.

Men who are equal in rights, in education, in fortune, or, to comprise
all in one word, in their social condition, have necessarily wants,
habits, and tastes which are hardly dissimilar. As they look at
objects under the same aspect, their minds naturally tend to
analogous conclusions; and, though each of them may deviate from his
contemporaries and from opinions of his own, they will involuntarily and
unconsciously concur in a certain number of received opinions. The more
attentively I consider the effects of equality upon the mind, the more
am I persuaded that the intellectual anarchy which we witness about us
is not, as many men suppose, the natural state of democratic nations.
I think it is rather to be regarded as an accident peculiar to their
youth, and that it only breaks out at that period of transition when men
have already snapped the former ties which bound them together, but are
still amazingly different in origin, education, and manners; so that,
having retained opinions, propensities and tastes of great diversity,
nothing any longer prevents men from avowing them openly. The leading
opinions of men become similar in proportion as their conditions
assimilate; such appears to me to be the general and permanent law--the
rest is casual and transient.

I believe that it will rarely happen to any man amongst a democratic
community, suddenly to frame a system of notions very remote from
that which his contemporaries have adopted; and if some such innovator
appeared, I apprehend that he would have great difficulty in finding
listeners, still more in finding believers. When the conditions of men
are almost equal, they do not easily allow themselves to be persuaded by
each other. As they all live in close intercourse, as they have learned
the same things together, and as they lead the same life, they are not
naturally disposed to take one of themselves for a guide, and to follow
him implicitly. Men seldom take the opinion of their equal, or of a
man like themselves, upon trust. Not only is confidence in the superior
attainments of certain individuals weakened amongst democratic nations,
as I have elsewhere remarked, but the general notion of the intellectual
superiority which any man whatsoever may acquire in relation to the rest
of the community is soon overshadowed. As men grow more like each other,
the doctrine of the equality of the intellect gradually infuses itself
into their opinions; and it becomes more difficult for any innovator to
acquire or to exert much influence over the minds of a people. In such
communities sudden intellectual revolutions will therefore be rare; for,
if we read aright the history of the world, we shall find that great and
rapid changes in human opinions have been produced far less by the force
of reasoning than by the authority of a name. Observe, too, that as the
men who live in democratic societies are not connected with each other
by any tie, each of them must be convinced individually; whilst in
aristocratic society it is enough to convince a few--the rest follow.
If Luther had lived in an age of equality, and had not had princes
and potentates for his audience, he would perhaps have found it more
difficult to change the aspect of Europe. Not indeed that the men of
democracies are naturally strongly persuaded of the certainty of their
opinions, or are unwavering in belief; they frequently entertain doubts
which no one, in their eyes, can remove. It sometimes happens at such
times that the human mind would willingly change its position; but as
nothing urges or guides it forwards, it oscillates to and fro without
progressive motion. *a

[Footnote a: If I inquire what state of society is most favorable to the
great revolutions of the mind, I find that it occurs somewhere between
the complete equality of the whole community and the absolute separation
of ranks. Under a system of castes generations succeed each other
without altering men's positions; some have nothing more, others nothing
better, to hope for. The imagination slumbers amidst this universal
silence and stillness, and the very idea of change fades from the human
mind. When ranks have been abolished and social conditions are almost
equalized, all men are in ceaseless excitement, but each of them stands
alone, independent and weak. This latter state of things is excessively
different from the former one; yet it has one point of analogy--great
revolutions of the human mind seldom occur in it. But between these two
extremes of the history of nations is an intermediate period--a period
as glorious as it is agitated--when the conditions of men are not
sufficiently settled for the mind to be lulled in torpor, when they are
sufficiently unequal for men to exercise a vast power on the minds of
one another, and when some few may modify the convictions of all. It is
at such times that great reformers start up, and new opinions suddenly
change the face of the world.]

Even when the reliance of a democratic people has been won, it is still
no easy matter to gain their attention. It is extremely difficult to
obtain a hearing from men living in democracies, unless it be to speak
to them of themselves. They do not attend to the things said to them,
because they are always fully engrossed with the things they are doing.
For indeed few men are idle in democratic nations; life is passed in
the midst of noise and excitement, and men are so engaged in acting that
little remains to them for thinking. I would especially remark that they
are not only employed, but that they are passionately devoted to their
employments. They are always in action, and each of their actions
absorbs their faculties: the zeal which they display in business puts
out the enthusiasm they might otherwise entertain for idea. I think
that it is extremely difficult to excite the enthusiasm of a democratic
people for any theory which has not a palpable, direct, and immediate
connection with the daily occupations of life: therefore they will not
easily forsake their old opinions; for it is enthusiasm which flings the
minds of men out of the beaten track, and effects the great revolutions
of the intellect as well as the great revolutions of the political
world. Thus democratic nations have neither time nor taste to go in
search of novel opinions. Even when those they possess become doubtful,
they still retain them, because it would take too much time and inquiry
to change them--they retain them, not as certain, but as established.

There are yet other and more cogent reasons which prevent any great
change from being easily effected in the principles of a democratic
people. I have already adverted to them at the commencement of this
part of my work. If the influence of individuals is weak and hardly
perceptible amongst such a people, the power exercised by the mass upon
the mind of each individual is extremely great--I have already shown for
what reasons. I would now observe that it is wrong to suppose that this
depends solely upon the form of government, and that the majority would
lose its intellectual supremacy if it were to lose its political power.
In aristocracies men have often much greatness and strength of their
own: when they find themselves at variance with the greater number of
their fellow-countrymen, they withdraw to their own circle, where they
support and console themselves. Such is not the case in a democratic
country; there public favor seems as necessary as the air we breathe,
and to live at variance with the multitude is, as it were, not to
live. The multitude requires no laws to coerce those who think not like
itself: public disapprobation is enough; a sense of their loneliness and
impotence overtakes them and drives them to despair.

Whenever social conditions are equal, public opinion presses with
enormous weight upon the mind of each individual; it surrounds, directs,
and oppresses him; and this arises from the very constitution of
society, much more than from its political laws. As men grow more alike,
each man feels himself weaker in regard to all the rest; as he discerns
nothing by which he is considerably raised above them, or distinguished
from them, he mistrusts himself as soon as they assail him. Not only
does he mistrust his strength, but he even doubts of his right; and he
is very near acknowledging that he is in the wrong, when the greater
number of his countrymen assert that he is so. The majority do not need
to constrain him--they convince him. In whatever way then the powers of
a democratic community may be organized and balanced, it will always be
extremely difficult to believe what the bulk of the people reject, or to
profess what they condemn.

This circumstance is extraordinarily favorable to the stability of
opinions. When an opinion has taken root amongst a democratic people,
and established itself in the minds of the bulk of the community, it
afterwards subsists by itself and is maintained without effort, because
no one attacks it. Those who at first rejected it as false, ultimately
receive it as the general impression; and those who still dispute it in
their hearts, conceal their dissent; they are careful not to engage in a
dangerous and useless conflict. It is true, that when the majority of
a democratic people change their opinions, they may suddenly and
arbitrarily effect strange revolutions in men's minds; but their
opinions do not change without much difficulty, and it is almost as
difficult to show that they are changed.

Time, events, or the unaided individual action of the mind, will
sometimes undermine or destroy an opinion, without any outward sign
of the change. It has not been openly assailed, no conspiracy has been
formed to make war on it, but its followers one by one noiselessly
secede--day by day a few of them abandon it, until last it is only
professed by a minority. In this state it will still continue to
prevail. As its enemies remain mute, or only interchange their thoughts
by stealth, they are themselves unaware for a long period that a great
revolution has actually been effected; and in this state of uncertainly
they take no steps--they observe each other and are silent. The majority
have ceased to believe what they believed before; but they still affect
to believe, and this empty phantom of public opinion in strong enough to
chill innovators, and to keep them silent and at respectful distance. We
live at a time which has witnessed the most rapid changes of opinion in
the minds of men; nevertheless it may be that the leading opinions of
society will ere long be more settled than they have been for several
centuries in our history: that time is not yet come, but it may
perhaps be approaching. As I examine more closely the natural wants and
tendencies of democratic nations, I grow persuaded that if ever social
equality is generally and permanently established in the world, great
intellectual and political revolutions will become more difficult and
less frequent than is supposed. Because the men of democracies appear
always excited, uncertain, eager, changeable in their wills and in their
positions, it is imagined that they are suddenly to abrogate their laws,
to adopt new opinions, and to assume new manners. But if the principle
of equality predisposes men to change, it also suggests to them certain
interests and tastes which cannot be satisfied without a settled order
of things; equality urges them on, but at the same time it holds them
back; it spurs them, but fastens them to earth;--it kindles their
desires, but limits their powers. This, however, is not perceived at
first; the passions which tend to sever the citizens of a democracy are
obvious enough; but the hidden force which restrains and unites them is
not discernible at a glance.

Amidst the ruins which surround me, shall I dare to say that revolutions
are not what I most fear coming generations? If men continue to shut
themselves more closely within the narrow circle of domestic interests
and to live upon that kind of excitement, it is to be apprehended that
they may ultimately become inaccessible to those great and powerful
public emotions which perturb nations--but which enlarge them and
recruit them. When property becomes so fluctuating, and the love of
property so restless and so ardent, I cannot but fear that men may
arrive at such a state as to regard every new theory as a peril,
every innovation as an irksome toil, every social improvement as a
stepping-stone to revolution, and so refuse to move altogether for fear
of being moved too far. I dread, and I confess it, lest they should at
last so entirely give way to a cowardly love of present enjoyment, as to
lose sight of the interests of their future selves and of those of their
descendants; and to prefer to glide along the easy current of life,
rather than to make, when it is necessary, a strong and sudden effort
to a higher purpose. It is believed by some that modern society will be
ever changing its aspect; for myself, I fear that it will ultimately be
too invariably fixed in the same institutions, the same prejudices, the
same manners, so that mankind will be stopped and circumscribed; that
the mind will swing backwards and forwards forever, without begetting
fresh ideas; that man will waste his strength in bootless and solitary
trifling; and, though in continual motion, that humanity will cease to
advance.




Chapter XXII: Why Democratic Nations Are Naturally Desirous Of Peace,
And Democratic Armies Of War

The same interests, the same fears, the same passions which deter
democratic nations from revolutions, deter them also from war; the
spirit of military glory and the spirit of revolution are weakened at
the same time and by the same causes. The ever-increasing numbers of men
of property--lovers of peace, the growth of personal wealth which war
so rapidly consumes, the mildness of manners, the gentleness of heart,
those tendencies to pity which are engendered by the equality
of conditions, that coolness of understanding which renders men
comparatively insensible to the violent and poetical excitement of
arms--all these causes concur to quench the military spirit. I think it
may be admitted as a general and constant rule, that, amongst civilized
nations, the warlike passions will become more rare and less intense in
proportion as social conditions shall be more equal. War is nevertheless
an occurrence to which all nations are subject, democratic nations as
well as others. Whatever taste they may have for peace, they must hold
themselves in readiness to repel aggression, or in other words they must
have an army.

Fortune, which has conferred so many peculiar benefits upon the
inhabitants of the United States, has placed them in the midst of a
wilderness, where they have, so to speak, no neighbors: a few thousand
soldiers are sufficient for their wants; but this is peculiar to
America, not to democracy. The equality of conditions, and the
manners as well as the institutions resulting from it, do not exempt
a democratic people from the necessity of standing armies, and their
armies always exercise a powerful influence over their fate. It is
therefore of singular importance to inquire what are the natural
propensities of the men of whom these armies are composed.

Amongst aristocratic nations, especially amongst those in which birth
is the only source of rank, the same inequality exists in the army as
in the nation; the officer is noble, the soldier is a serf; the one is
naturally called upon to command, the other to obey. In aristocratic
armies, the private soldier's ambition is therefore circumscribed within
very narrow limits. Nor has the ambition of the officer an unlimited
range. An aristocratic body not only forms a part of the scale of ranks
in the nation, but it contains a scale of ranks within itself: the
members of whom it is composed are placed one above another, in a
particular and unvarying manner. Thus one man is born to the command of
a regiment, another to that of a company; when once they have reached
the utmost object of their hopes, they stop of their own accord, and
remain contented with their lot. There is, besides, a strong cause,
which, in aristocracies, weakens the officer's desire of promotion.
Amongst aristocratic nations, an officer, independently of his rank
in the army, also occupies an elevated rank in society; the former is
almost always in his eyes only an appendage to the latter. A nobleman
who embraces the profession of arms follows it less from motives of
ambition than from a sense of the duties imposed on him by his birth.
He enters the army in order to find an honorable employment for the idle
years of his youth, and to be able to bring back to his home and his
peers some honorable recollections of military life; but his principal
object is not to obtain by that profession either property, distinction,
or power, for he possesses these advantages in his own right, and enjoys
them without leaving his home.

In democratic armies all the soldiers may become officers, which makes
the desire of promotion general, and immeasurably extends the bounds
of military ambition. The officer, on his part, sees nothing which
naturally and necessarily stops him at one grade more than at another;
and each grade has immense importance in his eyes, because his rank
in society almost always depends on his rank in the army. Amongst
democratic nations it often happens that an officer has no property but
his pay, and no distinction but that of military honors: consequently as
often as his duties change, his fortune changes, and he becomes, as
it were, a new man. What was only an appendage to his position in
aristocratic armies, has thus become the main point, the basis of his
whole condition. Under the old French monarchy officers were always
called by their titles of nobility; they are now always called by
the title of their military rank. This little change in the forms of
language suffices to show that a great revolution has taken place in the
constitution of society and in that of the army. In democratic armies
the desire of advancement is almost universal: it is ardent,
tenacious, perpetual; it is strengthened by all other desires, and only
extinguished with life itself. But it is easy to see, that of all armies
in the world, those in which advancement must be slowest in time
of peace are the armies of democratic countries. As the number of
commissions is naturally limited, whilst the number of competitors is
almost unlimited, and as the strict law of equality is over all alike,
none can make rapid progress--many can make no progress at all. Thus the
desire of advancement is greater, and the opportunities of advancement
fewer, there than elsewhere. All the ambitious spirits of a democratic
army are consequently ardently desirous of war, because war makes
vacancies, and warrants the violation of that law of seniority which is
the sole privilege natural to democracy.

We thus arrive at this singular consequence, that of all armies those
most ardently desirous of war are democratic armies, and of all nations
those most fond of peace are democratic nations: and, what makes these
facts still more extraordinary, is that these contrary effects are
produced at the same time by the principle of equality.

All the members of the community, being alike, constantly harbor the
wish, and discover the possibility, of changing their condition and
improving their welfare: this makes them fond of peace, which is
favorable to industry, and allows every man to pursue his own little
undertakings to their completion. On the other hand, this same equality
makes soldiers dream of fields of battle, by increasing the value of
military honors in the eyes of those who follow the profession of arms,
and by rendering those honors accessible to all. In either case
the inquietude of the heart is the same, the taste for enjoyment as
insatiable, the ambition of success as great--the means of gratifying it
are alone different.

These opposite tendencies of the nation and the army expose democratic
communities to great dangers. When a military spirit forsakes a people,
the profession of arms immediately ceases to be held in honor, and
military men fall to the lowest rank of the public servants: they are
little esteemed, and no longer understood. The reverse of what takes
place in aristocratic ages then occurs; the men who enter the army
are no longer those of the highest, but of the lowest rank. Military
ambition is only indulged in when no other is possible. Hence arises a
circle of cause and consequence from which it is difficult to escape:
the best part of the nation shuns the military profession because that
profession is not honored, and the profession is not honored because the
best part of the nation has ceased to follow it. It is then no matter
of surprise that democratic armies are often restless, ill-tempered,
and dissatisfied with their lot, although their physical condition is
commonly far better, and their discipline less strict than in other
countries. The soldier feels that he occupies an inferior position,
and his wounded pride either stimulates his taste for hostilities
which would render his services necessary, or gives him a turn for
revolutions, during which he may hope to win by force of arms the
political influence and personal importance now denied him. The
composition of democratic armies makes this last-mentioned danger
much to be feared. In democratic communities almost every man has some
property to preserve; but democratic armies are generally led by men
without property, most of whom have little to lose in civil broils. The
bulk of the nation is naturally much more afraid of revolutions than in
the ages of aristocracy, but the leaders of the army much less so.

Moreover, as amongst democratic nations (to repeat what I have just
remarked) the wealthiest, the best educated, and the most able men
seldom adopt the military profession, the army, taken collectively,
eventually forms a small nation by itself, where the mind is less
enlarged, and habits are more rude than in the nation at large. Now,
this small uncivilized nation has arms in its possession, and alone
knows how to use them: for, indeed, the pacific temper of the community
increases the danger to which a democratic people is exposed from the
military and turbulent spirit of the army. Nothing is so dangerous as
an army amidst an unwarlike nation; the excessive love of the whole
community for quiet continually puts its constitution at the mercy of
the soldiery. It may therefore be asserted, generally speaking, that if
democratic nations are naturally prone to peace from their interests and
their propensities, they are constantly drawn to war and revolutions
by their armies. Military revolutions, which are scarcely ever to
be apprehended in aristocracies, are always to be dreaded amongst
democratic nations. These perils must be reckoned amongst the most
formidable which beset their future fate, and the attention of statesmen
should be sedulously applied to find a remedy for the evil.

When a nation perceives that it is inwardly affected by the restless
ambition of its army, the first thought which occurs is to give this
inconvenient ambition an object by going to war. I speak no ill of
war: war almost always enlarges the mind of a people, and raises their
character. In some cases it is the only check to the excessive growth
of certain propensities which naturally spring out of the equality
of conditions, and it must be considered as a necessary corrective to
certain inveterate diseases to which democratic communities are liable.
War has great advantages, but we must not flatter ourselves that it
can diminish the danger I have just pointed out. That peril is only
suspended by it, to return more fiercely when the war is over; for
armies are much more impatient of peace after having tasted military
exploits. War could only be a remedy for a people which should always be
athirst for military glory. I foresee that all the military rulers who
may rise up in great democratic nations, will find it easier to conquer
with their armies, than to make their armies live at peace after
conquest. There are two things which a democratic people will always
find very difficult--to begin a war, and to end it.

Again, if war has some peculiar advantages for democratic nations, on
the other hand it exposes them to certain dangers which aristocracies
have no cause to dread to an equal extent. I shall only point out two
of these. Although war gratifies the army, it embarrasses and often
exasperates that countless multitude of men whose minor passions every
day require peace in order to be satisfied. Thus there is some risk
of its causing, under another form, the disturbance it is intended
to prevent. No protracted war can fail to endanger the freedom of a
democratic country. Not indeed that after every victory it is to be
apprehended that the victorious generals will possess themselves by
force of the supreme power, after the manner of Sylla and Caesar: the
danger is of another kind. War does not always give over democratic
communities to military government, but it must invariably and
immeasurably increase the powers of civil government; it must almost
compulsorily concentrate the direction of all men and the management
of all things in the hands of the administration. If it lead not to
despotism by sudden violence, it prepares men for it more gently
by their habits. All those who seek to destroy the liberties of a
democratic nation ought to know that war is the surest and the shortest
means to accomplish it. This is the first axiom of the science.

One remedy, which appears to be obvious when the ambition of soldiers
and officers becomes the subject of alarm, is to augment the number
of commissions to be distributed by increasing the army. This affords
temporary relief, but it plunges the country into deeper difficulties at
some future period. To increase the army may produce a lasting effect in
an aristocratic community, because military ambition is there confined
to one class of men, and the ambition of each individual stops, as it
were, at a certain limit; so that it may be possible to satisfy all who
feel its influence. But nothing is gained by increasing the army amongst
a democratic people, because the number of aspirants always rises in
exactly the same ratio as the army itself. Those whose claims have been
satisfied by the creation of new commissions are instantly succeeded by
a fresh multitude beyond all power of satisfaction; and even those who
were but now satisfied soon begin to crave more advancement; for the
same excitement prevails in the ranks of the army as in the civil
classes of democratic society, and what men want is not to reach a
certain grade, but to have constant promotion. Though these wants may
not be very vast, they are perpetually recurring. Thus a democratic
nation, by augmenting its army, only allays for a time the ambition
of the military profession, which soon becomes even more formidable,
because the number of those who feel it is increased. I am of opinion
that a restless and turbulent spirit is an evil inherent in the
very constitution of democratic armies, and beyond hope of cure. The
legislators of democracies must not expect to devise any military
organization capable by its influence of calming and restraining the
military profession: their efforts would exhaust their powers, before
the object is attained.

The remedy for the vices of the army is not to be found in the army
itself, but in the country. Democratic nations are naturally afraid
of disturbance and of despotism; the object is to turn these natural
instincts into well-digested, deliberate, and lasting tastes. When men
have at last learned to make a peaceful and profitable use of freedom,
and have felt its blessings--when they have conceived a manly love of
order, and have freely submitted themselves to discipline--these same
men, if they follow the profession of arms, bring into it, unconsciously
and almost against their will, these same habits and manners. The
general spirit of the nation being infused into the spirit peculiar to
the army, tempers the opinions and desires engendered by military life,
or represses them by the mighty force of public opinion. Teach but the
citizens to be educated, orderly, firm, and free, the soldiers will be
disciplined and obedient. Any law which, in repressing the turbulent
spirit of the army, should tend to diminish the spirit of freedom in the
nation, and to overshadow the notion of law and right, would defeat
its object: it would do much more to favor, than to defeat, the
establishment of military tyranny.

After all, and in spite of all precautions, a large army amidst a
democratic people will always be a source of great danger; the most
effectual means of diminishing that danger would be to reduce the army,
but this is a remedy which all nations have it not in their power to
use.




Chapter XXIII: Which Is The Most Warlike And Most Revolutionary Class In
Democratic Armies?

It is a part of the essence of a democratic army to be very numerous in
proportion to the people to which it belongs, as I shall hereafter
show. On the other hand, men living in democratic times seldom choose a
military life. Democratic nations are therefore soon led to give up the
system of voluntary recruiting for that of compulsory enlistment. The
necessity of their social condition compels them to resort to the latter
means, and it may easily be foreseen that they will all eventually adopt
it. When military service is compulsory, the burden is indiscriminately
and equally borne by the whole community. This is another necessary
consequence of the social condition of these nations, and of their
notions. The government may do almost whatever it pleases, provided it
appeals to the whole community at once: it is the unequal distribution
of the weight, not the weight itself, which commonly occasions
resistance. But as military service is common to all the citizens, the
evident consequence is that each of them remains but for a few years
on active duty. Thus it is in the nature of things that the soldier in
democracies only passes through the army, whilst among most aristocratic
nations the military profession is one which the soldier adopts, or
which is imposed upon him, for life.

This has important consequences. Amongst the soldiers of a democratic
army, some acquire a taste for military life, but the majority, being
enlisted against their will, and ever ready to go back to their
homes, do not consider themselves as seriously engaged in the military
profession, and are always thinking of quitting it. Such men do not
contract the wants, and only half partake in the passions, which that
mode of life engenders. They adapt themselves to their military duties,
but their minds are still attached to the interests and the duties which
engaged them in civil life. They do not therefore imbibe the spirit of
the army--or rather, they infuse the spirit of the community at large
into the army, and retain it there. Amongst democratic nations the
private soldiers remain most like civilians: upon them the habits of the
nation have the firmest hold, and public opinion most influence. It is
by the instrumentality of the private soldiers especially that it may
be possible to infuse into a democratic army the love of freedom and
the respect of rights, if these principles have once been successfully
inculcated on the people at large. The reverse happens amongst
aristocratic nations, where the soldiery have eventually nothing in
common with their fellow-citizens, and where they live amongst them as
strangers, and often as enemies. In aristocratic armies the officers
are the conservative element, because the officers alone have retained a
strict connection with civil society, and never forego their purpose
of resuming their place in it sooner or later: in democratic armies the
private soldiers stand in this position, and from the same cause.

It often happens, on the contrary, that in these same democratic armies
the officers contract tastes and wants wholly distinct from those of
the nation--a fact which may be thus accounted for. Amongst democratic
nations, the man who becomes an officer severs all the ties which bound
him to civil life; he leaves it forever; he has no interest to resume
it. His true country is the army, since he owes all he has to the rank
he has attained in it; he therefore follows the fortunes of the army,
rises or sinks with it, and henceforward directs all his hopes to that
quarter only. As the wants of an officer are distinct from those of the
country, he may perhaps ardently desire war, or labor to bring about
a revolution at the very moment when the nation is most desirous of
stability and peace. There are, nevertheless, some causes which allay
this restless and warlike spirit. Though ambition is universal and
continual amongst democratic nations, we have seen that it is seldom
great. A man who, being born in the lower classes of the community, has
risen from the ranks to be an officer, has already taken a prodigious
step. He has gained a footing in a sphere above that which he filled
in civil life, and he has acquired rights which most democratic nations
will ever consider as inalienable. *a He is willing to pause after so
great an effort, and to enjoy what he has won. The fear of risking what
he has already obtained damps the desire of acquiring what he has not
got. Having conquered the first and greatest impediment which opposed
his advancement, he resigns himself with less impatience to the slowness
of his progress. His ambition will be more and more cooled in proportion
as the increasing distinction of his rank teaches him that he has more
to put in jeopardy. If I am not mistaken, the least warlike, and also
the least revolutionary part, of a democratic army, will always be its
chief commanders. [Footnote a: The position of officers is indeed much
more secure amongst democratic nations than elsewhere; the lower the
personal standing of the man, the greater is the comparative importance
of his military grade, and the more just and necessary is it that the
enjoyment of that rank should be secured by the laws.]

But the remarks I have just made on officers and soldiers are
not applicable to a numerous class which in all armies fills the
intermediate space between them--I mean the class of non-commissioned
officers. This class of non-commissioned officers which have never acted
a part in history until the present century, is henceforward destined,
I think, to play one of some importance. Like the officers,
non-commissioned officers have broken, in their minds, all the ties
which bound them to civil life; like the former, they devote themselves
permanently to the service, and perhaps make it even more exclusively
the object of all their desires: but non-commissioned officers are men
who have not yet reached a firm and lofty post at which they may pause
and breathe more freely, ere they can attain further promotion. By
the very nature of his duties, which is invariable, a non-commissioned
officer is doomed to lead an obscure, confined, comfortless, and
precarious existence; as yet he sees nothing of military life but its
dangers; he knows nothing but its privations and its discipline--more
difficult to support than dangers: he suffers the more from his present
miseries, from knowing that the constitution of society and of the army
allow him to rise above them; he may, indeed, at any time obtain his
commission, and enter at once upon command, honors, independence,
rights, and enjoyments. Not only does this object of his hopes appear to
him of immense importance, but he is never sure of reaching it till it
is actually his own; the grade he fills is by no means irrevocable; he
is always entirely abandoned to the arbitrary pleasure of his
commanding officer, for this is imperiously required by the necessity of
discipline: a slight fault, a whim, may always deprive him in an instant
of the fruits of many years of toil and endeavor; until he has reached
the grade to which he aspires he has accomplished nothing; not till he
reaches that grade does his career seem to begin. A desperate ambition
cannot fail to be kindled in a man thus incessantly goaded on by his
youth, his wants, his passions, the spirit of his age, his hopes,
and his age, his hopes, and his fears. Non-commissioned officers are
therefore bent on war--on war always, and at any cost; but if war be
denied them, then they desire revolutions to suspend the authority
of established regulations, and to enable them, aided by the general
confusion and the political passions of the time, to get rid of their
superior officers and to take their places. Nor is it impossible for
them to bring about such a crisis, because their common origin and
habits give them much influence over the soldiers, however different may
be their passions and their desires.

It would be an error to suppose that these various characteristics of
officers, non-commissioned officers, and men, belong to any particular
time or country; they will always occur at all times, and amongst
all democratic nations. In every democratic army the non-commissioned
officers will be the worst representatives of the pacific and orderly
spirit of the country, and the private soldiers will be the best. The
latter will carry with them into military life the strength or weakness
of the manners of the nation; they will display a faithful reflection of
the community: if that community is ignorant and weak, they will allow
themselves to be drawn by their leaders into disturbances, either
unconsciously or against their will; if it is enlightened and energetic,
the community will itself keep them within the bounds of order.




Chapter XXIV: Causes Which Render Democratic Armies Weaker Than Other
Armies At The Outset Of A Campaign, And More Formidable In Protracted
Warfare

Any army is in danger of being conquered at the outset of a campaign,
after a long peace; any army which has long been engaged in warfare
has strong chances of victory: this truth is peculiarly applicable to
democratic armies. In aristocracies the military profession, being a
privileged career, is held in honor even in time of peace. Men of great
talents, great attainments, and great ambition embrace it; the army is
in all respects on a level with the nation, and frequently above it. We
have seen, on the contrary, that amongst a democratic people the
choicer minds of the nation are gradually drawn away from the military
profession, to seek by other paths, distinction, power, and especially
wealth. After a long peace--and in democratic ages the periods of peace
are long--the army is always inferior to the country itself. In this
state it is called into active service; and until war has altered it,
there is danger for the country as well as for the army.

I have shown that in democratic armies, and in time of peace, the rule
of seniority is the supreme and inflexible law of advancement. This is
not only a consequence, as I have before observed, of the constitution
of these armies, but of the constitution of the people, and it will
always occur. Again, as amongst these nations the officer derives his
position in the country solely from his position in the army, and as
he draws all the distinction and the competency he enjoys from the
same source, he does not retire from his profession, or is not
super-annuated, till towards the extreme close of life. The consequence
of these two causes is, that when a democratic people goes to war after
a long interval of peace all the leading officers of the army are old
men. I speak not only of the generals, but of the non-commissioned
officers, who have most of them been stationary, or have only advanced
step by step. It may be remarked with surprise, that in a democratic
army after a long peace all the soldiers are mere boys, and all the
superior officers in declining years; so that the former are wanting in
experience, the latter in vigor. This is a strong element of defeat,
for the first condition of successful generalship is youth: I should not
have ventured to say so if the greatest captain of modern times had not
made the observation. These two causes do not act in the same manner
upon aristocratic armies: as men are promoted in them by right of birth
much more than by right of seniority, there are in all ranks a certain
number of young men, who bring to their profession all the early vigor
of body and mind. Again, as the men who seek for military honors amongst
an aristocratic people, enjoy a settled position in civil society, they
seldom continue in the army until old age overtakes them. After having
devoted the most vigorous years of youth to the career of arms, they
voluntarily retire, and spend at home the remainder of their maturer
years.

A long peace not only fills democratic armies with elderly officers,
but it also gives to all the officers habits both of body and mind which
render them unfit for actual service. The man who has long lived amidst
the calm and lukewarm atmosphere of democratic manners can at first ill
adapt himself to the harder toils and sterner duties of warfare; and if
he has not absolutely lost the taste for arms, at least he has assumed a
mode of life which unfits him for conquest.

Amongst aristocratic nations, the ease of civil life exercises less
influence on the manners of the army, because amongst those nations the
aristocracy commands the army: and an aristocracy, however plunged in
luxurious pleasures, has always many other passions besides that of
its own well-being, and to satisfy those passions more thoroughly its
well-being will be readily sacrificed. *a

[Footnote a: See Appendix V.]

I have shown that in democratic armies, in time of peace, promotion is
extremely slow. The officers at first support this state of things with
impatience, they grow excited, restless, exasperated, but in the end
most of them make up their minds to it. Those who have the largest
share of ambition and of resources quit the army; others, adapting their
tastes and their desires to their scanty fortunes, ultimately look upon
the military profession in a civil point of view. The quality they value
most in it is the competency and security which attend it: their whole
notion of the future rests upon the certainty of this little provision,
and all they require is peaceably to enjoy it. Thus not only does a long
peace fill an army with old men, but it is frequently imparts the views
of old men to those who are still in the prime of life.

I have also shown that amongst democratic nations in time of peace the
military profession is held in little honor and indifferently followed.
This want of public favor is a heavy discouragement to the army; it
weighs down the minds of the troops, and when war breaks out at last,
they cannot immediately resume their spring and vigor. No similar cause
of moral weakness occurs in aristocratic armies: there the officers are
never lowered either in their own eyes or in those of their countrymen,
because, independently of their military greatness, they are personally
great. But even if the influence of peace operated on the two kinds of
armies in the same manner, the results would still be different. When
the officers of an aristocratic army have lost their warlike spirit and
the desire of raising themselves by service, they still retain a certain
respect for the honor of their class, and an old habit of being foremost
to set an example. But when the officers of a democratic army have
no longer the love of war and the ambition of arms, nothing whatever
remains to them.

I am therefore of opinion that, when a democratic people engages in
a war after a long peace, it incurs much more risk of defeat than any
other nation; but it ought not easily to be cast down by its reverses,
for the chances of success for such an army are increased by the
duration of the war. When a war has at length, by its long continuance,
roused the whole community from their peaceful occupations and ruined
their minor undertakings, the same passions which made them attach so
much importance to the maintenance of peace will be turned to arms.
War, after it has destroyed all modes of speculation, becomes itself
the great and sole speculation, to which all the ardent and ambitious
desires which equality engenders are exclusively directed. Hence it is
that the selfsame democratic nations which are so reluctant to engage
in hostilities, sometimes perform prodigious achievements when once
they have taken the field. As the war attracts more and more of public
attention, and is seen to create high reputations and great fortunes
in a short space of time, the choicest spirits of the nation enter the
military profession: all the enterprising, proud, and martial minds, no
longer of the aristocracy solely, but of the whole country, are drawn
in this direction. As the number of competitors for military honors is
immense, and war drives every man to his proper level, great generals
are always sure to spring up. A long war produces upon a democratic army
the same effects that a revolution produces upon a people; it breaks
through regulations, and allows extraordinary men to rise above the
common level. Those officers whose bodies and minds have grown old in
peace, are removed, or superannuated, or they die. In their stead a host
of young men are pressing on, whose frames are already hardened, whose
desires are extended and inflamed by active service. They are bent on
advancement at all hazards, and perpetual advancement; they are followed
by others with the same passions and desires, and after these are
others yet unlimited by aught but the size of the army. The principle of
equality opens the door of ambition to all, and death provides chances
for ambition. Death is constantly thinning the ranks, making vacancies,
closing and opening the career of arms.

There is moreover a secret connection between the military character
and the character of democracies, which war brings to light. The men of
democracies are naturally passionately eager to acquire what they covet,
and to enjoy it on easy conditions. They for the most part worship
chance, and are much less afraid of death than of difficulty. This is
the spirit which they bring to commerce and manufactures; and this same
spirit, carried with them to the field of battle, induces them willingly
to expose their lives in order to secure in a moment the rewards of
victory. No kind of greatness is more pleasing to the imagination of
a democratic people than military greatness--a greatness of vivid and
sudden lustre, obtained without toil, by nothing but the risk of life.
Thus, whilst the interests and the tastes of the members of a democratic
community divert them from war, their habits of mind fit them for
carrying on war well; they soon make good soldiers, when they are roused
from their business and their enjoyments. If peace is peculiarly hurtful
to democratic armies, war secures to them advantages which no other
armies ever possess; and these advantages, however little felt at first,
cannot fail in the end to give them the victory. An aristocratic nation,
which in a contest with a democratic people does not succeed in ruining
the latter at the outset of the war, always runs a great risk of being
conquered by it.




Chapter XXV: Of Discipline In Democratic Armies

It is a very general opinion, especially in aristocratic countries,
that the great social equality which prevails in democracies ultimately
renders the private soldier independent of the officer, and thus
destroys the bond of discipline. This is a mistake, for there are two
kinds of discipline, which it is important not to confound. When the
officer is noble and the soldier a serf--one rich, the other poor--the
former educated and strong, the latter ignorant and weak--the strictest
bond of obedience may easily be established between the two men. The
soldier is broken in to military discipline, as it were, before he
enters the army; or rather, military discipline is nothing but an
enhancement of social servitude. In aristocratic armies the soldier
will soon become insensible to everything but the orders of his superior
officers; he acts without reflection, triumphs without enthusiasm, and
dies without complaint: in this state he is no longer a man, but he is
still a most formidable animal trained for war.

A democratic people must despair of ever obtaining from soldiers
that blind, minute, submissive, and invariable obedience which an
aristocratic people may impose on them without difficulty. The state of
society does not prepare them for it, and the nation might be in danger
of losing its natural advantages if it sought artificially to acquire
advantages of this particular kind. Amongst democratic communities,
military discipline ought not to attempt to annihilate the free spring
of the faculties; all that can be done by discipline is to direct it;
the obedience thus inculcated is less exact, but it is more eager and
more intelligent. It has its root in the will of him who obeys: it rests
not only on his instinct, but on his reason; and consequently it will
often spontaneously become more strict as danger requires it. The
discipline of an aristocratic army is apt to be relaxed in war, because
that discipline is founded upon habits, and war disturbs those habits.
The discipline of a democratic army on the contrary is strengthened in
sight of the enemy, because every soldier then clearly perceives that he
must be silent and obedient in order to conquer.

The nations which have performed the greatest warlike achievements knew
no other discipline than that which I speak of. Amongst the ancients
none were admitted into the armies but freemen and citizens, who
differed but little from one another, and were accustomed to treat
each other as equals. In this respect it may be said that the armies
of antiquity were democratic, although they came out of the bosom
of aristocracy; the consequence was that in those armies a sort of
fraternal familiarity prevailed between the officers and the men.
Plutarch's lives of great commanders furnish convincing instances of the
fact: the soldiers were in the constant habit of freely addressing their
general, and the general listened to and answered whatever the soldiers
had to say: they were kept in order by language and by example, far
more than by constraint or punishment; the general was as much their
companion as their chief. I know not whether the soldiers of Greece and
Rome ever carried the minutiae of military discipline to the same
degree of perfection as the Russians have done; but this did not prevent
Alexander from conquering Asia--and Rome, the world.




Chapter XXVI: Some Considerations On War In Democratic Communities

When the principle of equality is in growth, not only amongst a single
nation, but amongst several neighboring nations at the same time, as is
now the case in Europe, the inhabitants of these different countries,
notwithstanding the dissimilarity of language, of customs, and of laws,
nevertheless resemble each other in their equal dread of war and their
common love of peace. *a It is in vain that ambition or anger puts arms
in the hands of princes; they are appeased in spite of themselves by a
species of general apathy and goodwill, which makes the sword drop
from their grasp, and wars become more rare. As the spread of equality,
taking place in several countries at once, simultaneously impels their
various inhabitants to follow manufactures and commerce, not only do
their tastes grow alike, but their interests are so mixed and entangled
with one another that no nation can inflict evils on other nations
without those evils falling back upon itself; and all nations ultimately
regard war as a calamity, almost as severe to the conqueror as to
the conquered. Thus, on the one hand, it is extremely difficult in
democratic ages to draw nations into hostilities; but on the other hand,
it is almost impossible that any two of them should go to war without
embroiling the rest. The interests of all are so interlaced, their
opinions and their wants so much alike, that none can remain quiet when
the others stir. Wars therefore become more rare, but when they break
out they spread over a larger field. Neighboring democratic nations not
only become alike in some respects, but they eventually grow to resemble
each other in almost all. *b This similitude of nations has consequences
of great importance in relation to war.

[Footnote a: It is scarcely necessary for me to observe that the dread
of war displayed by the nations of Europe is not solely attributable
to the progress made by the principle of equality amongst them;
independently of this permanent cause several other accidental causes of
great weight might be pointed out, and I may mention before all the rest
the extreme lassitude which the wars of the Revolution and the Empire
have left behind them.]

[Footnote b: This is not only because these nations have the same social
condition, but it arises from the very nature of that social condition
which leads men to imitate and identify themselves with each other. When
the members of a community are divided into castes and classes, they not
only differ from one another, but they have no taste and no desire to be
alike; on the contrary, everyone endeavors, more and more, to keep his
own opinions undisturbed, to retain his own peculiar habits, and to
remain himself. The characteristics of individuals are very strongly
marked. When the state of society amongst a people is democratic--that
is to say, when there are no longer any castes or classes in the
community, and all its members are nearly equal in education and in
property--the human mind follows the opposite direction. Men are much
alike, and they are annoyed, as it were, by any deviation from that
likeness: far from seeking to preserve their own distinguishing
singularities, they endeavor to shake them off, in order to identify
themselves with the general mass of the people, which is the sole
representative of right and of might to their eyes. The characteristics
of individuals are nearly obliterated. In the ages of aristocracy even
those who are naturally alike strive to create imaginary differences
between themselves: in the ages of democracy even those who are not
alike seek only to become so, and to copy each other--so strongly is the
mind of every man always carried away by the general impulse of mankind.
Something of the same kind may be observed between nations: two nations
having the same aristocratic social condition, might remain thoroughly
distinct and extremely different, because the spirit of aristocracy
is to retain strong individual characteristics; but if two neighboring
nations have the same democratic social condition, they cannot fail
to adopt similar opinions and manners, because the spirit of democracy
tends to assimilate men to each other.]

If I inquire why it is that the Helvetic Confederacy made the greatest
and most powerful nations of Europe tremble in the fifteenth century,
whilst at the present day the power of that country is exactly
proportioned to its population, I perceive that the Swiss are become
like all the surrounding communities, and those surrounding communities
like the Swiss: so that as numerical strength now forms the only
difference between them, victory necessarily attends the largest army.
Thus one of the consequences of the democratic revolution which is going
on in Europe is to make numerical strength preponderate on all fields
of battle, and to constrain all small nations to incorporate themselves
with large States, or at least to adopt the policy of the latter. As
numbers are the determining cause of victory, each people ought of
course to strive by all the means in its power to bring the greatest
possible number of men into the field. When it was possible to enlist a
kind of troops superior to all others, such as the Swiss infantry or the
French horse of the sixteenth century, it was not thought necessary to
raise very large armies; but the case is altered when one soldier is as
efficient as another.

The same cause which begets this new want also supplies means of
satisfying it; for, as I have already observed, when men are all alike,
they are all weak, and the supreme power of the State is naturally much
stronger amongst democratic nations than elsewhere. Hence, whilst these
nations are desirous of enrolling the whole male population in the
ranks of the army, they have the power of effecting this object: the
consequence is, that in democratic ages armies seem to grow larger
in proportion as the love of war declines. In the same ages, too,
the manner of carrying on war is likewise altered by the same causes.
Machiavelli observes in "The Prince," "that it is much more difficult to
subdue a people which has a prince and his barons for its leaders,
than a nation which is commanded by a prince and his slaves." To avoid
offence, let us read public functionaries for slaves, and this important
truth will be strictly applicable to our own time.

A great aristocratic people cannot either conquer its neighbors, or be
conquered by them, without great difficulty. It cannot conquer them,
because all its forces can never be collected and held together for a
considerable period: it cannot be conquered, because an enemy meets at
every step small centres of resistance by which invasion is arrested.
War against an aristocracy may be compared to war in a mountainous
country; the defeated party has constant opportunities of rallying its
forces to make a stand in a new position. Exactly the reverse occurs
amongst democratic nations: they easily bring their whole disposable
force into the field, and when the nation is wealthy and populous it
soon becomes victorious; but if ever it is conquered, and its territory
invaded, it has few resources at command; and if the enemy takes the
capital, the nation is lost. This may very well be explained: as
each member of the community is individually isolated and extremely
powerless, no one of the whole body can either defend himself or present
a rallying point to others. Nothing is strong in a democratic country
except the State; as the military strength of the State is destroyed
by the destruction of the army, and its civil power paralyzed by the
capture of the chief city, all that remains is only a multitude without
strength or government, unable to resist the organized power by which it
is assailed. I am aware that this danger may be lessened by the creation
of provincial liberties, and consequently of provincial powers, but this
remedy will always be insufficient. For after such a catastrophe, not
only is the population unable to carry on hostilities, but it may be
apprehended that they will not be inclined to attempt it. In accordance
with the law of nations adopted in civilized countries, the object of
wars is not to seize the property of private individuals, but simply to
get possession of political power. The destruction of private property
is only occasionally resorted to for the purpose of attaining the latter
object. When an aristocratic country is invaded after the defeat of
its army, the nobles, although they are at the same time the
wealthiest members of the community, will continue to defend themselves
individually rather than submit; for if the conqueror remained master
of the country, he would deprive them of their political power, to which
they cling even more closely than to their property. They therefore
prefer fighting to subjection, which is to them the greatest of all
misfortunes; and they readily carry the people along with them because
the people has long been used to follow and obey them, and besides has
but little to risk in the war. Amongst a nation in which equality of
conditions prevails, each citizen, on the contrary, has but slender
share of political power, and often has no share at all; on the other
hand, all are independent, and all have something to lose; so that they
are much less afraid of being conquered, and much more afraid of war,
than an aristocratic people. It will always be extremely difficult to
decide a democratic population to take up arms, when hostilities have
reached its own territory. Hence the necessity of giving to such a
people the rights and the political character which may impart to every
citizen some of those interests that cause the nobles to act for the
public welfare in aristocratic countries.

It should never be forgotten by the princes and other leaders of
democratic nations, that nothing but the passion and the habit of
freedom can maintain an advantageous contest with the passion and the
habit of physical well-being. I can conceive nothing better prepared
for subjection, in case of defeat, than a democratic people without free
institutions.

Formerly it was customary to take the field with a small body of troops,
to fight in small engagements, and to make long, regular sieges: modern
tactics consist in fighting decisive battles, and, as soon as a line
of march is open before the army, in rushing upon the capital city, in
order to terminate the war at a single blow. Napoleon, it is said, was
the inventor of this new system; but the invention of such a system did
not depend on any individual man, whoever he might be. The mode in which
Napoleon carried on war was suggested to him by the state of society in
his time; that mode was successful, because it was eminently adapted
to that state of society, and because he was the first to employ it.
Napoleon was the first commander who marched at the head of an army
from capital to capital, but the road was opened for him by the ruin of
feudal society. It may fairly be believed that, if that extraordinary
man had been born three hundred years ago, he would not have derived the
same results from his method of warfare, or, rather, that he would have
had a different method.

I shall add but a few words on civil wars, for fear of exhausting the
patience of the reader. Most of the remarks which I have made respecting
foreign wars are applicable a fortiori to civil wars. Men living in
democracies are not naturally prone to the military character; they
sometimes assume it, when they have been dragged by compulsion to the
field; but to rise in a body and voluntarily to expose themselves to the
horrors of war, and especially of civil war, is a course which the
men of democracies are not apt to adopt. None but the most adventurous
members of the community consent to run into such risks; the bulk of the
population remains motionless. But even if the population were inclined
to act, considerable obstacles would stand in their way; for they can
resort to no old and well-established influence which they are willing
to obey--no well-known leaders to rally the discontented, as well as
to discipline and to lead them--no political powers subordinate to the
supreme power of the nation, which afford an effectual support to the
resistance directed against the government. In democratic countries the
moral power of the majority is immense, and the physical resources
which it has at its command are out of all proportion to the physical
resources which may be combined against it. Therefore the party which
occupies the seat of the majority, which speaks in its name and wields
its power, triumphs instantaneously and irresistibly over all private
resistance; it does not even give such opposition time to exist,
but nips it in the bud. Those who in such nations seek to effect a
revolution by force of arms have no other resource than suddenly to
seize upon the whole engine of government as it stands, which can
better be done by a single blow than by a war; for as soon as there is
a regular war, the party which represents the State is always certain to
conquer. The only case in which a civil war could arise is, if the army
should divide itself into two factions, the one raising the standard
of rebellion, the other remaining true to its allegiance. An army
constitutes a small community, very closely united together, endowed
with great powers of vitality, and able to supply its own wants for some
time. Such a war might be bloody, but it could not be long; for either
the rebellious army would gain over the government by the sole display
of its resources, or by its first victory, and then the war would be
over; or the struggle would take place, and then that portion of the
army which should not be supported by the organized powers of the State
would speedily either disband itself or be destroyed. It may therefore
be admitted as a general truth, that in ages of equality civil wars will
become much less frequent and less protracted. *c

[Footnote c: It should be borne in mind that I speak here of sovereign
and independent democratic nations, not of confederate democracies; in
confederacies, as the preponderating power always resides, in spite of
all political fictions, in the state governments, and not in the
federal government, civil wars are in fact nothing but foreign wars in
disguise.]




Book Four: Influence Of Democratic Opinions On Political Society




Chapter I: That Equality Naturally Gives Men A Taste For Free
Institutions

I should imperfectly fulfil the purpose of this book, if, after having
shown what opinions and sentiments are suggested by the principle of
equality, I did not point out, ere I conclude, the general influence
which these same opinions and sentiments may exercise upon the
government of human societies. To succeed in this object I shall
frequently have to retrace my steps; but I trust the reader will not
refuse to follow me through paths already known to him, which may lead
to some new truth.

The principle of equality, which makes men independent of each other,
gives them a habit and a taste for following, in their private actions,
no other guide but their own will. This complete independence, which
they constantly enjoy towards their equals and in the intercourse of
private life, tends to make them look upon all authority with a jealous
eye, and speedily suggests to them the notion and the love of
political freedom. Men living at such times have a natural bias to free
institutions. Take any one of them at a venture, and search if you can
his most deep-seated instincts; you will find that of all governments he
will soonest conceive and most highly value that government, whose head
he has himself elected, and whose administration he may control. Of all
the political effects produced by the equality of conditions, this love
of independence is the first to strike the observing, and to alarm the
timid; nor can it be said that their alarm is wholly misplaced, for
anarchy has a more formidable aspect in democratic countries than
elsewhere. As the citizens have no direct influence on each other, as
soon as the supreme power of the nation fails, which kept them all in
their several stations, it would seem that disorder must instantly
reach its utmost pitch, and that, every man drawing aside in a different
direction, the fabric of society must at once crumble away.

I am, however, persuaded that anarchy is not the principal evil which
democratic ages have to fear, but the least. For the principle
of equality begets two tendencies; the one leads men straight to
independence, and may suddenly drive them into anarchy; the other
conducts them by a longer, more secret, but more certain road, to
servitude. Nations readily discern the former tendency, and are prepared
to resist it; they are led away by the latter, without perceiving its
drift; hence it is peculiarly important to point it out. For myself, I
am so far from urging as a reproach to the principle of equality that it
renders men untractable, that this very circumstance principally calls
forth my approbation. I admire to see how it deposits in the mind
and heart of man the dim conception and instinctive love of political
independence, thus preparing the remedy for the evil which it engenders;
it is on this very account that I am attached to it.




Chapter II: That The Notions Of Democratic Nations On Government Are
Naturally Favorable To The Concentration Of Power

The notion of secondary powers, placed between the sovereign and his
subjects, occurred naturally to the imagination of aristocratic nations,
because those communities contained individuals or families raised above
the common level, and apparently destined to command by their birth,
their education, and their wealth. This same notion is naturally wanting
in the minds of men in democratic ages, for converse reasons: it
can only be introduced artificially, it can only be kept there with
difficulty; whereas they conceive, as it were, without thinking upon the
subject, the notion of a sole and central power which governs the whole
community by its direct influence. Moreover in politics, as well as
in philosophy and in religion, the intellect of democratic nations is
peculiarly open to simple and general notions. Complicated systems are
repugnant to it, and its favorite conception is that of a great nation
composed of citizens all resembling the same pattern, and all governed
by a single power.

The very next notion to that of a sole and central power, which presents
itself to the minds of men in the ages of equality, is the notion of
uniformity of legislation. As every man sees that he differs but
little from those about him, he cannot understand why a rule which is
applicable to one man should not be equally applicable to all others.
Hence the slightest privileges are repugnant to his reason; the faintest
dissimilarities in the political institutions of the same people offend
him, and uniformity of legislation appears to him to be the first
condition of good government. I find, on the contrary, that this same
notion of a uniform rule, equally binding on all the members of the
community, was almost unknown to the human mind in aristocratic ages;
it was either never entertained, or it was rejected. These contrary
tendencies of opinion ultimately turn on either side to such blind
instincts and such ungovernable habits that they still direct the
actions of men, in spite of particular exceptions. Notwithstanding the
immense variety of conditions in the Middle Ages, a certain number of
persons existed at that period in precisely similar circumstances; but
this did not prevent the laws then in force from assigning to each
of them distinct duties and different rights. On the contrary, at the
present time all the powers of government are exerted to impose the
same customs and the same laws on populations which have as yet but few
points of resemblance. As the conditions of men become equal amongst
a people, individuals seem of less importance, and society of greater
dimensions; or rather, every citizen, being assimilated to all the rest,
is lost in the crowd, and nothing stands conspicuous but the great and
imposing image of the people at large. This naturally gives the men of
democratic periods a lofty opinion of the privileges of society, and a
very humble notion of the rights of individuals; they are ready to admit
that the interests of the former are everything, and those of the latter
nothing. They are willing to acknowledge that the power which represents
the community has far more information and wisdom than any of the
members of that community; and that it is the duty, as well as the
right, of that power to guide as well as govern each private citizen.

If we closely scrutinize our contemporaries, and penetrate to the root
of their political opinions, we shall detect some of the notions which I
have just pointed out, and we shall perhaps be surprised to find so much
accordance between men who are so often at variance. The Americans hold,
that in every State the supreme power ought to emanate from the people;
but when once that power is constituted, they can conceive, as it were,
no limits to it, and they are ready to admit that it has the right to
do whatever it pleases. They have not the slightest notion of peculiar
privileges granted to cities, families, or persons: their minds appear
never to have foreseen that it might be possible not to apply
with strict uniformity the same laws to every part, and to all the
inhabitants. These same opinions are more and more diffused in Europe;
they even insinuate themselves amongst those nations which most
vehemently reject the principle of the sovereignty of the people. Such
nations assign a different origin to the supreme power, but they ascribe
to that power the same characteristics. Amongst them all, the idea of
intermediate powers is weakened and obliterated: the idea of rights
inherent in certain individuals is rapidly disappearing from the minds
of men; the idea of the omnipotence and sole authority of society at
large rises to fill its place. These ideas take root and spread in
proportion as social conditions become more equal, and men more alike;
they are engendered by equality, and in turn they hasten the progress of
equality.

In France, where the revolution of which I am speaking has gone further
than in any other European country, these opinions have got complete
hold of the public mind. If we listen attentively to the language of the
various parties in France, we shall find that there is not one which
has not adopted them. Most of these parties censure the conduct of the
government, but they all hold that the government ought perpetually to
act and interfere in everything that is done. Even those which are
most at variance are nevertheless agreed upon this head. The unity, the
ubiquity, the omnipotence of the supreme power, and the uniformity of
its rules, constitute the principal characteristics of all the political
systems which have been put forward in our age. They recur even in the
wildest visions of political regeneration: the human mind pursues them
in its dreams. If these notions spontaneously arise in the minds of
private individuals, they suggest themselves still more forcibly to
the minds of princes. Whilst the ancient fabric of European society
is altered and dissolved, sovereigns acquire new conceptions of their
opportunities and their duties; they learn for the first time that the
central power which they represent may and ought to administer by
its own agency, and on a uniform plan, all the concerns of the whole
community. This opinion, which, I will venture to say, was never
conceived before our time by the monarchs of Europe, now sinks deeply
into the minds of kings, and abides there amidst all the agitation of
more unsettled thoughts.

Our contemporaries are therefore much less divided than is commonly
supposed; they are constantly disputing as to the hands in which
supremacy is to be vested, but they readily agree upon the duties and
the rights of that supremacy. The notion they all form of government is
that of a sole, simple, providential, and creative power. All secondary
opinions in politics are unsettled; this one remains fixed, invariable,
and consistent. It is adopted by statesmen and political philosophers;
it is eagerly laid hold of by the multitude; those who govern and those
who are governed agree to pursue it with equal ardor: it is the foremost
notion of their minds, it seems inborn. It originates therefore in no
caprice of the human intellect, but it is a necessary condition of the
present state of mankind.




Chapter III: That The Sentiments Of Democratic Nations Accord With Their
Opinions In Leading Them To Concentrate Political Power

If it be true that, in ages of equality, men readily adopt the notion of
a great central power, it cannot be doubted on the other hand that their
habits and sentiments predispose them to recognize such a power and to
give it their support. This may be demonstrated in a few words, as the
greater part of the reasons, to which the fact may be attributed, have
been previously stated. *a As the men who inhabit democratic countries
have no superiors, no inferiors, and no habitual or necessary partners
in their undertakings, they readily fall back upon themselves and
consider themselves as beings apart. I had occasion to point this out
at considerable length in treating of individualism. Hence such men can
never, without an effort, tear themselves from their private affairs to
engage in public business; their natural bias leads them to abandon the
latter to the sole visible and permanent representative of the interests
of the community, that is to say, to the State. Not only are they
naturally wanting in a taste for public business, but they have
frequently no time to attend to it. Private life is so busy in
democratic periods, so excited, so full of wishes and of work, that
hardly any energy or leisure remains to each individual for public life.
I am the last man to contend that these propensities are unconquerable,
since my chief object in writing this book has been to combat them. I
only maintain that at the present day a secret power is fostering them
in the human heart, and that if they are not checked they will wholly
overgrow it.

[Footnote a: See Appendix W.]

I have also had occasion to show how the increasing love of well-being,
and the fluctuating character of property, cause democratic nations
to dread all violent disturbance. The love of public tranquillity is
frequently the only passion which these nations retain, and it becomes
more active and powerful amongst them in proportion as all other
passions droop and die. This naturally disposes the members of the
community constantly to give or to surrender additional rights to the
central power, which alone seems to be interested in defending them by
the same means that it uses to defend itself. As in ages of equality no
man is compelled to lend his assistance to his fellow-men, and none
has any right to expect much support from them, everyone is at once
independent and powerless. These two conditions, which must never be
either separately considered or confounded together, inspire the
citizen of a democratic country with very contrary propensities. His
independence fills him with self-reliance and pride amongst his equals;
his debility makes him feel from time to time the want of some outward
assistance, which he cannot expect from any of them, because they are
all impotent and unsympathizing. In this predicament he naturally turns
his eyes to that imposing power which alone rises above the level of
universal depression. Of that power his wants and especially his desires
continually remind him, until he ultimately views it as the sole and
necessary support of his own weakness. *b This may more completely
explain what frequently takes place in democratic countries, where the
very men who are so impatient of superiors patiently submit to a master,
exhibiting at once their pride and their servility.

[Footnote b: In democratic communities nothing but the central power has
any stability in its position or any permanence in its undertakings. All
the members of society are in ceaseless stir and transformation. Now it
is in the nature of all governments to seek constantly to enlarge their
sphere of action; hence it is almost impossible that such a government
should not ultimately succeed, because it acts with a fixed principle
and a constant will, upon men, whose position, whose notions, and whose
desires are in continual vacillation. It frequently happens that the
members of the community promote the influence of the central power
without intending it. Democratic ages are periods of experiment,
innovation, and adventure. At such times there are always a multitude of
men engaged in difficult or novel undertakings, which they follow alone,
without caring for their fellowmen. Such persons may be ready to admit,
as a general principle, that the public authority ought not to interfere
in private concerns; but, by an exception to that rule, each of them
craves for its assistance in the particular concern on which he is
engaged, and seeks to draw upon the influence of the government for his
own benefit, though he would restrict it on all other occasions. If a
large number of men apply this particular exception to a great
variety of different purposes, the sphere of the central power extends
insensibly in all directions, although each of them wishes it to be
circumscribed. Thus a democratic government increases its power simply
by the fact of its permanence. Time is on its side; every incident
befriends it; the passions of individuals unconsciously promote it; and
it may be asserted, that the older a democratic community is, the more
centralized will its government become.]

The hatred which men bear to privilege increases in proportion as
privileges become more scarce and less considerable, so that democratic
passions would seem to burn most fiercely at the very time when they
have least fuel. I have already given the reason of this phenomenon.
When all conditions are unequal, no inequality is so great as to offend
the eye; whereas the slightest dissimilarity is odious in the midst
of general uniformity: the more complete is this uniformity, the more
insupportable does the sight of such a difference become. Hence it is
natural that the love of equality should constantly increase together
with equality itself, and that it should grow by what it feeds upon.
This never-dying, ever-kindling hatred, which sets a democratic people
against the smallest privileges, is peculiarly favorable to the gradual
concentration of all political rights in the hands of the representative
of the State alone. The sovereign, being necessarily and incontestably
above all the citizens, excites not their envy, and each of them thinks
that he strips his equals of the prerogative which he concedes to the
crown. The man of a democratic age is extremely reluctant to obey his
neighbor who is his equal; he refuses to acknowledge in such a person
ability superior to his own; he mistrusts his justice, and is jealous
of his power; he fears and he contemns him; and he loves continually to
remind him of the common dependence in which both of them stand to the
same master. Every central power which follows its natural tendencies
courts and encourages the principle of equality; for equality singularly
facilitates, extends, and secures the influence of a central power.

In like manner it may be said that every central government worships
uniformity: uniformity relieves it from inquiry into an infinite number
of small details which must be attended to if rules were to be adapted
to men, instead of indiscriminately subjecting men to rules: thus the
government likes what the citizens like, and naturally hates what they
hate. These common sentiments, which, in democratic nations, constantly
unite the sovereign and every member of the community in one and the
same conviction, establish a secret and lasting sympathy between them.
The faults of the government are pardoned for the sake of its tastes;
public confidence is only reluctantly withdrawn in the midst even of
its excesses and its errors, and it is restored at the first call.
Democratic nations often hate those in whose hands the central power is
vested; but they always love that power itself.

Thus, by two separate paths, I have reached the same conclusion. I have
shown that the principle of equality suggests to men the notion of
a sole, uniform, and strong government: I have now shown that the
principle of equality imparts to them a taste for it. To governments of
this kind the nations of our age are therefore tending. They are drawn
thither by the natural inclination of mind and heart; and in order to
reach that result, it is enough that they do not check themselves in
their course. I am of opinion, that, in the democratic ages which are
opening upon us, individual independence and local liberties will ever
be the produce of artificial contrivance; that centralization will be
the natural form of government. *c

[Footnote c: See Appendix X.]




Chapter IV: Of Certain Peculiar And Accidental Causes Which Either Lead
A People To Complete Centralization Of Government, Or Which Divert Them
From It

If all democratic nations are instinctively led to the centralization of
government, they tend to this result in an unequal manner. This depends
on the particular circumstances which may promote or prevent the
natural consequences of that state of society--circumstances which are
exceedingly numerous; but I shall only advert to a few of them. Amongst
men who have lived free long before they became equal, the tendencies
derived from free institutions combat, to a certain extent, the
propensities superinduced by the principle of equality; and although
the central power may increase its privileges amongst such a people, the
private members of such a community will never entirely forfeit their
independence. But when the equality of conditions grows up amongst a
people which has never known, or has long ceased to know, what freedom
is (and such is the case upon the Continent of Europe), as the former
habits of the nation are suddenly combined, by some sort of natural
attraction, with the novel habits and principles engendered by the state
of society, all powers seem spontaneously to rush to the centre.
These powers accumulate there with astonishing rapidity, and the State
instantly attains the utmost limits of its strength, whilst private
persons allow themselves to sink as suddenly to the lowest degree of
weakness.

The English who emigrated three hundred years ago to found a democratic
commonwealth on the shores of the New World, had all learned to take
a part in public affairs in their mother-country; they were conversant
with trial by jury; they were accustomed to liberty of speech and of the
press--to personal freedom, to the notion of rights and the practice
of asserting them. They carried with them to America these free
institutions and manly customs, and these institutions preserved them
against the encroachments of the State. Thus amongst the Americans it
is freedom which is old--equality is of comparatively modern date. The
reverse is occurring in Europe, where equality, introduced by absolute
power and under the rule of kings, was already infused into the habits
of nations long before freedom had entered into their conceptions.

I have said that amongst democratic nations the notion of government
naturally presents itself to the mind under the form of a sole and
central power, and that the notion of intermediate powers is not
familiar to them. This is peculiarly applicable to the democratic
nations which have witnessed the triumph of the principle of equality
by means of a violent revolution. As the classes which managed local
affairs have been suddenly swept away by the storm, and as the confused
mass which remains has as yet neither the organization nor the habits
which fit it to assume the administration of these same affairs, the
State alone seems capable of taking upon itself all the details of
government, and centralization becomes, as it were, the unavoidable
state of the country. Napoleon deserves neither praise nor censure for
having centred in his own hands almost all the administrative power
of France; for, after the abrupt disappearance of the nobility and
the higher rank of the middle classes, these powers devolved on him of
course: it would have been almost as difficult for him to reject as to
assume them. But no necessity of this kind has ever been felt by the
Americans, who, having passed through no revolution, and having governed
themselves from the first, never had to call upon the State to act for
a time as their guardian. Thus the progress of centralization amongst a
democratic people depends not only on the progress of equality, but on
the manner in which this equality has been established.

At the commencement of a great democratic revolution, when hostilities
have but just broken out between the different classes of society, the
people endeavors to centralize the public administration in the hands of
the government, in order to wrest the management of local affairs
from the aristocracy. Towards the close of such a revolution, on the
contrary, it is usually the conquered aristocracy that endeavors to
make over the management of all affairs to the State, because such an
aristocracy dreads the tyranny of a people which has become its equal,
and not unfrequently its master. Thus it is not always the same class
of the community which strives to increase the prerogative of the
government; but as long as the democratic revolution lasts there is
always one class in the nation, powerful in numbers or in wealth, which
is induced, by peculiar passions or interests, to centralize the public
administration, independently of that hatred of being governed by one's
neighbor, which is a general and permanent feeling amongst democratic
nations. It may be remarked, that at the present day the lower orders in
England are striving with all their might to destroy local independence,
and to transfer the administration from all points of the circumference
to the centre; whereas the higher classes are endeavoring to retain this
administration within its ancient boundaries. I venture to predict that
a time will come when the very reverse will happen.

These observations explain why the supreme power is always stronger, and
private individuals weaker, amongst a democratic people which has passed
through a long and arduous struggle to reach a state of equality than
amongst a democratic community in which the citizens have been equal
from the first. The example of the Americans completely demonstrates
the fact. The inhabitants of the United States were never divided by
any privileges; they have never known the mutual relation of master and
inferior, and as they neither dread nor hate each other, they have never
known the necessity of calling in the supreme power to manage their
affairs. The lot of the Americans is singular: they have derived from
the aristocracy of England the notion of private rights and the taste
for local freedom; and they have been able to retain both the one and
the other, because they have had no aristocracy to combat.

If at all times education enables men to defend their independence, this
is most especially true in democratic ages. When all men are alike, it
is easy to found a sole and all-powerful government, by the aid of
mere instinct. But men require much intelligence, knowledge, and art to
organize and to maintain secondary powers under similar circumstances,
and to create amidst the independence and individual weakness of the
citizens such free associations as may be in a condition to struggle
against tyranny without destroying public order.

Hence the concentration of power and the subjection of individuals will
increase amongst democratic nations, not only in the same proportion
as their equality, but in the same proportion as their ignorance. It
is true, that in ages of imperfect civilization the government is
frequently as wanting in the knowledge required to impose a despotism
upon the people as the people are wanting in the knowledge required to
shake it off; but the effect is not the same on both sides. However rude
a democratic people may be, the central power which rules it is never
completely devoid of cultivation, because it readily draws to its own
uses what little cultivation is to be found in the country, and, if
necessary, may seek assistance elsewhere. Hence, amongst a nation which
is ignorant as well as democratic, an amazing difference cannot fail
speedily to arise between the intellectual capacity of the ruler and
that of each of his subjects. This completes the easy concentration
of all power in his hands: the administrative function of the State is
perpetually extended, because the State alone is competent to administer
the affairs of the country. Aristocratic nations, however unenlightened
they may be, never afford the same spectacle, because in them
instruction is nearly equally diffused between the monarch and the
leading members of the community.

The pacha who now rules in Egypt found the population of that country
composed of men exceedingly ignorant and equal, and he has borrowed the
science and ability of Europe to govern that people. As the personal
attainments of the sovereign are thus combined with the ignorance and
democratic weakness of his subjects, the utmost centralization has been
established without impediment, and the pacha has made the country his
manufactory, and the inhabitants his workmen.

I think that extreme centralization of government ultimately enervates
society, and thus after a length of time weakens the government itself;
but I do not deny that a centralized social power may be able to execute
great undertakings with facility in a given time and on a particular
point. This is more especially true of war, in which success depends
much more on the means of transferring all the resources of a nation
to one single point, than on the extent of those resources. Hence it is
chiefly in war that nations desire and frequently require to increase
the powers of the central government. All men of military genius are
fond of centralization, which increases their strength; and all men of
centralizing genius are fond of war, which compels nations to combine
all their powers in the hands of the government. Thus the democratic
tendency which leads men unceasingly to multiply the privileges of the
State, and to circumscribe the rights of private persons, is much more
rapid and constant amongst those democratic nations which are exposed by
their position to great and frequent wars, than amongst all others.

I have shown how the dread of disturbance and the love of well-being
insensibly lead democratic nations to increase the functions of
central government, as the only power which appears to be intrinsically
sufficiently strong, enlightened, and secure, to protect them from
anarchy. I would now add, that all the particular circumstances
which tend to make the state of a democratic community agitated and
precarious, enhance this general propensity, and lead private persons
more and more to sacrifice their rights to their tranquility. A people
is therefore never so disposed to increase the functions of central
government as at the close of a long and bloody revolution, which, after
having wrested property from the hands of its former possessors,
has shaken all belief, and filled the nation with fierce hatreds,
conflicting interests, and contending factions. The love of public
tranquillity becomes at such times an indiscriminating passion, and the
members of the community are apt to conceive a most inordinate devotion
to order.

I have already examined several of the incidents which may concur to
promote the centralization of power, but the principal cause still
remains to be noticed. The foremost of the incidental causes which
may draw the management of all affairs into the hands of the ruler in
democratic countries, is the origin of that ruler himself, and his own
propensities. Men who live in the ages of equality are naturally fond
of central power, and are willing to extend its privileges; but if it
happens that this same power faithfully represents their own interests,
and exactly copies their own inclinations, the confidence they place in
it knows no bounds, and they think that whatever they bestow upon it is
bestowed upon themselves.

The attraction of administrative powers to the centre will always be
less easy and less rapid under the reign of kings who are still in some
way connected with the old aristocratic order, than under new princes,
the children of their own achievements, whose birth, prejudices,
propensities, and habits appear to bind them indissolubly to the cause
of equality. I do not mean that princes of aristocratic origin who live
in democratic ages do not attempt to centralize; I believe they apply
themselves to that object as diligently as any others. For them,
the sole advantages of equality lie in that direction; but their
opportunities are less great, because the community, instead of
volunteering compliance with their desires, frequently obeys them with
reluctance. In democratic communities the rule is that centralization
must increase in proportion as the sovereign is less aristocratic. When
an ancient race of kings stands at the head of an aristocracy, as the
natural prejudices of the sovereign perfectly accord with the natural
prejudices of the nobility, the vices inherent in aristocratic
communities have a free course, and meet with no corrective. The reverse
is the case when the scion of a feudal stock is placed at the head of
a democratic people. The sovereign is constantly led, by his education,
his habits, and his associations, to adopt sentiments suggested by the
inequality of conditions, and the people tend as constantly, by their
social condition, to those manners which are engendered by equality.
At such times it often happens that the citizens seek to control the
central power far less as a tyrannical than as an aristocratical power,
and that they persist in the firm defence of their independence, not
only because they would remain free, but especially because they are
determined to remain equal. A revolution which overthrows an ancient
regal family, in order to place men of more recent growth at the head
of a democratic people, may temporarily weaken the central power; but
however anarchical such a revolution may appear at first, we need not
hesitate to predict that its final and certain consequence will be to
extend and to secure the prerogatives of that power. The foremost or
indeed the sole condition which is required in order to succeed in
centralizing the supreme power in a democratic community, is to love
equality, or to get men to believe you love it. Thus the science of
despotism, which was once so complex, is simplified, and reduced as it
were to a single principle.




Chapter V: That Amongst The European Nations Of Our Time The Power Of
Governments Is Increasing, Although The Persons Who Govern Are Less
Stable

On reflecting upon what has already been said, the reader will be
startled and alarmed to find that in Europe everything seems to conduce
to the indefinite extension of the prerogatives of government, and to
render all that enjoyed the rights of private independence more weak,
more subordinate, and more precarious. The democratic nations of Europe
have all the general and permanent tendencies which urge the Americans
to the centralization of government, and they are moreover exposed to a
number of secondary and incidental causes with which the Americans are
unacquainted. It would seem as if every step they make towards equality
brings them nearer to despotism. And indeed if we do but cast our
looks around, we shall be convinced that such is the fact. During the
aristocratic ages which preceded the present time, the sovereigns of
Europe had been deprived of, or had relinquished, many of the rights
inherent in their power. Not a hundred years ago, amongst the greater
part of European nations, numerous private persons and corporations were
sufficiently independent to administer justice, to raise and maintain
troops, to levy taxes, and frequently even to make or interpret the
law. The State has everywhere resumed to itself alone these natural
attributes of sovereign power; in all matters of government the State
tolerates no intermediate agent between itself and the people, and in
general business it directs the people by its own immediate influence. I
am far from blaming this concentration of power, I simply point it out.

At the same period a great number of secondary powers existed in Europe,
which represented local interests and administered local affairs. Most
of these local authorities have already disappeared; all are speedily
tending to disappear, or to fall into the most complete dependence.
From one end of Europe to the other the privileges of the nobility, the
liberties of cities, and the powers of provincial bodies, are either
destroyed or upon the verge of destruction. Europe has endured, in
the course of the last half-century, many revolutions and
counter-revolutions which have agitated it in opposite directions: but
all these perturbations resemble each other in one respect--they have
all shaken or destroyed the secondary powers of government. The local
privileges which the French did not abolish in the countries they
conquered, have finally succumbed to the policy of the princes who
conquered the French. Those princes rejected all the innovations of the
French Revolution except centralization: that is the only principle they
consented to receive from such a source. My object is to remark, that
all these various rights, which have been successively wrested, in our
time, from classes, corporations, and individuals, have not served
to raise new secondary powers on a more democratic basis, but have
uniformly been concentrated in the hands of the sovereign. Everywhere
the State acquires more and more direct control over the humblest
members of the community, and a more exclusive power of governing
each of them in his smallest concerns. *a Almost all the charitable
establishments of Europe were formerly in the hands of private persons
or of corporations; they are now almost all dependent on the supreme
government, and in many countries are actually administered by that
power. The State almost exclusively undertakes to supply bread to the
hungry, assistance and shelter to the sick, work to the idle, and to
act as the sole reliever of all kinds of misery. Education, as well
as charity, is become in most countries at the present day a national
concern. The State receives, and often takes, the child from the arms of
the mother, to hand it over to official agents: the State undertakes to
train the heart and to instruct the mind of each generation. Uniformity
prevails in the courses of public instruction as in everything else;
diversity, as well as freedom, is disappearing day by day. Nor do I
hesitate to affirm, that amongst almost all the Christian nations of our
days, Catholic as well as Protestant, religion is in danger of falling
into the hands of the government. Not that rulers are over-jealous of
the right of settling points of doctrine, but they get more and more
hold upon the will of those by whom doctrines are expounded; they
deprive the clergy of their property, and pay them by salaries; they
divert to their own use the influence of the priesthood, they make them
their own ministers--often their own servants--and by this alliance with
religion they reach the inner depths of the soul of man. *b

[Footnote a: This gradual weakening of individuals in relation to
society at large may be traced in a thousand ways. I shall select
from amongst these examples one derived from the law of wills. In
aristocracies it is common to profess the greatest reverence for the
last testamentary dispositions of a man; this feeling sometimes even
became superstitious amongst the older nations of Europe: the power of
the State, far from interfering with the caprices of a dying man, gave
full force to the very least of them, and insured to him a perpetual
power. When all living men are enfeebled, the will of the dead is less
respected: it is circumscribed within a narrow range, beyond which it
is annulled or checked by the supreme power of the laws. In the Middle
Ages, testamentary power had, so to speak, no limits: amongst the French
at the present day, a man cannot distribute his fortune amongst his
children without the interference of the State; after having domineered
over a whole life, the law insists upon regulating the very last act of
it.]

[Footnote b: In proportion as the duties of the central power are
augmented, the number of public officers by whom that power is
represented must increase also. They form a nation in each nation; and
as they share the stability of the government, they more and more fill
up the place of an aristocracy.

In almost every part of Europe the government rules in two ways; it
rules one portion of the community by the fear which they entertain of
its agents, and the other by the hope they have of becoming its agents.]

But this is as yet only one side of the picture. The authority of
government has not only spread, as we have just seen, throughout the
sphere of all existing powers, till that sphere can no longer contain
it, but it goes further, and invades the domain heretofore reserved
to private independence. A multitude of actions, which were formerly
entirely beyond the control of the public administration, have been
subjected to that control in our time, and the number of them is
constantly increasing. Amongst aristocratic nations the supreme
government usually contented itself with managing and superintending
the community in whatever directly and ostensibly concerned the national
honor; but in all other respects the people were left to work out their
own free will. Amongst these nations the government often seemed to
forget that there is a point at which the faults and the sufferings of
private persons involve the general prosperity, and that to prevent
the ruin of a private individual must sometimes be a matter of public
importance. The democratic nations of our time lean to the opposite
extreme. It is evident that most of our rulers will not content
themselves with governing the people collectively: it would seem as
if they thought themselves responsible for the actions and private
condition of their subjects--as if they had undertaken to guide and to
instruct each of them in the various incidents of life, and to secure
their happiness quite independently of their own consent. On the other
hand private individuals grow more and more apt to look upon the
supreme power in the same light; they invoke its assistance in all their
necessities, and they fix their eyes upon the administration as their
mentor or their guide.

I assert that there is no country in Europe in which the public
administration has not become, not only more centralized, but more
inquisitive and more minute it everywhere interferes in private concerns
more than it did; it regulates more undertakings, and undertakings of a
lesser kind; and it gains a firmer footing every day about, above, and
around all private persons, to assist, to advise, and to coerce them.
Formerly a sovereign lived upon the income of his lands, or the revenue
of his taxes; this is no longer the case now that his wants have
increased as well as his power. Under the same circumstances which
formerly compelled a prince to put on a new tax, he now has recourse
to a loan. Thus the State gradually becomes the debtor of most of the
wealthier members of the community, and centralizes the largest amounts
of capital in its own hands. Small capital is drawn into its keeping
by another method. As men are intermingled and conditions become more
equal, the poor have more resources, more education, and more desires;
they conceive the notion of bettering their condition, and this teaches
them to save. These savings are daily producing an infinite number of
small capitals, the slow and gradual produce of labor, which are always
increasing. But the greater part of this money would be unproductive if
it remained scattered in the hands of its owners. This circumstance has
given rise to a philanthropic institution, which will soon become, if I
am not mistaken, one of our most important political institutions. Some
charitable persons conceived the notion of collecting the savings of
the poor and placing them out at interest. In some countries these
benevolent associations are still completely distinct from the State;
but in almost all they manifestly tend to identify themselves with the
government; and in some of them the government has superseded them,
taking upon itself the enormous task of centralizing in one place, and
putting out at interest on its own responsibility, the daily savings of
many millions of the working classes. Thus the State draws to itself the
wealth of the rich by loans, and has the poor man's mite at its disposal
in the savings banks. The wealth of the country is perpetually flowing
around the government and passing through its hands; the accumulation
increases in the same proportion as the equality of conditions; for in
a democratic country the State alone inspires private individuals with
confidence, because the State alone appears to be endowed with strength
and durability. *c Thus the sovereign does not confine himself to
the management of the public treasury; he interferes in private money
matters; he is the superior, and often the master, of all the members
of the community; and, in addition to this, he assumes the part of their
steward and paymaster.

[Footnote c: On the one hand the taste for worldly welfare is
perpetually increasing, and on the other the government gets more and
more complete possession of the sources of that welfare. Thus men are
following two separate roads to servitude: the taste for their own
welfare withholds them from taking a part in the government, and their
love of that welfare places them in closer dependence upon those who
govern.]

The central power not only fulfils of itself the whole of the duties
formerly discharged by various authorities--extending those duties, and
surpassing those authorities--but it performs them with more alertness,
strength, and independence than it displayed before. All the governments
of Europe have in our time singularly improved the science of
administration: they do more things, and they do everything with more
order, more celerity, and at less expense; they seem to be constantly
enriched by all the experience of which they have stripped private
persons. From day to day the princes of Europe hold their subordinate
officers under stricter control, and they invent new methods for guiding
them more closely, and inspecting them with less trouble. Not content
with managing everything by their agents, they undertake to manage the
conduct of their agents in everything; so that the public administration
not only depends upon one and the same power, but it is more and more
confined to one spot and concentrated in the same hands. The government
centralizes its agency whilst it increases its prerogative--hence a
twofold increase of strength.

In examining the ancient constitution of the judicial power, amongst
most European nations, two things strike the mind--the independence of
that power, and the extent of its functions. Not only did the courts of
justice decide almost all differences between private persons, but in
very many cases they acted as arbiters between private persons and the
State. I do not here allude to the political and administrative offices
which courts of judicature had in some countries usurped, but the
judicial office common to them all. In most of the countries of Europe,
there were, and there still are, many private rights, connected for
the most part with the general right of property, which stood under
the protection of the courts of justice, and which the State could not
violate without their sanction. It was this semi-political power which
mainly distinguished the European courts of judicature from all others;
for all nations have had judges, but all have not invested their judges
with the same privileges. Upon examining what is now occurring amongst
the democratic nations of Europe which are called free, as well as
amongst the others, it will be observed that new and more dependent
courts are everywhere springing up by the side of the old ones, for
the express purpose of deciding, by an extraordinary jurisdiction,
such litigated matters as may arise between the government and private
persons. The elder judicial power retains its independence, but its
jurisdiction is narrowed; and there is a growing tendency to reduce it
to be exclusively the arbiter between private interests. The number of
these special courts of justice is continually increasing, and their
functions increase likewise. Thus the government is more and more
absolved from the necessity of subjecting its policy and its rights to
the sanction of another power. As judges cannot be dispensed with, at
least the State is to select them, and always to hold them under its
control; so that, between the government and private individuals, they
place the effigy of justice rather than justice itself. The State is
not satisfied with drawing all concerns to itself, but it acquires an
ever-increasing power of deciding on them all without restriction and
without appeal. *d

[Footnote d: A strange sophism has been made on this head in France.
When a suit arises between the government and a private person, it is
not to be tried before an ordinary judge--in order, they say, not to
mix the administrative and the judicial powers; as if it were not to
mix those powers, and to mix them in the most dangerous and oppressive
manner, to invest the government with the office of judging and
administering at the same time.]

There exists amongst the modern nations of Europe one great cause,
independent of all those which have already been pointed out, which
perpetually contributes to extend the agency or to strengthen the
prerogative of the supreme power, though it has not been sufficiently
attended to: I mean the growth of manufactures, which is fostered by the
progress of social equality. Manufactures generally collect a multitude
of men of the same spot, amongst whom new and complex relations
spring up. These men are exposed by their calling to great and sudden
alternations of plenty and want, during which public tranquillity is
endangered. It may also happen that these employments sacrifice the
health, and even the life, of those who gain by them, or of those who
live by them. Thus the manufacturing classes require more regulation,
superintendence, and restraint than the other classes of society, and
it is natural that the powers of government should increase in the same
proportion as those classes.

This is a truth of general application; what follows more especially
concerns the nations of Europe. In the centuries which preceded that in
which we live, the aristocracy was in possession of the soil, and was
competent to defend it: landed property was therefore surrounded by
ample securities, and its possessors enjoyed great independence.
This gave rise to laws and customs which have been perpetuated,
notwithstanding the subdivision of lands and the ruin of the nobility;
and, at the present time, landowners and agriculturists are still those
amongst the community who must easily escape from the control of the
supreme power. In these same aristocratic ages, in which all the
sources of our history are to be traced, personal property was of small
importance, and those who possessed it were despised and weak:
the manufacturing class formed an exception in the midst of those
aristocratic communities; as it had no certain patronage, it was not
outwardly protected, and was often unable to protect itself.

Hence a habit sprung up of considering manufacturing property as
something of a peculiar nature, not entitled to the same deference,
and not worthy of the same securities as property in general; and
manufacturers were looked upon as a small class in the bulk of the
people, whose independence was of small importance, and who might with
propriety be abandoned to the disciplinary passions of princes. On
glancing over the codes of the middle ages, one is surprised to see,
in those periods of personal independence, with what incessant royal
regulations manufactures were hampered, even in their smallest details:
on this point centralization was as active and as minute as it can ever
be. Since that time a great revolution has taken place in the world;
manufacturing property, which was then only in the germ, has spread
till it covers Europe: the manufacturing class has been multiplied and
enriched by the remnants of all other ranks; it has grown and is still
perpetually growing in number, in importance, in wealth. Almost all
those who do not belong to it are connected with it at least on some one
point; after having been an exception in society, it threatens to
become the chief, if not the only, class; nevertheless the notions and
political precedents engendered by it of old still cling about it. These
notions and these precedents remain unchanged, because they are old,
and also because they happen to be in perfect accordance with the new
notions and general habits of our contemporaries. Manufacturing property
then does not extend its rights in the same ratio as its importance. The
manufacturing classes do not become less dependent, whilst they become
more numerous; but, on the contrary, it would seem as if despotism
lurked within them, and naturally grew with their growth. *e As a
nation becomes more engaged in manufactures, the want of roads, canals,
harbors, and other works of a semi-public nature, which facilitate the
acquisition of wealth, is more strongly felt; and as a nation becomes
more democratic, private individuals are less able, and the State more
able, to execute works of such magnitude. I do not hesitate to assert
that the manifest tendency of all governments at the present time is to
take upon themselves alone the execution of these undertakings; by which
means they daily hold in closer dependence the population which they
govern.

[Footnote e: I shall quote a few facts in corroboration of this remark.
Mines are the natural sources of manufacturing wealth: as manufactures
have grown up in Europe, as the produce of mines has become of more
general importance, and good mining more difficult from the subdivision
of property which is a consequence of the equality of conditions, most
governments have asserted a right of owning the soil in which the mines
lie, and of inspecting the works; which has never been the case with any
other kind of property. Thus mines, which were private property, liable
to the same obligations and sheltered by the same guarantees as all
other landed property, have fallen under the control of the State.
The State either works them or farms them; the owners of them are mere
tenants, deriving their rights from the State; and, moreover, the State
almost everywhere claims the power of directing their operations: it
lays down rules, enforces the adoption of particular methods, subjects
the mining adventurers to constant superintendence, and, if refractory,
they are ousted by a government court of justice, and the government
transfers their contract to other hands; so that the government not
only possesses the mines, but has all the adventurers in its power.
Nevertheless, as manufactures increase, the working of old mines
increases also; new ones are opened, the mining population extends and
grows up; day by day governments augment their subterranean dominions,
and people them with their agents.]

On the other hand, in proportion as the power of a State increases, and
its necessities are augmented, the State consumption of manufactured
produce is always growing larger, and these commodities are generally
made in the arsenals or establishments of the government. Thus, in every
kingdom, the ruler becomes the principal manufacturer; he collects
and retains in his service a vast number of engineers, architects,
mechanics, and handicraftsmen. Not only is he the principal
manufacturer, but he tends more and more to become the chief, or rather
the master of all other manufacturers. As private persons become
more powerless by becoming more equal, they can effect nothing in
manufactures without combination; but the government naturally seeks to
place these combinations under its own control.

It must be admitted that these collective beings, which are called
combinations, are stronger and more formidable than a private individual
can ever be, and that they have less of the responsibility of their own
actions; whence it seems reasonable that they should not be allowed to
retain so great an independence of the supreme government as might be
conceded to a private individual.

Rulers are the more apt to follow this line of policy, as their own
inclinations invite them to it. Amongst democratic nations it is only by
association that the resistance of the people to the government can ever
display itself: hence the latter always looks with ill-favor on those
associations which are not in its own power; and it is well worthy of
remark, that amongst democratic nations, the people themselves often
entertain a secret feeling of fear and jealousy against these
very associations, which prevents the citizens from defending the
institutions of which they stand so much in need. The power and the
duration of these small private bodies, in the midst of the weakness and
instability of the whole community, astonish and alarm the people;
and the free use which each association makes of its natural powers is
almost regarded as a dangerous privilege. All the associations which
spring up in our age are, moreover, new corporate powers, whose rights
have not been sanctioned by time; they come into existence at a
time when the notion of private rights is weak, and when the power of
government is unbounded; hence it is not surprising that they lose their
freedom at their birth. Amongst all European nations there are some
kinds of associations which cannot be formed until the State has
examined their by-laws, and authorized their existence. In several
others, attempts are made to extend this rule to all associations; the
consequences of such a policy, if it were successful, may easily be
foreseen. If once the sovereign had a general right of authorizing
associations of all kinds upon certain conditions, he would not be long
without claiming the right of superintending and managing them, in order
to prevent them from departing from the rules laid down by himself. In
this manner, the State, after having reduced all who are desirous of
forming associations into dependence, would proceed to reduce into the
same condition all who belong to associations already formed--that is
to say, almost all the men who are now in existence. Governments thus
appropriate to themselves, and convert to their own purposes, the
greater part of this new power which manufacturing interests have in
our time brought into the world. Manufacturers govern us--they govern
manufactures.

I attach so much importance to all that I have just been saying, that
I am tormented by the fear of having impaired my meaning in seeking
to render it more clear. If the reader thinks that the examples I have
adduced to support my observations are insufficient or ill-chosen--if
he imagines that I have anywhere exaggerated the encroachments of the
supreme power, and, on the other hand, that I have underrated the extent
of the sphere which still remains open to the exertions of individual
independence, I entreat him to lay down the book for a moment, and to
turn his mind to reflect for himself upon the subjects I have attempted
to explain. Let him attentively examine what is taking place in France
and in other countries--let him inquire of those about him--let him
search himself, and I am much mistaken if he does not arrive, without
my guidance, and by other paths, at the point to which I have sought
to lead him. He will perceive that for the last half-century,
centralization has everywhere been growing up in a thousand different
ways. Wars, revolutions, conquests, have served to promote it: all men
have labored to increase it. In the course of the same period, during
which men have succeeded each other with singular rapidity at the head
of affairs, their notions, interests, and passions have been infinitely
diversified; but all have by some means or other sought to centralize.
This instinctive centralization has been the only settled point amidst
the extreme mutability of their lives and of their thoughts.

If the reader, after having investigated these details of human affairs,
will seek to survey the wide prospect as a whole, he will be struck
by the result. On the one hand the most settled dynasties shaken or
overthrown--the people everywhere escaping by violence from the sway
of their laws--abolishing or limiting the authority of their rulers or
their princes--the nations, which are not in open revolution, restless
at least, and excited--all of them animated by the same spirit of
revolt: and on the other hand, at this very period of anarchy, and
amongst these untractable nations, the incessant increase of the
prerogative of the supreme government, becoming more centralized, more
adventurous, more absolute, more extensive--the people perpetually
falling under the control of the public administration--led
insensibly to surrender to it some further portion of their individual
independence, till the very men, who from time to time upset a throne
and trample on a race of kings, bend more and more obsequiously to the
slightest dictate of a clerk. Thus two contrary revolutions appear
in our days to be going on; the one continually weakening the supreme
power, the other as continually strengthening it: at no other period
in our history has it appeared so weak or so strong. But upon a more
attentive examination of the state of the world, it appears that these
two revolutions are intimately connected together, that they originate
in the same source, and that after having followed a separate course,
they lead men at last to the same result. I may venture once more to
repeat what I have already said or implied in several parts of this
book: great care must be taken not to confound the principle of equality
itself with the revolution which finally establishes that principle in
the social condition and the laws of a nation: here lies the reason of
almost all the phenomena which occasion our astonishment. All the old
political powers of Europe, the greatest as well as the least, were
founded in ages of aristocracy, and they more or less represented or
defended the principles of inequality and of privilege. To make the
novel wants and interests, which the growing principle of equality
introduced, preponderate in government, our contemporaries had to
overturn or to coerce the established powers. This led them to make
revolutions, and breathed into many of them, that fierce love of
disturbance and independence, which all revolutions, whatever be their
object, always engender. I do not believe that there is a single country
in Europe in which the progress of equality has not been preceded or
followed by some violent changes in the state of property and persons;
and almost all these changes have been attended with much anarchy and
license, because they have been made by the least civilized portion of
the nation against that which is most civilized. Hence proceeded the
two-fold contrary tendencies which I have just pointed out. As long as
the democratic revolution was glowing with heat, the men who were
bent upon the destruction of old aristocratic powers hostile to that
revolution, displayed a strong spirit of independence; but as the
victory or the principle of equality became more complete, they
gradually surrendered themselves to the propensities natural to that
condition of equality, and they strengthened and centralized their
governments. They had sought to be free in order to make themselves
equal; but in proportion as equality was more established by the aid
of freedom, freedom itself was thereby rendered of more difficult
attainment.

These two states of a nation have sometimes been contemporaneous:
the last generation in France showed how a people might organize a
stupendous tyranny in the community, at the very time when they were
baffling the authority of the nobility and braving the power of all
kings--at once teaching the world the way to win freedom, and the way to
lose it. In our days men see that constituted powers are dilapidated
on every side--they see all ancient authority gasping away, all ancient
barriers tottering to their fall, and the judgment of the wisest is
troubled at the sight: they attend only to the amazing revolution which
is taking place before their eyes, and they imagine that mankind is
about to fall into perpetual anarchy: if they looked to the final
consequences of this revolution, their fears would perhaps assume a
different shape. For myself, I confess that I put no trust in the spirit
of freedom which appears to animate my contemporaries. I see well
enough that the nations of this age are turbulent, but I do not clearly
perceive that they are liberal; and I fear lest, at the close of
those perturbations which rock the base of thrones, the domination of
sovereigns may prove more powerful than it ever was before.




Chapter VI: What Sort Of Despotism Democratic Nations Have To Fear

I had remarked during my stay in the United States, that a democratic
state of society, similar to that of the Americans, might offer singular
facilities for the establishment of despotism; and I perceived, upon
my return to Europe, how much use had already been made by most of our
rulers, of the notions, the sentiments, and the wants engendered by this
same social condition, for the purpose of extending the circle of
their power. This led me to think that the nations of Christendom would
perhaps eventually undergo some sort of oppression like that which
hung over several of the nations of the ancient world. A more accurate
examination of the subject, and five years of further meditations, have
not diminished my apprehensions, but they have changed the object of
them. No sovereign ever lived in former ages so absolute or so powerful
as to undertake to administer by his own agency, and without the
assistance of intermediate powers, all the parts of a great empire: none
ever attempted to subject all his subjects indiscriminately to strict
uniformity of regulation, and personally to tutor and direct every
member of the community. The notion of such an undertaking never
occurred to the human mind; and if any man had conceived it, the want
of information, the imperfection of the administrative system, and above
all, the natural obstacles caused by the inequality of conditions, would
speedily have checked the execution of so vast a design. When the Roman
emperors were at the height of their power, the different nations of the
empire still preserved manners and customs of great diversity; although
they were subject to the same monarch, most of the provinces were
separately administered; they abounded in powerful and active
municipalities; and although the whole government of the empire was
centred in the hands of the emperor alone, and he always remained, upon
occasions, the supreme arbiter in all matters, yet the details of social
life and private occupations lay for the most part beyond his control.
The emperors possessed, it is true, an immense and unchecked power,
which allowed them to gratify all their whimsical tastes, and to employ
for that purpose the whole strength of the State. They frequently abused
that power arbitrarily to deprive their subjects of property or of life:
their tyranny was extremely onerous to the few, but it did not reach the
greater number; it was fixed to some few main objects, and neglected the
rest; it was violent, but its range was limited.

But it would seem that if despotism were to be established amongst the
democratic nations of our days, it might assume a different character;
it would be more extensive and more mild; it would degrade men without
tormenting them. I do not question, that in an age of instruction
and equality like our own, sovereigns might more easily succeed in
collecting all political power into their own hands, and might interfere
more habitually and decidedly within the circle of private interests,
than any sovereign of antiquity could ever do. But this same principle
of equality which facilitates despotism, tempers its rigor. We have seen
how the manners of society become more humane and gentle in proportion
as men become more equal and alike. When no member of the community has
much power or much wealth, tyranny is, as it were, without opportunities
and a field of action. As all fortunes are scanty, the passions of men
are naturally circumscribed--their imagination limited, their pleasures
simple. This universal moderation moderates the sovereign himself, and
checks within certain limits the inordinate extent of his desires.

Independently of these reasons drawn from the nature of the state of
society itself, I might add many others arising from causes beyond my
subject; but I shall keep within the limits I have laid down to myself.
Democratic governments may become violent and even cruel at certain
periods of extreme effervescence or of great danger: but these crises
will be rare and brief. When I consider the petty passions of our
contemporaries, the mildness of their manners, the extent of their
education, the purity of their religion, the gentleness of their
morality, their regular and industrious habits, and the restraint which
they almost all observe in their vices no less than in their virtues,
I have no fear that they will meet with tyrants in their rulers, but
rather guardians. *a I think then that the species of oppression by
which democratic nations are menaced is unlike anything which ever
before existed in the world: our contemporaries will find no prototype
of it in their memories. I am trying myself to choose an expression
which will accurately convey the whole of the idea I have formed of it,
but in vain; the old words "despotism" and "tyranny" are inappropriate:
the thing itself is new; and since I cannot name it, I must attempt to
define it.

[Footnote a: See Appendix Y.]

I seek to trace the novel features under which despotism may appear
in the world. The first thing that strikes the observation is
an innumerable multitude of men all equal and alike, incessantly
endeavoring to procure the petty and paltry pleasures with which they
glut their lives. Each of them, living apart, is as a stranger to the
fate of all the rest--his children and his private friends constitute to
him the whole of mankind; as for the rest of his fellow-citizens, he is
close to them, but he sees them not--he touches them, but he feels them
not; he exists but in himself and for himself alone; and if his kindred
still remain to him, he may be said at any rate to have lost his
country. Above this race of men stands an immense and tutelary power,
which takes upon itself alone to secure their gratifications, and
to watch over their fate. That power is absolute, minute, regular,
provident, and mild. It would be like the authority of a parent, if,
like that authority, its object was to prepare men for manhood; but it
seeks on the contrary to keep them in perpetual childhood: it is well
content that the people should rejoice, provided they think of nothing
but rejoicing. For their happiness such a government willingly labors,
but it chooses to be the sole agent and the only arbiter of that
happiness: it provides for their security, foresees and supplies their
necessities, facilitates their pleasures, manages their principal
concerns, directs their industry, regulates the descent of property, and
subdivides their inheritances--what remains, but to spare them all
the care of thinking and all the trouble of living? Thus it every day
renders the exercise of the free agency of man less useful and less
frequent; it circumscribes the will within a narrower range, and
gradually robs a man of all the uses of himself. The principle of
equality has prepared men for these things: it has predisposed men to
endure them, and oftentimes to look on them as benefits.

After having thus successively taken each member of the community in
its powerful grasp, and fashioned them at will, the supreme power then
extends its arm over the whole community. It covers the surface of
society with a net-work of small complicated rules, minute and uniform,
through which the most original minds and the most energetic characters
cannot penetrate, to rise above the crowd. The will of man is not
shattered, but softened, bent, and guided: men are seldom forced by it
to act, but they are constantly restrained from acting: such a power
does not destroy, but it prevents existence; it does not tyrannize, but
it compresses, enervates, extinguishes, and stupefies a people, till
each nation is reduced to be nothing better than a flock of timid and
industrious animals, of which the government is the shepherd. I have
always thought that servitude of the regular, quiet, and gentle kind
which I have just described, might be combined more easily than is
commonly believed with some of the outward forms of freedom; and that
it might even establish itself under the wing of the sovereignty of the
people. Our contemporaries are constantly excited by two conflicting
passions; they want to be led, and they wish to remain free: as they
cannot destroy either one or the other of these contrary propensities,
they strive to satisfy them both at once. They devise a sole, tutelary,
and all-powerful form of government, but elected by the people. They
combine the principle of centralization and that of popular sovereignty;
this gives them a respite; they console themselves for being in tutelage
by the reflection that they have chosen their own guardians. Every man
allows himself to be put in leading-strings, because he sees that it is
not a person or a class of persons, but the people at large that holds
the end of his chain. By this system the people shake off their state
of dependence just long enough to select their master, and then relapse
into it again. A great many persons at the present day are quite
contented with this sort of compromise between administrative despotism
and the sovereignty of the people; and they think they have done enough
for the protection of individual freedom when they have surrendered
it to the power of the nation at large. This does not satisfy me:
the nature of him I am to obey signifies less to me than the fact of
extorted obedience.

I do not however deny that a constitution of this kind appears to me to
be infinitely preferable to one, which, after having concentrated
all the powers of government, should vest them in the hands of an
irresponsible person or body of persons. Of all the forms which
democratic despotism could assume, the latter would assuredly be
the worst. When the sovereign is elective, or narrowly watched by a
legislature which is really elective and independent, the oppression
which he exercises over individuals is sometimes greater, but it is
always less degrading; because every man, when he is oppressed and
disarmed, may still imagine, that whilst he yields obedience it is to
himself he yields it, and that it is to one of his own inclinations that
all the rest give way. In like manner I can understand that when the
sovereign represents the nation, and is dependent upon the people, the
rights and the power of which every citizen is deprived, not only serve
the head of the State, but the State itself; and that private persons
derive some return from the sacrifice of their independence which they
have made to the public. To create a representation of the people in
every centralized country, is therefore, to diminish the evil which
extreme centralization may produce, but not to get rid of it. I admit
that by this means room is left for the intervention of individuals in
the more important affairs; but it is not the less suppressed in the
smaller and more private ones. It must not be forgotten that it is
especially dangerous to enslave men in the minor details of life. For my
own part, I should be inclined to think freedom less necessary in great
things than in little ones, if it were possible to be secure of the one
without possessing the other. Subjection in minor affairs breaks out
every day, and is felt by the whole community indiscriminately. It does
not drive men to resistance, but it crosses them at every turn, till
they are led to surrender the exercise of their will. Thus their
spirit is gradually broken and their character enervated; whereas that
obedience, which is exacted on a few important but rare occasions, only
exhibits servitude at certain intervals, and throws the burden of it
upon a small number of men. It is in vain to summon a people, which has
been rendered so dependent on the central power, to choose from time to
time the representatives of that power; this rare and brief exercise of
their free choice, however important it may be, will not prevent them
from gradually losing the faculties of thinking, feeling, and acting for
themselves, and thus gradually falling below the level of humanity. *b
I add that they will soon become incapable of exercising the great and
only privilege which remains to them. The democratic nations which have
introduced freedom into their political constitution, at the very
time when they were augmenting the despotism of their administrative
constitution, have been led into strange paradoxes. To manage those
minor affairs in which good sense is all that is wanted--the people are
held to be unequal to the task, but when the government of the country
is at stake, the people are invested with immense powers; they are
alternately made the playthings of their ruler, and his masters--more
than kings, and less than men. After having exhausted all the different
modes of election, without finding one to suit their purpose, they are
still amazed, and still bent on seeking further; as if the evil they
remark did not originate in the constitution of the country far more
than in that of the electoral body. It is, indeed, difficult to conceive
how men who have entirely given up the habit of self-government should
succeed in making a proper choice of those by whom they are to be
governed; and no one will ever believe that a liberal, wise, and
energetic government can spring from the suffrages of a subservient
people. A constitution, which should be republican in its head and
ultra-monarchical in all its other parts, has ever appeared to me to
be a short-lived monster. The vices of rulers and the ineptitude of the
people would speedily bring about its ruin; and the nation, weary of its
representatives and of itself, would create freer institutions, or soon
return to stretch itself at the feet of a single master.

[Footnote b: See Appendix Z.]




Chapter VII: Continuation Of The Preceding Chapters

I believe that it is easier to establish an absolute and despotic
government amongst a people in which the conditions of society are
equal, than amongst any other; and I think that if such a government
were once established amongst such a people, it would not only oppress
men, but would eventually strip each of them of several of the highest
qualities of humanity. Despotism therefore appears to me peculiarly to
be dreaded in democratic ages. I should have loved freedom, I believe,
at all times, but in the time in which we live I am ready to worship
it. On the other hand, I am persuaded that all who shall attempt, in
the ages upon which we are entering, to base freedom upon aristocratic
privilege, will fail--that all who shall attempt to draw and to retain
authority within a single class, will fail. At the present day no ruler
is skilful or strong enough to found a despotism, by re-establishing
permanent distinctions of rank amongst his subjects: no legislator is
wise or powerful enough to preserve free institutions, if he does not
take equality for his first principle and his watchword. All those of
our contemporaries who would establish or secure the independence and
the dignity of their fellow-men, must show themselves the friends of
equality; and the only worthy means of showing themselves as such, is to
be so: upon this depends the success of their holy enterprise. Thus the
question is not how to reconstruct aristocratic society, but how to make
liberty proceed out of that democratic state of society in which God has
placed us.

These two truths appear to me simple, clear, and fertile in
consequences; and they naturally lead me to consider what kind of
free government can be established amongst a people in which social
conditions are equal. It results from the very constitution of
democratic nations and from their necessities, that the power of
government amongst them must be more uniform, more centralized, more
extensive, more searching, and more efficient than in other countries.
Society at large is naturally stronger and more active, individuals more
subordinate and weak; the former does more, the latter less; and this is
inevitably the case. It is not therefore to be expected that the range
of private independence will ever be as extensive in democratic as
in aristocratic countries--nor is this to be desired; for, amongst
aristocratic nations, the mass is often sacrificed to the individual,
and the prosperity of the greater number to the greatness of the few.
It is both necessary and desirable that the government of a democratic
people should be active and powerful: and our object should not be to
render it weak or indolent, but solely to prevent it from abusing its
aptitude and its strength.

The circumstance which most contributed to secure the independence of
private persons in aristocratic ages, was, that the supreme power did
not affect to take upon itself alone the government and administration
of the community; those functions were necessarily partially left to
the members of the aristocracy: so that as the supreme power was always
divided, it never weighed with its whole weight and in the same manner
on each individual. Not only did the government not perform everything
by its immediate agency; but as most of the agents who discharged its
duties derived their power not from the State, but from the circumstance
of their birth, they were not perpetually under its control. The
government could not make or unmake them in an instant, at pleasure,
nor bend them in strict uniformity to its slightest caprice--this was
an additional guarantee of private independence. I readily admit that
recourse cannot be had to the same means at the present time: but I
discover certain democratic expedients which may be substituted for
them. Instead of vesting in the government alone all the administrative
powers of which corporations and nobles have been deprived, a portion of
them may be entrusted to secondary public bodies, temporarily composed
of private citizens: thus the liberty of private persons will be more
secure, and their equality will not be diminished.

The Americans, who care less for words than the French, still designate
by the name of "county" the largest of their administrative districts:
but the duties of the count or lord-lieutenant are in part performed by
a provincial assembly. At a period of equality like our own it would be
unjust and unreasonable to institute hereditary officers; but there is
nothing to prevent us from substituting elective public officers to a
certain extent. Election is a democratic expedient which insures the
independence of the public officer in relation to the government,
as much and even more than hereditary rank can insure it amongst
aristocratic nations. Aristocratic countries abound in wealthy and
influential persons who are competent to provide for themselves, and
who cannot be easily or secretly oppressed: such persons restrain a
government within general habits of moderation and reserve. I am very
well aware that democratic countries contain no such persons naturally;
but something analogous to them may be created by artificial means. I
firmly believe that an aristocracy cannot again be founded in the world;
but I think that private citizens, by combining together, may constitute
bodies of great wealth, influence, and strength, corresponding to the
persons of an aristocracy. By this means many of the greatest political
advantages of aristocracy would be obtained without its injustice or
its dangers. An association for political, commercial, or manufacturing
purposes, or even for those of science and literature, is a powerful
and enlightened member of the community, which cannot be disposed of at
pleasure, or oppressed without remonstrance; and which, by defending its
own rights against the encroachments of the government, saves the common
liberties of the country.

In periods of aristocracy every man is always bound so closely to many
of his fellow-citizens, that he cannot be assailed without their coming
to his assistance. In ages of equality every man naturally stands alone;
he has no hereditary friends whose co-operation he may demand--no class
upon whose sympathy he may rely: he is easily got rid of, and he is
trampled on with impunity. At the present time, an oppressed member
of the community has therefore only one method of self-defence--he
may appeal to the whole nation; and if the whole nation is deaf to his
complaint, he may appeal to mankind: the only means he has of making
this appeal is by the press. Thus the liberty of the press is infinitely
more valuable amongst democratic nations than amongst all others; it is
the only cure for the evils which equality may produce. Equality sets
men apart and weakens them; but the press places a powerful weapon
within every man's reach, which the weakest and loneliest of them all
may use. Equality deprives a man of the support of his connections; but
the press enables him to summon all his fellow-countrymen and all his
fellow-men to his assistance. Printing has accelerated the progress of
equality, and it is also one of its best correctives.

I think that men living in aristocracies may, strictly speaking, do
without the liberty of the press: but such is not the case with those
who live in democratic countries. To protect their personal independence
I trust not to great political assemblies, to parliamentary privilege,
or to the assertion of popular sovereignty. All these things may, to
a certain extent, be reconciled with personal servitude--but that
servitude cannot be complete if the press is free: the press is the
chiefest democratic instrument of freedom.

Something analogous may be said of the judicial power. It is a part of
the essence of judicial power to attend to private interests, and to fix
itself with predilection on minute objects submitted to its observation;
another essential quality of judicial power is never to volunteer its
assistance to the oppressed, but always to be at the disposal of the
humblest of those who solicit it; their complaint, however feeble they
may themselves be, will force itself upon the ear of justice and claim
redress, for this is inherent in the very constitution of the courts
of justice. A power of this kind is therefore peculiarly adapted to the
wants of freedom, at a time when the eye and finger of the government
are constantly intruding into the minutest details of human actions, and
when private persons are at once too weak to protect themselves, and too
much isolated for them to reckon upon the assistance of their fellows.
The strength of the courts of law has ever been the greatest security
which can be offered to personal independence; but this is more
especially the case in democratic ages: private rights and interests are
in constant danger, if the judicial power does not grow more extensive
and more strong to keep pace with the growing equality of conditions.

Equality awakens in men several propensities extremely dangerous to
freedom, to which the attention of the legislator ought constantly to be
directed. I shall only remind the reader of the most important amongst
them. Men living in democratic ages do not readily comprehend the
utility of forms: they feel an instinctive contempt for them--I have
elsewhere shown for what reasons. Forms excite their contempt and often
their hatred; as they commonly aspire to none but easy and present
gratifications, they rush onwards to the object of their desires, and
the slightest delay exasperates them. This same temper, carried
with them into political life, renders them hostile to forms, which
perpetually retard or arrest them in some of their projects. Yet this
objection which the men of democracies make to forms is the very thing
which renders forms so useful to freedom; for their chief merit is to
serve as a barrier between the strong and the weak, the ruler and the
people, to retard the one, and give the other time to look about him.
Forms become more necessary in proportion as the government becomes
more active and more powerful, whilst private persons are becoming more
indolent and more feeble. Thus democratic nations naturally stand more
in need of forms than other nations, and they naturally respect them
less. This deserves most serious attention. Nothing is more pitiful
than the arrogant disdain of most of our contemporaries for questions
of form; for the smallest questions of form have acquired in our time an
importance which they never had before: many of the greatest interests
of mankind depend upon them. I think that if the statesmen of
aristocratic ages could sometimes contemn forms with impunity, and
frequently rise above them, the statesmen to whom the government of
nations is now confided ought to treat the very least among them
with respect, and not neglect them without imperious necessity. In
aristocracies the observance of forms was superstitious; amongst us they
ought to be kept with a deliberate and enlightened deference.

Another tendency, which is extremely natural to democratic nations and
extremely dangerous, is that which leads them ta despise and undervalue
the rights of private persons. The attachment which men feel to a right,
and the respect which they display for it, is generally proportioned to
its importance, or to the length of time during which they have enjoyed
it. The rights of private persons amongst democratic nations are
commonly of small importance, of recent growth, and extremely
precarious--the consequence is that they are often sacrificed without
regret, and almost always violated without remorse. But it happens that
at the same period and amongst the same nations in which men conceive
a natural contempt for the rights of private persons, the rights of
society at large are naturally extended and consolidated: in other
words, men become less attached to private rights at the very time at
which it would be most necessary to retain and to defend what little
remains of them. It is therefore most especially in the present
democratic ages, that the true friends of the liberty and the greatness
of man ought constantly to be on the alert to prevent the power of
government from lightly sacrificing the private rights of individuals
to the general execution of its designs. At such times no citizen is so
obscure that it is not very dangerous to allow him to be oppressed--no
private rights are so unimportant that they can be surrendered with
impunity to the caprices of a government. The reason is plain:--if the
private right of an individual is violated at a time when the human mind
is fully impressed with the importance and the sanctity of such rights,
the injury done is confined to the individual whose right is infringed;
but to violate such a right, at the present day, is deeply to corrupt
the manners of the nation and to put the whole community in jeopardy,
because the very notion of this kind of right constantly tends amongst
us to be impaired and lost.

There are certain habits, certain notions, and certain vices which are
peculiar to a state of revolution, and which a protracted revolution
cannot fail to engender and to propagate, whatever be, in other
respects, its character, its purpose, and the scene on which it takes
place. When any nation has, within a short space of time, repeatedly
varied its rulers, its opinions, and its laws, the men of whom it is
composed eventually contract a taste for change, and grow accustomed
to see all changes effected by sudden violence. Thus they naturally
conceive a contempt for forms which daily prove ineffectual; and they do
not support without impatience the dominion of rules which they have so
often seen infringed. As the ordinary notions of equity and morality no
longer suffice to explain and justify all the innovations daily begotten
by a revolution, the principle of public utility is called in, the
doctrine of political necessity is conjured up, and men accustom
themselves to sacrifice private interests without scruple, and
to trample on the rights of individuals in order more speedily to
accomplish any public purpose.

These habits and notions, which I shall call revolutionary, because all
revolutions produce them, occur in aristocracies just as much as amongst
democratic nations; but amongst the former they are often less powerful
and always less lasting, because there they meet with habits, notions,
defects, and impediments, which counteract them: they consequently
disappear as soon as the revolution is terminated, and the nation
reverts to its former political courses. This is not always the case
in democratic countries, in which it is ever to be feared that
revolutionary tendencies, becoming more gentle and more regular, without
entirely disappearing from society, will be gradually transformed into
habits of subjection to the administrative authority of the government.
I know of no countries in which revolutions re more dangerous than
in democratic countries; because, independently of the accidental and
transient evils which must always attend them, they may always create
some evils which are permanent and unending. I believe that there are
such things as justifiable resistance and legitimate rebellion: I do not
therefore assert, as an absolute proposition, that the men of democratic
ages ought never to make revolutions; but I think that they have
especial reason to hesitate before they embark in them, and that it is
far better to endure many grievances in their present condition than to
have recourse to so perilous a remedy.

I shall conclude by one general idea, which comprises not only all the
particular ideas which have been expressed in the present chapter, but
also most of those which it is the object of this book to treat of.
In the ages of aristocracy which preceded our own, there were private
persons of great power, and a social authority of extreme weakness. The
outline of society itself was not easily discernible, and constantly
confounded with the different powers by which the community was ruled.
The principal efforts of the men of those times were required to
strengthen, aggrandize, and secure the supreme power; and on the other
hand, to circumscribe individual independence within narrower limits,
and to subject private interests to the interests of the public. Other
perils and other cares await the men of our age. Amongst the greater
part of modern nations, the government, whatever may be its origin, its
constitution, or its name, has become almost omnipotent, and private
persons are falling, more and more, into the lowest stage of weakness
and dependence. In olden society everything was different; unity and
uniformity were nowhere to be met with. In modern society everything
threatens to become so much alike, that the peculiar characteristics of
each individual will soon be entirely lost in the general aspect of the
world. Our forefathers were ever prone to make an improper use of the
notion, that private rights ought to be respected; and we are naturally
prone on the other hand to exaggerate the idea that the interest of a
private individual ought always to bend to the interest of the many. The
political world is metamorphosed: new remedies must henceforth be sought
for new disorders. To lay down extensive, but distinct and settled
limits, to the action of the government; to confer certain rights on
private persons, and to secure to them the undisputed enjoyment of those
rights; to enable individual man to maintain whatever independence,
strength, and original power he still possesses; to raise him by the
side of society at large, and uphold him in that position--these appear
to me the main objects of legislators in the ages upon which we are now
entering. It would seem as if the rulers of our time sought only to use
men in order to make things great; I wish that they would try a little
more to make great men; that they would set less value on the work, and
more upon the workman; that they would never forget that a nation cannot
long remain strong when every man belonging to it is individually weak,
and that no form or combination of social polity has yet been devised,
to make an energetic people out of a community of pusillanimous and
enfeebled citizens.

I trace amongst our contemporaries two contrary notions which are
equally injurious. One set of men can perceive nothing in the principle
of equality but the anarchical tendencies which it engenders: they
dread their own free agency--they fear themselves. Other thinkers, less
numerous but more enlightened, take a different view: besides that track
which starts from the principle of equality to terminate in anarchy,
they have at last discovered the road which seems to lead men to
inevitable servitude. They shape their souls beforehand to this
necessary condition; and, despairing of remaining free, they already
do obeisance in their hearts to the master who is soon to appear. The
former abandon freedom, because they think it dangerous; the latter,
because they hold it to be impossible. If I had entertained the latter
conviction, I should not have written this book, but I should have
confined myself to deploring in secret the destiny of mankind. I have
sought to point out the dangers to which the principle of equality
exposes the independence of man, because I firmly believe that these
dangers are the most formidable, as well as the least foreseen, of all
those which futurity holds in store: but I do not think that they are
insurmountable. The men who live in the democratic ages upon which we
are entering have naturally a taste for independence: they are naturally
impatient of regulation, and they are wearied by the permanence even of
the condition they themselves prefer. They are fond of power; but they
are prone to despise and hate those who wield it, and they easily elude
its grasp by their own mobility and insignificance. These propensities
will always manifest themselves, because they originate in the
groundwork of society, which will undergo no change: for a long time
they will prevent the establishment of any despotism, and they will
furnish fresh weapons to each succeeding generation which shall struggle
in favor of the liberty of mankind. Let us then look forward to the
future with that salutary fear which makes men keep watch and ward
for freedom, not with that faint and idle terror which depresses and
enervates the heart.




Chapter VIII: General Survey Of The Subject

Before I close forever the theme that has detained me so long, I would
fain take a parting survey of all the various characteristics of modern
society, and appreciate at last the general influence to be exercised by
the principle of equality upon the fate of mankind; but I am stopped
by the difficulty of the task, and in presence of so great an object my
sight is troubled, and my reason fails. The society of the modern world
which I have sought to delineate, and which I seek to judge, has but
just come into existence. Time has not yet shaped it into perfect form:
the great revolution by which it has been created is not yet over: and
amidst the occurrences of our time, it is almost impossible to discern
what will pass away with the revolution itself, and what will survive
its close. The world which is rising into existence is still half
encumbered by the remains of the world which is waning into decay; and
amidst the vast perplexity of human affairs, none can say how much of
ancient institutions and former manners will remain, or how much will
completely disappear. Although the revolution which is taking place in
the social condition, the laws, the opinions, and the feelings of men,
is still very far from being terminated, yet its results already admit
of no comparison with anything that the world has ever before witnessed.
I go back from age to age up to the remotest antiquity; but I find no
parallel to what is occurring before my eyes: as the past has ceased to
throw its light upon the future, the mind of man wanders in obscurity.
Nevertheless, in the midst of a prospect so wide, so novel and so
confused, some of the more prominent characteristics may already be
discerned and pointed out. The good things and the evils of life are
more equally distributed in the world: great wealth tends to disappear,
the number of small fortunes to increase; desires and gratifications
are multiplied, but extraordinary prosperity and irremediable penury are
alike unknown. The sentiment of ambition is universal, but the scope
of ambition is seldom vast. Each individual stands apart in solitary
weakness; but society at large is active, provident, and powerful: the
performances of private persons are insignificant, those of the State
immense. There is little energy of character; but manners are mild, and
laws humane. If there be few instances of exalted heroism or of virtues
of the highest, brightest, and purest temper, men's habits are regular,
violence is rare, and cruelty almost unknown. Human existence becomes
longer, and property more secure: life is not adorned with brilliant
trophies, but it is extremely easy and tranquil. Few pleasures are
either very refined or very coarse; and highly polished manners are as
uncommon as great brutality of tastes. Neither men of great learning,
nor extremely ignorant communities, are to be met with; genius becomes
more rare, information more diffused. The human mind is impelled by the
small efforts of all mankind combined together, not by the strenuous
activity of certain men. There is less perfection, but more abundance,
in all the productions of the arts. The ties of race, of rank, and of
country are relaxed; the great bond of humanity is strengthened. If
I endeavor to find out the most general and the most prominent of all
these different characteristics, I shall have occasion to perceive, that
what is taking place in men's fortunes manifests itself under a thousand
other forms. Almost all extremes are softened or blunted: all that was
most prominent is superseded by some mean term, at once less lofty and
less low, less brilliant and less obscure, than what before existed in
the world.

When I survey this countless multitude of beings, shaped in each other's
likeness, amidst whom nothing rises and nothing falls, the sight of such
universal uniformity saddens and chills me, and I am tempted to regret
that state of society which has ceased to be. When the world was full of
men of great importance and extreme insignificance, of great wealth and
extreme poverty, of great learning and extreme ignorance, I turned aside
from the latter to fix my observation on the former alone, who gratified
my sympathies. But I admit that this gratification arose from my own
weakness: it is because I am unable to see at once all that is around
me, that I am allowed thus to select and separate the objects of my
predilection from among so many others. Such is not the case with that
almighty and eternal Being whose gaze necessarily includes the whole of
created things, and who surveys distinctly, though at once, mankind and
man. We may naturally believe that it is not the singular prosperity of
the few, but the greater well-being of all, which is most pleasing in
the sight of the Creator and Preserver of men. What appears to me to be
man's decline, is to His eye advancement; what afflicts me is acceptable
to Him. A state of equality is perhaps less elevated, but it is more
just; and its justice constitutes its greatness and its beauty. I would
strive then to raise myself to this point of the divine contemplation,
and thence to view and to judge the concerns of men.

No man, upon the earth, can as yet affirm absolutely and generally,
that the new state of the world is better than its former one; but it
is already easy to perceive that this state is different. Some vices
and some virtues were so inherent in the constitution of an aristocratic
nation, and are so opposite to the character of a modern people, that
they can never be infused into it; some good tendencies and some bad
propensities which were unknown to the former, are natural to the
latter; some ideas suggest themselves spontaneously to the imagination
of the one, which are utterly repugnant to the mind of the other. They
are like two distinct orders of human beings, each of which has its
own merits and defects, its own advantages and its own evils. Care
must therefore be taken not to judge the state of society, which is now
coming into existence, by notions derived from a state of society
which no longer exists; for as these states of society are exceedingly
different in their structure, they cannot be submitted to a just or fair
comparison. It would be scarcely more reasonable to require of our
own contemporaries the peculiar virtues which originated in the social
condition of their forefathers, since that social condition is itself
fallen, and has drawn into one promiscuous ruin the good and evil which
belonged to it.

But as yet these things are imperfectly understood. I find that a great
number of my contemporaries undertake to make a certain selection from
amongst the institutions, the opinions, and the ideas which originated
in the aristocratic constitution of society as it was: a portion of
these elements they would willingly relinquish, but they would keep the
remainder and transplant them into their new world. I apprehend that
such men are wasting their time and their strength in virtuous
but unprofitable efforts. The object is not to retain the peculiar
advantages which the inequality of conditions bestows upon mankind, but
to secure the new benefits which equality may supply. We have not to
seek to make ourselves like our progenitors, but to strive to work out
that species of greatness and happiness which is our own. For myself,
who now look back from this extreme limit of my task, and discover from
afar, but at once, the various objects which have attracted my more
attentive investigation upon my way, I am full of apprehensions and
of hopes. I perceive mighty dangers which it is possible to ward
off--mighty evils which may be avoided or alleviated; and I cling with
a firmer hold to the belief, that for democratic nations to be virtuous
and prosperous they require but to will it. I am aware that many of my
contemporaries maintain that nations are never their own masters
here below, and that they necessarily obey some insurmountable and
unintelligent power, arising from anterior events, from their race, or
from the soil and climate of their country. Such principles are false
and cowardly; such principles can never produce aught but feeble men
and pusillanimous nations. Providence has not created mankind entirely
independent or entirely free. It is true that around every man a fatal
circle is traced, beyond which he cannot pass; but within the wide
verge of that circle he is powerful and free: as it is with man, so with
communities. The nations of our time cannot prevent the conditions of
men from becoming equal; but it depends upon themselves whether the
principle of equality is to lead them to servitude or freedom, to
knowledge or barbarism, to prosperity or to wretchedness.




Part I.




Appendix A

For information concerning all the countries of the West which have
not been visited by Europeans, consult the account of two expeditions
undertaken at the expense of Congress by Major Long. This traveller
particularly mentions, on the subject of the great American desert, that
a line may be drawn nearly parallel to the 20th degree of longitude *a
(meridian of Washington), beginning from the Red River and ending at
the River Platte. From this imaginary line to the Rocky Mountains, which
bound the valley of the Mississippi on the west, lie immense plains,
which are almost entirely covered with sand, incapable of cultivation,
or scattered over with masses of granite. In summer, these plains are
quite destitute of water, and nothing is to be seen on them but herds of
buffaloes and wild horses. Some hordes of Indians are also found
there, but in no great numbers. Major Long was told that in travelling
northwards from the River Platte you find the same desert lying
constantly on the left; but he was unable to ascertain the truth of this
report. However worthy of confidence may be the narrative of Major Long,
it must be remembered that he only passed through the country of which
he speaks, without deviating widely from the line which he had traced
out for his journey.

[Footnote a: The 20th degree of longitude, according to the meridian of
Washington, agrees very nearly with the 97th degree on the meridian of
Greenwich.]




Appendix B

South America, in the region between the tropics, produces an incredible
profusion of climbing plants, of which the flora of the Antilles alone
presents us with forty different species. Among the most graceful of
these shrubs is the passion-flower, which, according to Descourtiz,
grows with such luxuriance in the Antilles, as to climb trees by means
of the tendrils with which it is provided, and form moving bowers of
rich and elegant festoons, decorated with blue and purple flowers, and
fragrant with perfume. The Mimosa scandens (Acacia a grandes gousses) is
a creeper of enormous and rapid growth, which climbs from tree to tree,
and sometimes covers more than half a league.




Appendix C

The languages which are spoken by the Indians of America, from the Pole
to Cape Horn, are said to be all formed upon the same model, and subject
to the same grammatical rules; whence it may fairly be concluded that
all the Indian nations sprang from the same stock. Each tribe of
the American continent speaks a different dialect; but the number of
languages, properly so called, is very small, a fact which tends to
prove that the nations of the New World had not a very remote origin.
Moreover, the languages of America have a great degree of regularity,
from which it seems probable that the tribes which employ them had not
undergone any great revolutions, or been incorporated voluntarily or
by constraint, with foreign nations. For it is generally the union of
several languages into one which produces grammatical irregularities. It
is not long since the American languages, especially those of the
North, first attracted the serious attention of philologists, when the
discovery was made that this idiom of a barbarous people was the product
of a complicated system of ideas and very learned combinations. These
languages were found to be very rich, and great pains had been taken
at their formation to render them agreeable to the ear. The grammatical
system of the Americans differs from all others in several points, but
especially in the following:--Some nations of Europe, amongst
others the Germans, have the power of combining at pleasure different
expressions, and thus giving a complex sense to certain words. The
Indians have given a most surprising extension to this power, so as to
arrive at the means of connecting a great number of ideas with a single
term. This will be easily understood with the help of an example quoted
by Mr. Duponceau, in the "Memoirs of the Philosophical Society of
America": A Delaware woman playing with a cat or a young dog, says
this writer, is heard to pronounce the word kuligatschis, which is thus
composed: k is the sign of the second person, and signifies "thou" or
"thy"; uli is a part of the word wulit, which signifies "beautiful,"
"pretty"; gat is another fragment, of the word wichgat, which means
"paw"; and, lastly, schis is a diminutive giving the idea of smallness.
Thus in one word the Indian woman has expressed "Thy pretty little paw."
Take another example of the felicity with which the savages of America
have composed their words. A young man of Delaware is called pilape.
This word is formed from pilsit, "chaste," "innocent"; and lenape,
"man"; viz., "man in his purity and innocence." This facility of
combining words is most remarkable in the strange formation of their
verbs. The most complex action is often expressed by a single verb,
which serves to convey all the shades of an idea by the modification
of its construction. Those who may wish to examine more in detail this
subject, which I have only glanced at superficially, should read:--

1. The correspondence of Mr. Duponceau and the Rev. Mr. Hecwelder
relative to the Indian languages, which is to be found in the first
volume of the "Memoirs of the Philosophical Society of America,"
published at Philadelphia, 1819, by Abraham Small; vol. i. p. 356-464.

2. The "Grammar of the Delaware or the Lenape Language," by Geiberger,
and the preface of Mr. Duponceau. All these are in the same collection,
vol. iii.

3. An excellent account of these works, which is at the end of the sixth
volume of the American Encyclopaedia.




Appendix D

See in Charlevoix, vol. i. p. 235, the history of the first war which
the French inhabitants of Canada carried on, in 1610, against the
Iroquois. The latter, armed with bows and arrows, offered a desperate
resistance to the French and their allies. Charlevoix is not a great
painter, yet he exhibits clearly enough, in this narrative, the contrast
between the European manners and those of savages, as well as the
different way in which the two races of men understood the sense of
honor. When the French, says he, seized upon the beaver-skins which
covered the Indians who had fallen, the Hurons, their allies, were
greatly offended at this proceeding; but without hesitation they set
to work in their usual manner, inflicting horrid cruelties upon the
prisoners, and devouring one of those who had been killed, which
made the Frenchmen shudder. The barbarians prided themselves upon a
scrupulousness which they were surprised at not finding in our nation,
and could not understand that there was less to reprehend in the
stripping of dead bodies than in the devouring of their flesh like wild
beasts. Charlevoix, in another place (vol. i. p. 230), thus describes
the first torture of which Champlain was an eyewitness, and the return
of the Hurons into their own village. Having proceeded about eight
leagues, says he, our allies halted; and having singled out one of
their captives, they reproached him with all the cruelties which he
had practised upon the warriors of their nation who had fallen into his
hands, and told him that he might expect to be treated in like manner;
adding, that if he had any spirit he would prove it by singing. He
immediately chanted forth his death-song, and then his war-song, and all
the songs he knew, "but in a very mournful strain," says Champlain, who
was not then aware that all savage music has a melancholy character. The
tortures which succeeded, accompanied by all the horrors which we shall
mention hereafter, terrified the French, who made every effort to put a
stop to them, but in vain. The following night, one of the Hurons having
dreamt that they were pursued, the retreat was changed to a real flight,
and the savages never stopped until they were out of the reach of
danger. The moment they perceived the cabins of their own village, they
cut themselves long sticks, to which they fastened the scalps which had
fallen to their share, and carried them in triumph. At this sight, the
women swam to the canoes, where they received the bloody scalps from the
hands of their husbands, and tied them round their necks. The warriors
offered one of these horrible trophies to Champlain; they also presented
him with some bows and arrows--the only spoils of the Iroquois which
they had ventured to seize--entreating him to show them to the King
of France. Champlain lived a whole winter quite alone among these
barbarians, without being under any alarm for his person or property.




Appendix E

Although the Puritanical strictness which presided over the
establishment of the English colonies in America is now much relaxed,
remarkable traces of it are still found in their habits and their laws.
In 1792, at the very time when the anti-Christian republic of France
began its ephemeral existence, the legislative body of Massachusetts
promulgated the following law, to compel the citizens to observe the
Sabbath. We give the preamble and the principal articles of this
law, which is worthy of the reader's attention: "Whereas," says the
legislator, "the observation of the Sunday is an affair of public
interest; inasmuch as it produces a necessary suspension of labor, leads
men to reflect upon the duties of life, and the errors to which human
nature is liable, and provides for the public and private worship of
God, the creator and governor of the universe, and for the performance
of such acts of charity as are the ornament and comfort of Christian
societies:--Whereas irreligious or light-minded persons, forgetting the
duties which the Sabbath imposes, and the benefits which these duties
confer on society, are known to profane its sanctity, by following their
pleasures or their affairs; this way of acting being contrary to their
own interest as Christians, and calculated to annoy those who do not
follow their example; being also of great injury to society at large, by
spreading a taste for dissipation and dissolute manners; Be it enacted
and ordained by the Governor, Council, and Representatives convened in
General Court of Assembly, that all and every person and persons shall
on that day carefully apply themselves to the duties of religion
and piety, that no tradesman or labourer shall exercise his ordinary
calling, and that no game or recreation shall be used on the Lord's Day,
upon pain of forfeiting ten shillings.

"That no one shall travel on that day, or any part thereof, under pain
of forfeiting twenty shillings; that no vessel shall leave a harbour of
the colony; that no persons shall keep outside the meeting-house during
the time of public worship, or profane the time by playing or talking,
on penalty of five shillings.

"Public-houses shall not entertain any other than strangers or lodgers,
under penalty of five shillings for every person found drinking and
abiding therein.

"Any person in health, who, without sufficient reason, shall omit to
worship God in public during three months, shall be condemned to a fine
of ten shillings.

"Any person guilty of misbehaviour in a place of public worship, shall
be fined from five to forty shillings.

"These laws are to be enforced by the tything-men of each township, who
have authority to visit public-houses on the Sunday. The innkeeper who
shall refuse them admittance, shall be fined forty shillings for such
offence.

"The tything-men are to stop travellers, and require of them their
reason for being on the road on Sunday; anyone refusing to answer, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding five pounds sterling. If
the reason given by the traveller be not deemed by the tything-man
sufficient, he may bring the traveller before the justice of the peace
of the district." (Law of March 8, 1792; General Laws of Massachusetts,
vol. i. p. 410.)

On March 11, 1797, a new law increased the amount of fines, half of
which was to be given to the informer. (Same collection, vol. ii. p.
525.) On February 16, 1816, a new law confirmed these same measures.
(Same collection, vol. ii. p. 405.) Similar enactments exist in the
laws of the State of New York, revised in 1827 and 1828. (See Revised
Statutes, Part I. chapter 20, p. 675.) In these it is declared that no
one is allowed on the Sabbath to sport, to fish, to play at games, or to
frequent houses where liquor is sold. No one can travel, except in
case of necessity. And this is not the only trace which the religious
strictness and austere manners of the first emigrants have left behind
them in the American laws. In the Revised Statutes of the State of New
York, vol. i. p. 662, is the following clause:--

"Whoever shall win or lose in the space of twenty-four hours, by gaming
or betting, the sum of twenty-five dollars, shall be found guilty of a
misdemeanour, and upon conviction shall be condemned to pay a fine equal
to at least five times the value of the sum lost or won; which shall
be paid to the inspector of the poor of the township. He that loses
twenty-five dollars or more may bring an action to recover them; and if
he neglects to do so the inspector of the poor may prosecute the winner,
and oblige him to pay into the poor's box both the sum he has gained and
three times as much besides."

The laws we quote from are of recent date; but they are unintelligible
without going back to the very origin of the colonies. I have no doubt
that in our days the penal part of these laws is very rarely applied.
Laws preserve their inflexibility, long after the manners of a nation
have yielded to the influence of time. It is still true, however, that
nothing strikes a foreigner on his arrival in America more forcibly
than the regard paid to the Sabbath. There is one, in particular, of
the large American cities, in which all social movements begin to be
suspended even on Saturday evening. You traverse its streets at the hour
at which you expect men in the middle of life to be engaged in business,
and young people in pleasure; and you meet with solitude and silence.
Not only have all ceased to work, but they appear to have ceased to
exist. Neither the movements of industry are heard, nor the accents of
joy, nor even the confused murmur which arises from the midst of a great
city. Chains are hung across the streets in the neighborhood of the
churches; the half-closed shutters of the houses scarcely admit a ray
of sun into the dwellings of the citizens. Now and then you perceive a
solitary individual who glides silently along the deserted streets and
lanes. Next day, at early dawn, the rolling of carriages, the noise of
hammers, the cries of the population, begin to make themselves heard
again. The city is awake. An eager crowd hastens towards the resort of
commerce and industry; everything around you bespeaks motion, bustle,
hurry. A feverish activity succeeds to the lethargic stupor of
yesterday; you might almost suppose that they had but one day to acquire
wealth and to enjoy it.




Appendix F

It is unnecessary for me to say, that in the chapter which has just been
read, I have not had the intention of giving a history of America. My
only object was to enable the reader to appreciate the influence which
the opinions and manners of the first emigrants had exercised upon the
fate of the different colonies, and of the Union in general. I have
therefore confined myself to the quotation of a few detached fragments.
I do not know whether I am deceived, but it appears to me that, by
pursuing the path which I have merely pointed out, it would be easy to
present such pictures of the American republics as would not be unworthy
the attention of the public, and could not fail to suggest to the
statesman matter for reflection. Not being able to devote myself to this
labor, I am anxious to render it easy to others; and, for this purpose,
I subjoin a short catalogue and analysis of the works which seem to me
the most important to consult.

At the head of the general documents which it would be advantageous to
examine I place the work entitled "An Historical Collection of State
Papers, and other authentic Documents, intended as Materials for a
History of the United States of America," by Ebenezer Hasard. The first
volume of this compilation, which was printed at Philadelphia in 1792,
contains a literal copy of all the charters granted by the Crown of
England to the emigrants, as well as the principal acts of the colonial
governments, during the commencement of their existence. Amongst other
authentic documents, we here find a great many relating to the affairs
of New England and Virginia during this period. The second volume is
almost entirely devoted to the acts of the Confederation of 1643. This
federal compact, which was entered into by the colonies of New England
with the view of resisting the Indians, was the first instance of
union afforded by the Anglo-Americans. There were besides many other
confederations of the same nature, before the famous one of 1776, which
brought about the independence of the colonies.

Each colony has, besides, its own historic monuments, some of which are
extremely curious; beginning with Virginia, the State which was first
peopled. The earliest historian of Virginia was its founder, Captain
John Smith. Captain Smith has left us an octavo volume, entitled "The
generall Historie of Virginia and New England, by Captain John Smith,
sometymes Governor in those Countryes, and Admirall of New England";
printed at London in 1627. The work is adorned with curious maps and
engravings of the time when it appeared; the narrative extends from the
year 1584 to 1626. Smith's work is highly and deservedly esteemed.
The author was one of the most celebrated adventurers of a period of
remarkable adventure; his book breathes that ardor for discovery, that
spirit of enterprise, which characterized the men of his time, when
the manners of chivalry were united to zeal for commerce, and made
subservient to the acquisition of wealth. But Captain Smith is
most remarkable for uniting to the virtues which characterized his
contemporaries several qualities to which they were generally strangers;
his style is simple and concise, his narratives bear the stamp of truth,
and his descriptions are free from false ornament. This author throws
most valuable light upon the state and condition of the Indians at the
time when North America was first discovered.

The second historian to consult is Beverley, who commences his narrative
with the year 1585, and ends it with 1700. The first part of his book
contains historical documents, properly so called, relative to the
infancy of the colony. The second affords a most curious picture of the
state of the Indians at this remote period. The third conveys very clear
ideas concerning the manners, social conditions, laws, and political
customs of the Virginians in the author's lifetime. Beverley was a
native of Virginia, which occasions him to say at the beginning of
his book, that he entreats his readers not to exercise their critical
severity upon it, since, having been born in the Indies, he does not
aspire to purity of language. Notwithstanding this colonial modesty, the
author shows throughout his book the impatience with which he endures
the supremacy of the mother-country. In this work of Beverley are also
found numerous traces of that spirit of civil liberty which animated the
English colonies of America at the time when he wrote. He also shows the
dissensions which existed among them, and retarded their independence.
Beverley detests his Catholic neighbors of Maryland even more than
he hates the English government: his style is simple, his narrative
interesting, and apparently trustworthy.

I saw in America another work which ought to be consulted, entitled "The
History of Virginia," by William Stith. This book affords some curious
details, but I thought it long and diffuse. The most ancient as well as
the best document to be consulted on the history of Carolina, is a work
in small quarto, entitled "The History of Carolina," by John Lawson,
printed at London in 1718. This work contains, in the first part, a
journey of discovery in the west of Carolina; the account of which,
given in the form of a journal, is in general confused and superficial;
but it contains a very striking description of the mortality caused
among the savages of that time both by the smallpox and the immoderate
use of brandy; with a curious picture of the corruption of manners
prevalent amongst them, which was increased by the presence of
Europeans. The second part of Lawson's book is taken up with a
description of the physical condition of Carolina, and its productions.
In the third part, the author gives an interesting account of the
manners, customs, and government of the Indians at that period. There is
a good deal of talent and originality in this part of the work.
Lawson concludes his history with a copy of the charter granted to the
Carolinas in the reign of Charles II. The general tone of this work is
light, and often licentious, forming a perfect contrast to the solemn
style of the works published at the same period in New England. Lawson's
history is extremely scarce in America, and cannot be procured in
Europe. There is, however, a copy of it in the Royal Library at Paris.

From the southern extremity of the United States, I pass at once to the
northern limit; as the intermediate space was not peopled till a later
period. I must first point out a very curious compilation, entitled
"Collection of the Massachusetts Historical Society," printed for the
first time at Boston in 1792, and reprinted in 1806. The collection of
which I speak, and which is continued to the present day, contains a
great number of very valuable documents relating to the history of the
different States in New England. Among them are letters which have never
been published, and authentic pieces which had been buried in provincial
archives. The whole work of Gookin, concerning the Indians, is inserted
there.

I have mentioned several times in the chapter to which this note
relates, the work of Nathaniel Norton entitled "New England's Memorial";
sufficiently, perhaps, to prove that it deserves the attention of those
who would be conversant with the history of New England. This book is in
octavo, and was reprinted at Boston in 1826.

The most valuable and important authority which exists upon the
history of New England, is the work of the Rev. Cotton Mather, entitled
"Magnalia Christi Americana, or the Ecclesiastical History of New
England, 1620-1698, 2 vols. 8vo, reprinted at Hartford, United States,
in 1820." *b The author divided his work into seven books. The first
presents the history of the events which prepared and brought about the
establishment of New England. The second contains the lives of the first
governors and chief magistrates who presided over the country. The third
is devoted to the lives and labors of the evangelical ministers who,
during the same period, had the care of souls. In the fourth the author
relates the institution and progress of the University of Cambridge
(Massachusetts). In the fifth he describes the principles and the
discipline of the Church of New England. The sixth is taken up in
retracing certain facts, which, in the opinion of Mather, prove the
merciful interposition of Providence in behalf of the inhabitants of
New England. Lastly, in the seventh, the author gives an account of
the heresies and the troubles to which the Church of New England was
exposed. Cotton Mather was an evangelical minister who was born at
Boston, and passed his life there. His narratives are distinguished by
the same ardor and religious zeal which led to the foundation of the
colonies of New England. Traces of bad taste sometimes occur in his
manner of writing; but he interests, because he is full of enthusiasm.
He is often intolerant, still oftener credulous, but he never betrays
an intention to deceive. Sometimes his book contains fine passages, and
true and profound reflections, such as the following:--

"Before the arrival of the Puritans," says he (vol. i. chap. iv.),
"there were more than a few attempts of the English to people and
improve the parts of New England which were to the northward of New
Plymouth; but the designs of those attempts being aimed no higher
than the advancement of some worldly interests, a constant series of
disasters has confounded them, until there was a plantation erected upon
the nobler designs of Christianity: and that plantation though it
has had more adversaries than perhaps any one upon earth, yet, having
obtained help from God, it continues to this day." Mather occasionally
relieves the austerity of his descriptions with images full of tender
feeling: after having spoken of an English lady whose religious ardor
had brought her to America with her husband, and who soon after sank
under the fatigues and privations of exile, he adds, "As for her
virtuous husband, Isaac Johnson,

     He tryed
     To live without her, liked it not, and dyed."

[Footnote b: A folio edition of this work was published in London in
1702.]

Mather's work gives an admirable picture of the time and country which
he describes. In his account of the motives which led the Puritans to
seek an asylum beyond seas, he says:--"The God of Heaven served, as it
were, a summons upon the spirits of his people in the English nation,
stirring up the spirits of thousands which never saw the faces of each
other, with a most unanimous inclination to leave all the pleasant
accommodations of their native country, and go over a terrible
ocean, into a more terrible desert, for the pure enjoyment of all his
ordinances. It is now reasonable that, before we pass any further,
the reasons of his undertaking should be more exactly made known
unto posterity, especially unto the posterity of those that were the
undertakers, lest they come at length to forget and neglect the true
interest of New England. Wherefore I shall now transcribe some of them
from a manuscript, wherein they were then tendered unto consideration:

"General Considerations for the Plantation of New England

"First, It will be a service unto the Church of great consequence, to
carry the Gospel unto those parts of the world, and raise a bulwark
against the kingdom of Antichrist, which the Jesuits labour to rear up
in all parts of the world.

"Secondly, All other Churches of Europe have been brought under
desolations; and it may be feared that the like judgments are coming
upon us; and who knows but God hath provided this place to be a refuge
for many whom he means to save out of the general destruction?

"Thirdly, The land grows weary of her inhabitants, insomuch that man,
which is the most precious of all creatures, is here more vile and
base than the earth he treads upon; children, neighbours, and friends,
especially the poor, are counted the greatest burdens, which, if things
were right, would be the chiefest of earthly blessings.

"Fourthly, We are grown to that intemperance in all excess of riot, as
no mean estate almost will suffice a man to keep sail with his equals,
and he that fails in it must live in scorn and contempt: hence it comes
to pass, that all arts and trades are carried in that deceitful manner
and unrighteous course, as it is almost impossible for a good upright
man to maintain his constant charge and live comfortably in them.

"Fifthly, The schools of learning and religion are so corrupted, as
(besides the unsupportable charge of education) most children, even the
best, wittiest, and of the fairest hopes, are perverted, corrupted,
and utterly overthrown by the multitude of evil examples and licentious
behaviours in these seminaries.

"Sixthly, The whole earth is the Lord's garden, and he hath given it to
the sons of Adam, to be tilled and improved by them: why, then, should
we stand starving here for places of habitation, and in the meantime
suffer whole countries, as profitable for the use of man, to lie waste
without any improvement?

"Seventhly, What can be a better or nobler work, and more worthy of a
Christian, than to erect and support a reformed particular Church in its
infancy, and unite our forces with such a company of faithful people, as
by timely assistance may grow stronger and prosper; but for want of it,
may be put to great hazards, if not be wholly ruined?

"Eighthly, If any such as are known to be godly, and live in wealth
and prosperity here, shall forsake all this to join with this reformed
Church, and with it run the hazard of an hard and mean condition, it
will be an example of great use, both for the removing of scandal and to
give more life unto the faith of God's people in their prayers for the
plantation, and also to encourage others to join the more willingly in
it."

Further on, when he declares the principles of the Church of New England
with respect to morals, Mather inveighs with violence against the
custom of drinking healths at table, which he denounces as a pagan and
abominable practice. He proscribes with the same rigor all ornaments for
the hair used by the female sex, as well as their custom of having the
arms and neck uncovered. In another part of his work he relates several
instances of witchcraft which had alarmed New England. It is plain that
the visible action of the devil in the affairs of this world appeared to
him an incontestable and evident fact.

This work of Cotton Mather displays, in many places, the spirit of civil
liberty and political independence which characterized the times in
which he lived. Their principles respecting government are discoverable
at every page. Thus, for instance, the inhabitants of Massachusetts, in
the year 1630, ten years after the foundation of Plymouth, are found to
have devoted Pound 400 sterling to the establishment of the University
of Cambridge. In passing from the general documents relative to the
history of New England to those which describe the several States
comprised within its limits, I ought first to notice "The History of
the Colony of Massachusetts," by Hutchinson, Lieutenant-Governor of the
Massachusetts Province, 2 vols. 8vo. The history of Hutchinson, which
I have several times quoted in the chapter to which this note relates,
commences in the year 1628, and ends in 1750. Throughout the work there
is a striking air of truth and the greatest simplicity of style: it
is full of minute details. The best history to consult concerning
Connecticut is that of Benjamin Trumbull, entitled "A Complete History
of Connecticut, Civil and Ecclesiastical," 1630-1764, 2 vols. 8vo,
printed in 1818 at New Haven. This history contains a clear and calm
account of all the events which happened in Connecticut during the
period given in the title. The author drew from the best sources, and
his narrative bears the stamp of truth. All that he says of the
early days of Connecticut is extremely curious. See especially the
Constitution of 1639, vol. i. ch. vi. p. 100; and also the Penal Laws of
Connecticut, vol. i. ch. vii. p. 123.

"The History of New Hampshire," by Jeremy Belknap, is a work held in
merited estimation. It was printed at Boston in 1792, in 2 vols.
8vo. The third chapter of the first volume is particularly worthy of
attention for the valuable details it affords on the political and
religious principles of the Puritans, on the causes of their emigration,
and on their laws. The following curious quotation is given from a
sermon delivered in 1663:--"It concerneth New England always to remember
that they are a plantation religious, not a plantation of trade. The
profession of the purity of doctrine, worship, and discipline, is
written upon her forehead. Let merchants, and such as are increasing
cent. per cent., remember this, that worldly gain was not the end and
design of the people of New England, but religion. And if any man among
us make religion as twelve, and the world as thirteen, such an one hath
not the spirit of a true New Englishman." The reader of Belknap will
find in his work more general ideas, and more strength of thought, than
are to be met with in the American historians even to the present day.

Among the Central States which deserve our attention for their remote
origin, New York and Pennsylvania are the foremost. The best history
we have of the former is entitled "A History of New York," by William
Smith, printed at London in 1757. Smith gives us important details of
the wars between the French and English in America. His is the best
account of the famous confederation of the Iroquois.

With respect to Pennsylvania, I cannot do better than point out the
work of Proud, entitled "The History of Pennsylvania, from the original
Institution and Settlement of that Province, under the first Proprietor
and Governor, William Penn, in 1681, till after the year 1742," by
Robert Proud, 2 vols. 8vo, printed at Philadelphia in 1797. This work is
deserving of the especial attention of the reader; it contains a mass of
curious documents concerning Penn, the doctrine of the Quakers, and
the character, manners, and customs of the first inhabitants of
Pennsylvania. I need not add that among the most important documents
relating to this State are the works of Penn himself, and those of
Franklin.




Part II.




Appendix G

We read in Jefferson's "Memoirs" as follows:--

"At the time of the first settlement of the English in Virginia, when
land was to be had for little or nothing, some provident persons having
obtained large grants of it, and being desirous of maintaining
the splendor of their families, entailed their property upon their
descendants. The transmission of these estates from generation to
generation, to men who bore the same name, had the effect of raising up
a distinct class of families, who, possessing by law the privilege of
perpetuating their wealth, formed by these means a sort of patrician
order, distinguished by the grandeur and luxury of their establishments.
From this order it was that the King usually chose his councillors of
state." *c

[Footnote c: This passage is extracted and translated from M. Conseil's
work upon the life of Jefferson, entitled "Melanges Politiques et
Philosophiques de Jefferson."]

In the United States, the principal clauses of the English law
respecting descent have been universally rejected. The first rule that
we follow, says Mr. Kent, touching inheritance, is the following:--If a
man dies intestate, his property goes to his heirs in a direct line.
If he has but one heir or heiress, he or she succeeds to the whole. If
there are several heirs of the same degree, they divide the inheritance
equally amongst them, without distinction of sex. This rule was
prescribed for the first time in the State of New York by a statute of
February 23, 1786. (See Revised Statutes, vol. iii. Appendix, p. 48.) It
has since then been adopted in the Revised Statutes of the same State.
At the present day this law holds good throughout the whole of the
United States, with the exception of the State of Vermont, where the
male heir inherits a double portion. (Kent's "Commentaries," vol. iv. p.
370.) Mr. Kent, in the same work, vol. iv. p. 1-22, gives a historical
account of American legislation on the subject of entail: by this
we learn that, previous to the Revolution, the colonies followed the
English law of entail. Estates tail were abolished in Virginia in 1776,
on a motion of Mr. Jefferson. They were suppressed in New York in 1786,
and have since been abolished in North Carolina, Kentucky, Tennessee,
Georgia, and Missouri. In Vermont, Indiana, Illinois, South Carolina,
and Louisiana, entail was never introduced. Those States which thought
proper to preserve the English law of entail, modified it in such a
way as to deprive it of its most aristocratic tendencies. "Our general
principles on the subject of government," says Mr. Kent, "tend to favor
the free circulation of property."

It cannot fail to strike the French reader who studies the law
of inheritance, that on these questions the French legislation is
infinitely more democratic even than the American. The American law
makes an equal division of the father's property, but only in the case
of his will not being known; "for every man," says the law, "in the
State of New York (Revised Statutes, vol. iii. Appendix, p. 51), has
entire liberty, power, and authority, to dispose of his property by
will, to leave it entire, or divided in favor of any persons he chooses
as his heirs, provided he do not leave it to a political body or any
corporation." The French law obliges the testator to divide his property
equally, or nearly so, among his heirs. Most of the American republics
still admit of entails, under certain restrictions; but the French law
prohibits entail in all cases. If the social condition of the Americans
is more democratic than that of the French, the laws of the latter are
the most democratic of the two. This may be explained more easily than
at first appears to be the case. In France, democracy is still occupied
in the work of destruction; in America, it reigns quietly over the ruins
it has made.




Appendix H

Summary Of The Qualifications Of Voters In The United States As They
Existed In 1832

All the States agree in granting the right of voting at the age of
twenty-one. In all of them it is necessary to have resided for a certain
time in the district where the vote is given. This period varies from
three months to two years.

As to the qualification: in the State of Massachusetts it is necessary
to have an income of Pound 3 or a capital of Pound 60. In Rhode Island,
a man must possess landed property to the amount of $133.

In Connecticut, he must have a property which gives an income of $17. A
year of service in the militia also gives the elective privilege.

In New Jersey, an elector must have a property of Pound 50 a year.

In South Carolina and Maryland, the elector must possess fifty acres of
land.

In Tennessee, he must possess some property.

In the States of Mississippi, Ohio, Georgia, Virginia, Pennsylvania,
Delaware, New York, the only necessary qualification for voting is that
of paying the taxes; and in most of the States, to serve in the militia
is equivalent to the payment of taxes. In Maine and New Hampshire any
man can vote who is not on the pauper list.

Lastly, in the States of Missouri, Alabama, Illinois, Louisiana,
Indiana, Kentucky, and Vermont, the conditions of voting have no
reference to the property of the elector.

I believe there is no other State besides that of North Carolina in
which different conditions are applied to the voting for the Senate and
the electing the House of Representatives. The electors of the former,
in this case, should possess in property fifty acres of land; to vote
for the latter, nothing more is required than to pay taxes.




Appendix I

The small number of custom-house officers employed in the United States,
compared with the extent of the coast, renders smuggling very easy;
notwithstanding which, it is less practised than elsewhere, because
everybody endeavors to repress it. In America there is no police for
the prevention of fires, and such accidents are more frequent than in
Europe; but in general they are more speedily extinguished, because the
surrounding population is prompt in lending assistance.




Appendix K

It is incorrect to assert that centralization was produced by the French
Revolution; the revolution brought it to perfection, but did not create
it. The mania for centralization and government regulations dates from
the time when jurists began to take a share in the government, in the
time of Philippele-Bel; ever since which period they have been on the
increase. In the year 1775, M. de Malesherbes, speaking in the name of
the Cour des Aides, said to Louis XIV:-- *d

[Footnote d: See "Memoires pour servir a l'Histoire du Droit Public de
la France en matiere d'impots," p. 654, printed at Brussels in 1779.]

". . . Every corporation and every community of citizens retained the
right of administering its own affairs; a right which not only forms
part of the primitive constitution of the kingdom, but has a
still higher origin; for it is the right of nature, and of reason.
Nevertheless, your subjects, Sire, have been deprived of it; and we
cannot refrain from saying that in this respect your government has
fallen into puerile extremes. From the time when powerful ministers
made it a political principle to prevent the convocation of a national
assembly, one consequence has succeeded another, until the deliberations
of the inhabitants of a village are declared null when they have not
been authorized by the Intendant. Of course, if the community has an
expensive undertaking to carry through, it must remain under the control
of the sub-delegate of the Intendant, and, consequently, follow the
plan he proposes, employ his favorite workmen, pay them according to his
pleasure; and if an action at law is deemed necessary, the Intendant's
permission must be obtained. The cause must be pleaded before this first
tribunal, previous to its being carried into a public court; and if the
opinion of the Intendant is opposed to that of the inhabitants, or if
their adversary enjoys his favor, the community is deprived of the
power of defending its rights. Such are the means, Sire, which have been
exerted to extinguish the municipal spirit in France; and to stifle, if
possible, the opinions of the citizens. The nation may be said to lie
under an interdict, and to be in wardship under guardians." What could
be said more to the purpose at the present day, when the Revolution has
achieved what are called its victories in centralization?

In 1789, Jefferson wrote from Paris to one of his friends:--"There is
no country where the mania for over-governing has taken deeper root than
in France, or been the source of greater mischief." (Letter to Madison,
August 28, 1789.) The fact is, that for several centuries past the
central power of France has done everything it could to extend central
administration; it has acknowledged no other limits than its own
strength. The central power to which the Revolution gave birth made more
rapid advances than any of its predecessors, because it was stronger
and wiser than they had been; Louis XIV committed the welfare of such
communities to the caprice of an intendant; Napoleon left them to
that of the Minister. The same principle governed both, though its
consequences were more or less remote.




Appendix L

The immutability of the constitution of France is a necessary
consequence of the laws of that country. To begin with the most
important of all the laws, that which decides the order of succession to
the throne; what can be more immutable in its principle than a political
order founded upon the natural succession of father to son? In 1814,
Louis XVIII had established the perpetual law of hereditary succession
in favor of his own family. The individuals who regulated the
consequences of the Revolution of 1830 followed his example; they merely
established the perpetuity of the law in favor of another family. In
this respect they imitated the Chancellor Meaupou, who, when he erected
the new Parliament upon the ruins of the old, took care to declare in
the same ordinance that the rights of the new magistrates should be as
inalienable as those of their predecessors had been. The laws of 1830,
like those of 1814, point out no way of changing the constitution: and
it is evident that the ordinary means of legislation are insufficient
for this purpose. As the King, the Peers, and the Deputies, all derive
their authority from the constitution, these three powers united cannot
alter a law by virtue of which alone they govern. Out of the pale of the
constitution they are nothing: where, when, could they take their stand
to effect a change in its provisions? The alternative is clear: either
their efforts are powerless against the charter, which continues to
exist in spite of them, in which case they only reign in the name of the
charter; or they succeed in changing the charter, and then, the law by
which they existed being annulled, they themselves cease to exist.
By destroying the charter, they destroy themselves. This is much more
evident in the laws of 1830 than in those of 1814. In 1814, the royal
prerogative took its stand above and beyond the constitution; but in
1830, it was avowedly created by, and dependent on, the constitution. A
part, therefore, of the French constitution is immutable, because it is
united to the destiny of a family; and the body of the constitution is
equally immutable, because there appear to be no legal means of changing
it. These remarks are not applicable to England. That country having no
written constitution, who can assert when its constitution is changed?




Appendix M

The most esteemed authors who have written upon the English Constitution
agree with each other in establishing the omnipotence of the Parliament.
Delolme says: "It is a fundamental principle with the English lawyers,
that Parliament can do everything except making a woman a man, or a
man a woman." Blackstone expresses himself more in detail, if not more
energetically, than Delolme, in the following terms:--"The power and
jurisdiction of Parliament, says Sir Edward Coke (4 Inst. 36), 'is so
transcendent and absolute that it cannot be confined, either for causes
or persons, within any bounds.' And of this High Court, he adds, may be
truly said, 'Si antiquitatem spectes, est vetustissima; si dignitatem,
est honoratissima; si jurisdictionem, est capacissima.' It hath
sovereign and uncontrollable authority in the making, confirming,
enlarging, restraining, abrogating, repealing, reviving, and
expounding of laws, concerning matters of all possible denominations;
ecclesiastical or temporal; civil, military, maritime, or criminal; this
being the place where that absolute despotic power which must, in all
governments, reside somewhere, is intrusted by the constitution of these
kingdoms. All mischiefs and grievances, operations and remedies, that
transcend the ordinary course of the laws, are within the reach of this
extraordinary tribunal. It can regulate or new-model the succession to
the Crown; as was done in the reign of Henry VIII and William III. It
can alter the established religion of the land; as was done in a variety
of instances in the reigns of King Henry VIII and his three children. It
can change and create afresh even the constitution of the kingdom,
and of parliaments themselves; as was done by the Act of Union and the
several statutes for triennial and septennial elections. It can, in
short, do everything that is not naturally impossible to be done; and,
therefore some have not scrupled to call its power, by a figure rather
too bold, the omnipotence of Parliament."




Appendix N

There is no question upon which the American constitutions agree more
fully than upon that of political jurisdiction. All the constitutions
which take cognizance of this matter, give to the House of Delegates the
exclusive right of impeachment; excepting only the constitution of North
Carolina, which grants the same privilege to grand juries. (Article 23.)
Almost all the constitutions give the exclusive right of pronouncing
sentence to the Senate, or to the Assembly which occupies its place.

The only punishments which the political tribunals can inflict are
removal, or the interdiction of public functions for the future. There
is no other constitution but that of Virginia (p. 152), which enables
them to inflict every kind of punishment. The crimes which are subject
to political jurisdiction are, in the federal constitution (Section 4,
Art. 1); in that of Indiana (Art. 3, paragraphs 23 and 24); of New York
(Art. 5); of Delaware (Art. 5), high treason, bribery, and other high
crimes or offences. In the Constitution of Massachusetts (Chap. I,
Section 2); that of North Carolina (Art. 23); of Virginia (p. 252),
misconduct and maladministration. In the constitution of New Hampshire
(p. 105), corruption, intrigue, and maladministration. In Vermont (Chap.
2, Art. 24), maladministration. In South Carolina (Art. 5); Kentucky
(Art. 5); Tennessee (Art. 4); Ohio (Art. 1, 23, 24); Louisiana (Art.
5); Mississippi (Art. 5); Alabama (Art. 6); Pennsylvania (Art. 4),
crimes committed in the non-performance of official duties. In the
States of Illinois, Georgia, Maine, and Connecticut, no particular
offences are specified.




Appendix O

It is true that the powers of Europe may carry on maritime wars with
the Union; but there is always greater facility and less danger in
supporting a maritime than a continental war. Maritime warfare only
requires one species of effort. A commercial people which consents to
furnish its government with the necessary funds, is sure to possess a
fleet. And it is far easier to induce a nation to part with its money,
almost unconsciously, than to reconcile it to sacrifices of men and
personal efforts. Moreover, defeat by sea rarely compromises the
existence or independence of the people which endures it. As for
continental wars, it is evident that the nations of Europe cannot be
formidable in this way to the American Union. It would be very difficult
to transport and maintain in America more than 25,000 soldiers; an army
which may be considered to represent a nation of about 2,000,000 of men.
The most populous nation of Europe contending in this way against the
Union, is in the position of a nation of 2,000,000 of inhabitants at war
with one of 12,000,000. Add to this, that America has all its resources
within reach, whilst the European is at 4,000 miles distance from his;
and that the immensity of the American continent would of itself present
an insurmountable obstacle to its conquest.




Appendix P

The first American journal appeared in April, 1704, and was published
at Boston. See "Collection of the Historical Society of Massachusetts,"
vol. vi. p. 66. It would be a mistake to suppose that the periodical
press has always been entirely free in the American colonies: an
attempt was made to establish something analogous to a censorship and
preliminary security. Consult the Legislative Documents of Massachusetts
of January 14, 1722. The Committee appointed by the General Assembly
(the legislative body of the province) for the purpose of examining into
circumstances connected with a paper entitled "The New England Courier,"
expresses its opinion that "the tendency of the said journal is to turn
religion into derision and bring it into contempt; that it mentions
the sacred writers in a profane and irreligious manner; that it puts
malicious interpretations upon the conduct of the ministers of the
Gospel; and that the Government of his Majesty is insulted, and the
peace and tranquillity of the province disturbed by the said journal.
The Committee is consequently of opinion that the printer and publisher,
James Franklin, should be forbidden to print and publish the said
journal or any other work in future, without having previously submitted
it to the Secretary of the province; and that the justices of the peace
for the county of Suffolk should be commissioned to require bail of the
said James Franklin for his good conduct during the ensuing year." The
suggestion of the Committee was adopted and passed into a law, but the
effect of it was null, for the journal eluded the prohibition by putting
the name of Benjamin Franklin instead of James Franklin at the bottom of
its columns, and this manoeuvre was supported by public opinion.




Appendix Q

The Federal Constitution has introduced the jury into the tribunals of
the Union in the same way as the States had introduced it into their own
several courts; but as it has not established any fixed rules for the
choice of jurors, the federal courts select them from the ordinary jury
list which each State makes for itself. The laws of the States must
therefore be examined for the theory of the formation of juries.
See Story's "Commentaries on the Constitution," B. iii. chap. 38, p.
654-659; Sergeant's "Constitutional Law," p. 165. See also the Federal
Laws of the years 1789, 1800, and 1802, upon the subject. For the
purpose of thoroughly understanding the American principles with respect
to the formation of juries, I examined the laws of States at a distance
from one another, and the following observations were the result of
my inquiries. In America, all the citizens who exercise the elective
franchise have the right of serving upon a jury. The great State of New
York, however, has made a slight difference between the two privileges,
but in a spirit quite contrary to that of the laws of France; for in the
State of New York there are fewer persons eligible as jurymen than there
are electors. It may be said in general that the right of forming part
of a jury, like the right of electing representatives, is open to
all the citizens: the exercise of this right, however, is not put
indiscriminately into any hands. Every year a body of municipal or
county magistrates--called "selectmen" in New England, "supervisors"
in New York, "trustees" in Ohio, and "sheriffs of the parish" in
Louisiana--choose for each county a certain number of citizens who have
the right of serving as jurymen, and who are supposed to be capable
of exercising their functions. These magistrates, being themselves
elective, excite no distrust; their powers, like those of most
republican magistrates, are very extensive and very arbitrary, and they
frequently make use of them to remove unworthy or incompetent jurymen.
The names of the jurymen thus chosen are transmitted to the County
Court; and the jury who have to decide any affair are drawn by lot from
the whole list of names. The Americans have contrived in every way to
make the common people eligible to the jury, and to render the service
as little onerous as possible. The sessions are held in the chief town
of every county, and the jury are indemnified for their attendance
either by the State or the parties concerned. They receive in general a
dollar per day, besides their travelling expenses. In America, the being
placed upon the jury is looked upon as a burden, but it is a burden
which is very supportable. See Brevard's "Digest of the Public Statute
Law of South Carolina," vol. i. pp. 446 and 454, vol. ii. pp. 218
and 338; "The General Laws of Massachusetts, revised and published by
authority of the Legislature," vol. ii. pp. 187 and 331; "The Revised
Statutes of the State of New York," vol. ii. pp. 411, 643, 717, 720;
"The Statute Law of the State of Tennessee," vol. i. p. 209; "Acts of
the State of Ohio," pp. 95 and 210; and "Digeste general des Actes de la
Legislature de la Louisiane."




Appendix R

If we attentively examine the constitution of the jury as introduced
into civil proceedings in England, we shall readily perceive that the
jurors are under the immediate control of the judge. It is true that the
verdict of the jury, in civil as well as in criminal cases, comprises
the question of fact and the question of right in the same reply;
thus--a house is claimed by Peter as having been purchased by him: this
is the fact to be decided. The defendant puts in a plea of incompetency
on the part of the vendor: this is the legal question to be resolved.
But the jury do not enjoy the same character of infallibility in civil
cases, according to the practice of the English courts, as they do in
criminal cases. The judge may refuse to receive the verdict; and even
after the first trial has taken place, a second or new trial may be
awarded by the Court. See Blackstone's "Commentaries," book iii. ch. 24.




Appendix S

I find in my travelling journal a passage which may serve to convey a
more complete notion of the trials to which the women of America, who
consent to follow their husbands into the wilds, are often subjected.
This description has nothing to recommend it to the reader but its
strict accuracy:

". . . From time to time we come to fresh clearings; all these places
are alike; I shall describe the one at which we have halted to-night,
for it will serve to remind me of all the others.

"The bell which the pioneers hang round the necks of their cattle,
in order to find them again in the woods, announced our approach to a
clearing, when we were yet a long way off; and we soon afterwards heard
the stroke of the hatchet, hewing down the trees of the forest. As we
came nearer, traces of destruction marked the presence of civilized
man; the road was strewn with shattered boughs; trunks of trees, half
consumed by fire, or cleft by the wedge, were still standing in the
track we were following. We continued to proceed till we reached a wood
in which all the trees seemed to have been suddenly struck dead; in the
height of summer their boughs were as leafless as in winter; and upon
closer examination we found that a deep circle had been cut round the
bark, which, by stopping the circulation of the sap, soon kills the
tree. We were informed that this is commonly the first thing a pioneer
does; as he cannot in the first year cut down all the trees which cover
his new parcel of land, he sows Indian corn under their branches, and
puts the trees to death in order to prevent them from injuring his crop.
Beyond this field, at present imperfectly traced out, we suddenly came
upon the cabin of its owner, situated in the centre of a plot of ground
more carefully cultivated than the rest, but where man was still waging
unequal warfare with the forest; there the trees were cut down, but
their roots were not removed, and the trunks still encumbered the ground
which they so recently shaded. Around these dry blocks, wheat, suckers
of trees, and plants of every kind, grow and intertwine in all the
luxuriance of wild, untutored nature. Amidst this vigorous and various
vegetation stands the house of the pioneer, or, as they call it, the
log house. Like the ground about it, this rustic dwelling bore marks of
recent and hasty labor; its length seemed not to exceed thirty feet,
its height fifteen; the walls as well as the roof were formed of rough
trunks of trees, between which a little moss and clay had been inserted
to keep out the cold and rain.

"As night was coming on, we determined to ask the master of the log
house for a lodging. At the sound of our footsteps, the children who
were playing amongst the scattered branches sprang up and ran towards
the house, as if they were frightened at the sight of man; whilst two
large dogs, almost wild, with ears erect and outstretched nose, came
growling out of their hut, to cover the retreat of their young masters.
The pioneer himself made his appearance at the door of his dwelling;
he looked at us with a rapid and inquisitive glance, made a sign to the
dogs to go into the house, and set them the example, without betraying
either curiosity or apprehension at our arrival.

"We entered the log house: the inside is quite unlike that of
the cottages of the peasantry of Europe: it contains more than is
superfluous, less than is necessary. A single window with a muslin
blind; on a hearth of trodden clay an immense fire, which lights the
whole structure; above the hearth a good rifle, a deer's skin, and
plumes of eagles' feathers; on the right hand of the chimney a map of
the United States, raised and shaken by the wind through the crannies in
the wall; near the map, upon a shelf formed of a roughly hewn plank, a
few volumes of books--a Bible, the six first books of Milton, and two of
Shakespeare's plays; along the wall, trunks instead of closets; in the
centre of the room a rude table, with legs of green wood, and with the
bark still upon them, looking as if they grew out of the ground on which
they stood; but on this table a tea-pot of British ware, silver spoons,
cracked tea-cups, and some newspapers.

"The master of this dwelling has the strong angular features and lank
limbs peculiar to the native of New England. It is evident that this man
was not born in the solitude in which we have met with him: his physical
constitution suffices to show that his earlier years were spent in
the midst of civilized society, and that he belongs to that restless,
calculating, and adventurous race of men, who do with the utmost
coolness things only to be accounted for by the ardor of the passions,
and who endure the life of savages for a time, in order to conquer and
civilize the backwoods.

"When the pioneer perceived that we were crossing his threshold, he came
to meet us and shake hands, as is their custom; but his face was quite
unmoved; he opened the conversation by inquiring what was going on in
the world; and when his curiosity was satisfied, he held his peace,
as if he were tired by the noise and importunity of mankind. When we
questioned him in our turn, he gave us all the information we required;
he then attended sedulously, but without eagerness, to our personal
wants. Whilst he was engaged in providing thus kindly for us, how came
it that in spit of ourselves we felt our gratitude die upon our lips? It
is that our host whilst he performs the duties of hospitality, seems to
be obeying an irksome necessity of his condition: he treats it as a duty
imposed upon him by his situation, not as a pleasure. By the side of
the hearth sits a woman with a baby on her lap: she nods to us without
disturbing herself. Like the pioneer, this woman is in the prime of
life; her appearance would seem superior to her condition, and her
apparel even betrays a lingering taste for dress; but her delicate
limbs appear shrunken, her features are drawn in, her eye is mild and
melancholy; her whole physiognomy bears marks of a degree of religious
resignation, a deep quiet of all passions, and some sort of natural and
tranquil firmness, ready to meet all the ills of life, without fearing
and without braving them. Her children cluster about her, full
of health, turbulence, and energy: they are true children of the
wilderness; their mother watches them from time to time with mingled
melancholy and joy: to look at their strength and her languor, one might
imagine that the life she has given them has exhausted her own, and
still she regrets not what they have cost her. The house inhabited by
these emigrants has no internal partition or loft. In the one chamber
of which it consists, the whole family is gathered for the night. The
dwelling is itself a little world--an ark of civilization amidst an
ocean of foliage: a hundred steps beyond it the primeval forest spreads
its shades, and solitude resumes its sway."




Appendix T

It is not the equality of conditions which makes men immoral and
irreligious; but when men, being equal, are at the same time immoral and
irreligious, the effects of immorality and irreligion easily manifest
themselves outwardly, because men have but little influence upon each
other, and no class exists which can undertake to keep society in order.
Equality of conditions never engenders profligacy of morals, but it
sometimes allows that profligacy to show itself.




Appendix U

Setting aside all those who do not think at all, and those who dare not
say what they think, the immense majority of the Americans will still be
found to appear satisfied with the political institutions by which they
are governed; and, I believe, really to be so. I look upon this state
of public opinion as an indication, but not as a demonstration, of
the absolute excellence of American laws. The pride of a nation, the
gratification of certain ruling passions by the law, a concourse of
circumstances, defects which escape notice, and more than all the rest,
the influence of a majority which shuts the mouth of all cavillers, may
long perpetuate the delusions of a people as well as those of a man.
Look at England throughout the eighteenth century. No nation was ever
more prodigal of self-applause, no people was ever more self-satisfied;
then every part of its constitution was right--everything, even to its
most obvious defects, was irreproachable: at the present day a vast
number of Englishmen seem to have nothing better to do than to
prove that this constitution was faulty in many respects. Which was
right?--the English people of the last century, or the English people of
the present day?

The same thing has occurred in France. It is certain that during the
reign of Louis XIV the great bulk of the nation was devotedly attached
to the form of government which, at that time, governed the community.
But it is a vast error to suppose that there was anything degraded in
the character of the French of that age. There might be some sort of
servitude in France at that time, but assuredly there was no servile
spirit among the people. The writers of that age felt a species of
genuine enthusiasm in extolling the power of their king; and there was
no peasant so obscure in his hovel as not to take a pride in the glory
of his sovereign, and to die cheerfully with the cry "Vive le Roi!" upon
his lips. These very same forms of loyalty are now odious to the French
people. Which are wrong?--the French of the age of Louis XIV, or their
descendants of the present day?

Our judgment of the laws of a people must not then be founded Future
Condition Of Three Races In The United States exclusively upon its
inclinations, since those inclinations change from age to age; but upon
more elevated principles and a more general experience. The love which a
people may show for its law proves only this:--that we should not be in
too great a hurry to change them.




Appendix V

In the chapter to which this note relates I have pointed out one source
of danger: I am now about to point out another kind of peril, more rare
indeed, but far more formidable if it were ever to make its appearance.
If the love of physical gratification and the taste for well-being,
which are naturally suggested to men by a state of equality, were to
get entire possession of the mind of a democratic people, and to fill it
completely, the manners of the nation would become so totally opposed to
military tastes, that perhaps even the army would eventually acquire
a love of peace, in spite of the peculiar interest which leads it to
desire war. Living in the midst of a state of general relaxation, the
troops would ultimately think it better to rise without efforts, by
the slow but commodious advancement of a peace establishment, than
to purchase more rapid promotion at the cost of all the toils and
privations of the field. With these feelings, they would take up arms
without enthusiasm, and use them without energy; they would allow
themselves to be led to meet the foe, instead of marching to attack him.
It must not be supposed that this pacific state of the army would render
it adverse to revolutions; for revolutions, and especially military
revolutions, which are generally very rapid, are attended indeed with
great dangers, but not with protracted toil; they gratify ambition at
less cost than war; life only is at stake, and the men of democracies
care less for their lives than for their comforts. Nothing is more
dangerous for the freedom and the tranquillity of a people than an army
afraid of war, because, as such an army no longer seeks to maintain its
importance and its influence on the field of battle, it seeks to assert
them elsewhere. Thus it might happen that the men of whom a democratic
army consists should lose the interests of citizens without acquiring
the virtues of soldiers; and that the army should cease to be fit for
war without ceasing to be turbulent. I shall here repeat what I have
said in the text: the remedy for these dangers is not to be found in the
army, but in the country: a democratic people which has preserved the
manliness of its character will never be at a loss for military prowess
in its soldiers.




Appendix W

Men connect the greatness of their idea of unity with means, God with
ends: hence this idea of greatness, as men conceive it, leads us into
infinite littleness. To compel all men to follow the same course towards
the same object is a human notion;--to introduce infinite variety of
action, but so combined that all these acts lead by a multitude of
different courses to the accomplishment of one great design, is a
conception of the Deity. The human idea of unity is almost always
barren; the divine idea pregnant with abundant results. Men think they
manifest their greatness by simplifying the means they use; but it is
the purpose of God which is simple--his means are infinitely varied.




Appendix X

A democratic people is not only led by its own tastes to centralize
its government, but the passions of all the men by whom it is governed
constantly urge it in the same direction. It may easily be foreseen that
almost all the able and ambitious members of a democratic community will
labor without 2 ceasing to extend the powers of government, because they
all hope at some time or other to wield those powers. It is a waste
of time to attempt to prove to them that extreme centralization may
be injurious to the State, since they are centralizing for their own
benefit. Amongst the public men of democracies there are hardly any but
men of great disinterestedness or extreme mediocrity who seek to oppose
the centralization of government: the former are scarce, the latter
powerless.




Appendix Y

I have often asked myself what would happen if, amidst the relaxation of
democratic manners, and as a consequence of the restless spirit of the
army, a military government were ever to be founded amongst any of the
nations of the present age. I think that even such a government would
not differ very much from the outline I have drawn in the chapter to
which this note belongs, and that it would retain none of the fierce
characteristics of a military oligarchy. I am persuaded that, in such a
case, a sort of fusion would take place between the habits of official
men and those of the military service. The administration would assume
something of a military character, and the army some of the usages of
the civil administration. The result would be a regular, clear,
exact, and absolute system of government; the people would become the
reflection of the army, and the community be drilled like a garrison.




Appendix Z

It cannot be absolutely or generally affirmed that the greatest danger
of the present age is license or tyranny, anarchy or despotism. Both
are equally to be feared; and the one may as easily proceed as the other
from the selfsame cause, namely, that "general apathy," which is the
consequence of what I have termed "individualism": it is because this
apathy exists, that the executive government, having mustered a few
troops, is able to commit acts of oppression one day, and the next day a
party, which has mustered some thirty men in its ranks, can also commit
acts of oppression. Neither one nor the other can found anything to
last; and the causes which enable them to succeed easily, prevent them
from succeeding long: they rise because nothing opposes them, and they
sink because nothing supports them. The proper object therefore of our
most strenuous resistance, is far less either anarchy or despotism than
the apathy which may almost indifferently beget either the one or the
other.




Constitution Of The United States Of America

We The People of the United States, in Order to form a more perfect
Union, establish Justice, insure domestic Tranquillity, provide for the
common defence, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings
of Liberty to ourselves and our Posterity, do ordain and establish this
Constitution for the United States of America:




Article I

Section 1. All legislative Powers herein granted shall be vested in a
Congress of the United States, which shall consist of a Senate and House
of Representatives.

Section 2. The House of Representatives shall be composed of Members of
chosen every second Year by the People of the several States, and the
Electors in each States shall have the Qualifications requisite for
Electors of the most numerous Branch of the State Legislature.

No Person shall be a Representative who shall not have attained to the
Age of twenty-five Years, and been seven Years a Citizen of the United
States, and who shall not, when elected, be an Inhabitant of that State
in which he shall be chosen.

Representatives and direct Taxes shall be apportioned among the several
States which may be included within this Union, according to their
respective Numbers, which shall be determined by adding to the whole
Number of free Persons, including those bound to service for a Term
of Years, and excluding Indians not taxed, three-fifths of all other
Persons. The actual Enumeration shall be made within three Years after
the first Meeting of the Congress of the United States, and within
every subsequent Term of ten Years, in such Manner as they shall by Law
direct. The Number of Representatives shall not exceed one for every
thirty Thousand, but each State shall have at Least one Representative;
and until such enumeration shall be made, the State of New Hampshire
shall be entitled to choose three, Massachusetts, eight, Rhode-Island
and Providence Plantations one, Connecticut five, New York six, New
Jersey four, Pennsylvania eight, Delaware one, Maryland six, Virginia
ten, North Carolina five, South Carolina five, and Georgia three.

When vacancies happen in the Representation from any State, the
Executive Authority thereof shall issue Writs of Election to fill such
Vacancies.

The House of Representatives shall choose their Speaker and other
Officers; and shall have the sole Power of Impeachment. Section 3. The
Senate of the United States shall be composed of two Senators from
each State, chosen by the Legislature thereof, for six Years; and each
Senator shall have one Vote.

Immediately after they shall be assembled in Consequence of the first
Election, they shall be divided as equally as may be into three Classes.
The Seats of the Senators of the first Class shall be vacated at the
Expiration of the second Year, of the second Class at the expiration of
the fourth Year, and of the third Class at the expiration of the
sixth Year, so that one-third may be chosen every second Year; and if
Vacancies happen by Resignation, or otherwise, during the Recess of
the Legislature of any State, the Executive thereof may make temporary
Appointments until the next Meeting of the Legislature, which shall then
fill such Vacancies.

No person shall be a Senator who shall not have attained to the Age of
thirty Years, and been nine Years a Citizen of the United States, and
who shall not, when elected, be an Inhabitant of that State for which he
shall be chosen.

The Vice-President of the United States shall be President of the
Senate, but shall have no Vote, unless they be equally divided. The
Senate shall choose their other Officers, and also a President pro
tempore, in the Absence of the Vice-President, or when he shall exercise
the Office of President of the United States.

The Senate shall have the sole power to try all Impeachments. When
sitting for that Purpose, they shall be on Oath or Affirmation. When
the President of the United States is tried, the Chief Justice shall
preside: And no Person shall be convicted without the Concurrence of
two-thirds of the Members present. Judgment in cases of Impeachment
shall not extend further than to removal from Office, and
disqualification to hold and enjoy any Office of Honor, Trust, or Profit
under the United States: but the Party convicted shall nevertheless
be liable and subject to Indictment, Trial, Judgment, and Punishment
according to Law.

Section 4. The Times, Places and Manner of holding Elections for
Senators and Representatives, shall be prescribed in each State by the
Legislature thereof; but the Congress may at any time by Law make or
alter such Regulations, except as to the Places of choosing Senators.

The Congress shall assemble at least once in every Year, and such
Meeting shall be on the first Monday in December, unless they shall by
Law appoint a different Day.

Section 5. Each House shall be the Judge of the Elections, Returns
and Qualifications of its own Members, and a Majority of each shall
constitute a Quorum to do Business; but a smaller Number may adjourn
from day to day, and may be authorized to compel the Attendance of
Absent Members, in such Manner, and under such Penalties as each House
may provide.

Each House may determine the Rules of its Proceedings, punish its
Members for disorderly Behaviour, and, with a Concurrence of two-thirds,
expel a Member.

Each House shall keep a Journal of its Proceedings, and from time to
time publish the same, excepting such Parts as may in their Judgment
require Secrecy; and the Yeas and Nays of the Members of either House
on any question shall, at the Desire of one-fifth of those present, be
entered on the Journal.

Neither House, during the Session of Congress, shall, without the
Consent of the other, adjourn for more than three days, nor to any other
Place than that in which the two Houses shall be sitting.

Section 6. The Senators and Representatives shall receive a Compensation
for their Services, to be ascertained by Law, and paid out of the
Treasury of the United States. They shall in all Cases, except Treason,
Felony, and Breach of the Peace, be privileged from Arrest during their
attendance at the Session of their respective Houses, and in going to
and returning from the same; and for any Speech or Debate in either
House, they shall not be questioned in any other Place.

No Senator or Representative shall, during the Time for which he was
elected, be appointed to any civil Office under the Authority of the
United States, which shall have been created, or the Emoluments whereof
shall have been increased during such time; and no Person holding any
Office under the United States, shall be a Member of either House during
his Continuance in Office.

Section 7. All Bills for Raising Revenue shall originate in the House of
Representatives; but the Senate may propose or concur with Amendments as
on other Bills.

Every Bill which shall have passed the House of Representatives and the
Senate, shall, before it become a Law, be presented to the President of
the United States; if he approve he shall sign it, but if not he shall
return it, with his Objections, to that House in which it shall have
originated, who shall enter the Objections at large on their Journal,
and proceed to reconsider it. If after such Reconsideration two-thirds
of that House shall agree to pass the Bill, it shall be sent, together
with the Objections, to the other House, by which it shall likewise
be reconsidered, and if approved by two-thirds of that House, it shall
become a Law. But in all such Cases the Votes of both Houses shall be
determined by Yeas and Nays, and the Names of the Persons voting for
and against the Bill shall be entered on the Journal of each House
respectively. If any Bill shall not be returned by the President within
ten days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented to him,
the Same shall be a Law, in like manner as if he had signed it, unless
the Congress by their Adjournment prevent its Return, in which Case it
shall not be a Law.

Every Order, Resolution, or Vote to which the Concurrence of the Senate
and House of Representatives may be necessary (except on a question of
Adjournment) shall be presented to the President of the United States;
and before the Same shall take Effect, shall be approved by him, or
being disapproved by him, shall be repassed by two-thirds of the Senate
and House of Representatives, according to the Rules and Limitations
prescribed in the case of a Bill.

Section 8. The Congress shall have Power to lay and collect Taxes,
Duties, Imposts, and Excises, to pay the Debts and provide for the
common Defence and general Welfare of the United States; but all Duties,
Imposts and Excises shall be uniform throughout the United States;

To borrow Money on the credit of the United States;

To regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States,
and with the Indian Tribes;

To establish an Uniform Rule of Naturalization, and uniform Laws on the
subject of Bankruptcies throughout the United States; To coin Money,
regulate the Value thereof, and of foreign Coin, and fix the Standard of
Weights and Measures;

To provide for the Punishment of counterfeiting the Securities and
current Coin of the United States;

To establish Post Offices and Post Roads;

To promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for
limited Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their
respective Writings and Discoveries;

To constitute Tribunals inferior to the Supreme Court; To define and
punish Piracies and Felonies committed on the high Seas, and Offences
against the Law of Nations;

To declare War, grant Letters of Marque and Reprisal, and make Rules
concerning Captures on Land and Water;

To raise and support Armies, but no Appropriation of Money to that Use
shall be for a longer Term than two years;

To provide and maintain a Navy;

To make Rules for the Government and Regulation of the land and naval
Forces.

To provide for calling forth the Militia to execute the Laws of the
Union, suppress Insurrections and repel Invasions.

To provide for organizing, arming, and disciplining, the Militia, and
for governing such Part of them as may be employed in the Service of the
United States, reserving to the States respectively, the Appointment of
the Officers, and the Authority of training the Militia according to the
discipline prescribed by Congress;

To exercise exclusive Legislation in all Cases whatsoever, over
such District (not exceeding ten Miles square) as may, by Cession of
particular States, and the Acceptance of Congress become the Seat of the
Government of the United States, and to exercise like Authority over all
Places purchased by the Consent of the Legislature of the State in
which the Same shall be, for the Erection of Forts, Magazines, Arsenals,
Dock-Yards, and other needful Buildings;--And To make all Laws which
shall be necessary and proper for carrying into Execution the foregoing
Powers, and all other Powers vested by this Constitution in the
Government of the United States, or in any Department or Officer
thereof.

Section 9. The Migration or Importation of such Persons as any of the
States now existing shall think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited
by the Congress prior to the year one thousand eight hundred and eight,
but a tax or duty may be imposed on such Importation, not exceeding ten
dollars for each Person.

The Privilege of the Writ of Habeas Corpus shall not be suspended,
unless when in Cases of Rebellion or Invasion the public Safety may
require it.

No Bill of Attainder or ex post facto Law shall be passed. No
Capitation, or other direct Tax shall be laid, unless in Proportion to
the Census or Enumeration herein before directed to be taken.

No Tax or Duty shall be laid on Articles exported from any State.

No preference shall be given by any Regulation of Commerce or Revenue
to the Ports of one State over those of another: nor shall Vessels bound
to, or from, one State, be obliged to enter, clear, or pay Duties in
another.

No Money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in consequence of
Appropriations made by Law; and a regular Statement and Account of the
Receipts and Expenditures of all public Money shall be published from
time to time.

No Title of Nobility shall be granted by the United States: And no
Person holding any Office of Profit or Trust under them, shall, without
the Consent of the Congress, accept of any present, Emolument, Office,
or Title of any kind whatever, from any King, Prince, or foreign State.

Section 10. No State shall enter into any Treaty, Alliance, or
Confederation; grant Letters of Marque or Reprisal; coin Money; emit
Bills of Credit; make any Thing but gold and silver Coin a Tender in
Payment of Debts; pass any Bill of Attainder, ex post facto Law, or Law
impairing the Obligation of Contracts, or grant any Title of Nobility.

No State shall, without the Consent of the Congress, lay any Imposts or
Duties on Imports or Exports, except what may be absolutely necessary
for executing its inspection Laws: and the net Produce of all Duties and
Imposts, laid by any State on Imports or Exports shall be for the Use of
the Treasury of the United States; and all such laws shall be subject to
the Revision and Control of the Congress.

No State shall, without the Consent of Congress, lay any Duty of
Tonnage, keep Troops, or Ships of War in time of Peace, enter into any
Agreement or Compact with another State, or with a foreign Power, or
engage in War, unless actually invaded, or in such imminent Danger as
will not admit of delay.




Article II

Section 1. The Executive Power shall be vested in a President of the
United States of America. He shall hold his Office during the Term of
four Years, and, together with the Vice-President, chosen for the same
Term, be elected as follows:

Each State shall appoint, in such Manner as the Legislature thereof may
direct, a Number of Electors, equal to the whole Number of Senators and
Representatives to which the State may be entitled in the Congress: but
no Senator or Representative, or Person holding an Office of Trust or
Profit under the United States, shall be appointed an Elector.

[The Electors shall meet in their respective States, and vote by Ballot
for two persons, of whom one at least shall not be an inhabitant of
the same State with themselves. And they shall make a List of all the
Persons voted for, and of the Number of Votes for each; which List
they shall sign and certify, and transmit sealed to the Seat of the
Government of the United States, directed to the President of the
Senate. The President of the Senate shall, in the Presence of the Senate
and House of Representatives, open all the Certificates, and the Votes
shall then be counted. The Person having the greatest Number of Votes
shall be the President, if such Number be a Majority of the whole Number
of Electors appointed; and if there be more than one who have such
Majority, and have an equal number of Votes, then the House of
Representatives shall immediately choose by Ballot one of them for
President; and if no Person have a Majority, then from the five highest
on the List the said House shall in like Manner choose the President.
But in choosing the President, the Votes shall be taken by States,
the Representation from each State having one Vote; A quorum for this
Purpose shall consist of a Member or Members from two-thirds of the
States, and a Majority of all the States shall be necessary to a Choice.
In every Case, after the Choice of the President, the Person having the
greatest number of Votes of the Electors shall be the Vice-President.
But if there should remain two or more who have equal Votes, the Senate
shall choose from them by Ballot the Vice-President.]*d

[Footnote *d: This clause is superseded by Article XII, Amendments. See
page 396.]

The Congress may determine the Time of choosing the Electors, and the
Day on which they shall give their Votes; which Day shall be the same
throughout the United States.

No Person except a natural born Citizen, or a Citizen of the United
States, at the time of the Adoption of this Constitution, shall be
eligible to the Office of President; neither shall any person be
eligible to that Office who shall not have attained to the Age of
thirty-five Years, and been fourteen Years a Resident within the United
States.

In case of the Removal of the President from Office, or of his Death,
Resignation or Inability to discharge the Powers and Duties of the said
Office, the same shall devolve on the Vice-president, and the Congress
may by Law provide for the Case of Removal, Death, Resignation or
Inability, both of the President and Vice-President, declaring what
Officer shall then act as President, and such Officer shall act
accordingly, until the Disability be removed, or a President shall be
elected.

The President shall, at stated Times, receive for his Services, a
Compensation, which shall neither be increased nor diminished during the
Period for which he shall have been elected, and he shall not receive
within that period any other Emolument from the United States, or any of
them.

Before he enter on the Execution of his Office, he shall take the
following Oath or Affirmation:--"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that
I will faithfully execute the Office of President of the United States,
and will to the best of my Ability, preserve, protect, and defend the
Constitution of the United States."

Section 2. The President shall be Commander in Chief of the Army and
Navy of the United States, and of the Militia of the several States,
when called into the actual Service of the United States; he may
require the Opinion, in writing, of the principal Officer in each of the
executive Departments, upon any Subject relating to the Duties of their
respective Offices, and he shall have Power to grant Reprieves and
Pardons for Offences against the United States, except in Cases of
Impeachment.

He shall have Power, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate,
to make Treaties, provided two-thirds of the Senators present concur;
and he shall nominate, and by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Senate, shall appoint Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls,
Judges of the Supreme Court, and all other Officers of the United
States, whose Appointments are not herein otherwise provided for, and
which shall be established by Law: but the Congress may by Law vest
the Appointment of such inferior Officers, as they think proper, in the
President alone, in the Courts of Law, or in the Heads of Departments.

The President shall have Power to fill up all vacancies that may happen
during the recess of the Senate, by granting Commissions which shall
expire at the End of their next Session.

Section 3. He shall from time to time give to the Congress Information
of the state of the Union, and recommend to their Consideration
such Measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient; he may, on
extraordinary Occasions, convene both Houses, or either of them, and
in Case of Disagreement between them, with Respect to the Time of
Adjournment, he may adjourn them to such Time as he shall think proper;
he shall receive Ambassadors and other Public Ministers; he shall take
Care that the Laws be faithfully executed, and shall Commission all the
Officers of the United States.

Section 4. The President, Vice-President and all civil Officers of the
United States, shall be removed from Office on Impeachment for, and
Conviction of, Treason, Bribery, or other High Crimes and Misdemeanors.




Article III

Section 1. The judicial Power of the United States shall be vested in
one supreme Court, and in such inferior Courts as the Congress may from
time to time ordain and establish. The Judges, both of the Supreme and
inferior Courts, shall hold their Offices during good Behaviour, and
shall, at stated Times, receive for their Services, a Compensation,
which shall not be diminished during their Continuance in Office.

Section 2. The judicial Power shall extend to all cases, in Law and
Equity, arising under this Constitution, the Laws of the United States,
and Treaties made, or which shall be made, under their Authority;--to
all Cases affecting Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls;--to
all cases of Admiralty and maritime Jurisdiction; to Controversies to
which the United States shall be a Party;--to Controversies between two
or more States;--between a State and Citizens of another State; between
Citizens of different States,--between Citizens of the same State
claiming Lands under Grants of different States, and between a State, or
the Citizens thereof, and foreign States, Citizens or Subjects.

In all Cases affecting Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls,
and those in which a State shall be Party, the Supreme Court shall have
original Jurisdiction. In all the other Cases before mentioned, the
Supreme Court shall have appellate Jurisdiction, both as to Law and
Fact, with such Exceptions and under such Regulations as the Congress
shall make.

The Trial of all Crimes, except in Cases of Impeachment, shall be by
Jury; and such Trial shall be held in the State where the said Crimes
shall have been committed; but when not committed within any State, the
Trial shall be at such Place or Places as the Congress may by Law have
directed.

Section 3. Treason against the United States shall consist only in
levying War against them, or in adhering to their Enemies, giving them
Aid and Comfort. No person shall be convicted of Treason unless on the
Testimony of two Witnesses to the same overt Act, or on Confession in
open Court.

The Congress shall have power to declare the Punishment of Treason, but
no Attainder of Treason shall work Corruption of Blood or Forfeiture
except during the life of the person attainted.




Article IV

Section 1. Full Faith and Credit shall be given in each State to the
Public Acts, Records, and judicial Proceedings of every other State.
And the Congress may by general Laws prescribe the Manner in which such
Acts, Records and Proceedings shall be proved, and the Effect thereof.

Section 2. The Citizens of each State shall be entitled to all
Privileges and Immunities of Citizens in the several States. A person
charged in any State with Treason, Felony, or other Crime, who shall
flee from Justice, and be found in another State, shall on Demand of the
executive Authority of the State from which he fled, be delivered up, to
be removed to the State having Jurisdiction of the Crime.

No Person held to Service or Labour in one State, under the Laws
thereof, escaping into another, shall, in consequence of any Law or
Regulation therein, be discharged from such Service or Labour, but shall
be delivered up on Claim of the Party to whom such Service or Labour may
be due.

Section 3. New States may be admitted by the Congress into this Union;
but no new State shall be formed or erected within the Jurisdiction of
any other State; nor any State be formed by the Junction of two or more
States, or Parts of States, without the Consent of the Legislatures of
the States concerned as well as of the Congress.

The Congress shall have Power to dispose of and make all needful Rules
and Regulations respecting the Territory or other Property belonging
to the United States; and nothing in this Constitution shall be so
construed as to Prejudice any Claims of the United States, or of any
particular State.

Section 4. The United States shall guarantee to every State in this
Union a Republican Form of Government, and shall protect each of them
against Invasion; and on Application of the Legislature, or of the
Executive (when the Legislature cannot be convened) against domestic
Violence.




Article V

The Congress, whenever two-thirds of both Houses shall deem it
necessary, shall propose Amendments to this Constitution, or, on the
Application of the Legislatures of two-thirds of the several States,
shall call a Convention for proposing Amendments, which, in either
Case, shall be valid to all Intents and Purposes, as Part of this
Constitution, when ratified by the Legislatures of three-fourths of the
several States, or by Conventions in three-fourths thereof, as the
one or the other Mode of Ratification may be proposed by the Congress;
Provided that no Amendment which may be made prior to the Year One
thousand eight hundred and eight shall in any Manner affect the first
and fourth Clauses in the Ninth Section of the first Article; and that
no State, without its Consent, shall be deprived of its equal Suffrage
in the Senate.




Article VI

All Debts contracted and Engagements entered into, before the Adoption
of this Constitution, shall be as valid against the United States under
this Constitution, as under the Confederation.

This Constitution, and the Laws of the United States which shall be made
in Pursuance thereof; and all Treaties made, or which shall be made,
under the Authority of the United States, shall be the supreme Law of
the Land; and the Judges in every State shall be bound thereby,
any Thing in the Constitution or Laws of any State to the contrary
notwithstanding.

The Senators and Representatives before mentioned, and the Members of
the several State Legislatures, and all executive and judicial Officers,
both of the United States and of the several States, shall be bound by
Oath or Affirmation to support this Constitution; but no religious test
shall ever be required as a Qualification to any Office or public Trust
under the United States.




Article VII

The Ratification of the Conventions of nine States shall be sufficient
for the Establishment of this Constitution between the States so
ratifying the Same.

Done in Convention by the Unanimous Consent of the States present the
Seventeenth Day of September in the Year of Our Lord One thousand seven
hundred and eighty-seven and of the Independence of the United States of
America the Twelfth. In witness whereof We have hereunto subscribed our
Names,

     Geo. Washington
     Presidt. and deputy from Virginia.

     New Hampshire
     John Langdon
     Nicholas Gilman

     Massachusetts
     Nathaniel Gorham
     Rufus King

     Connecticut
     Wm. Saml. Johnson
     Roger Sherman

     New York
     Alexander Hamilton

     New Jersey
     Wil. Livingston.
     David Brearley.
     Wm. Paterson.
     Jona. Dayton

     Pennsylvania
     B Franklin
     Thomas Mifflin
     Robt. Morris.
     Geo. Clymer
     Thos. Fitzsimons
     Jared Ingersoll
     James Wilson
     Gouv. Morris

     Delaware
     Geo. Read
     Gunning Bedford Jun
     John Dickinson
     Richard Bassett
     Jaco. Broom

     Maryland
     James McHenry
     Dan of St Thos. Jenifer
     Danl. Carroll

     Virginia
     John Blair--
     James Madison Jr.

     North Carolina
     Wm. Blount
     Richd. Dobbs Spaight
     Hu. Williamson

     South Carolina
     J. Rutledge
     Charles Cotesworth Pinckney
     Charles Pinckney
     Peirce Butler.

     Georgia
     William Few
     Abr. Baldwin

     Attest. William Jackson, Secretary

The Word 'the,' being interlined between the seventh and eighth Lines of
the first Page, The word 'Thirty' being partly written on an Erasure
in the fifteenth Line of the first Page, The Words 'is tried' being
interlined between the thirty-second and thirty-third Lines of the first
Page, and the Word 'the' being interlined between the forty-third and
forty-fourth Lines of the second page.

[Note by the Department of State.--The foregoing explanation in the
original instrument is placed on the left of the paragraph beginning
with the words, 'Done in Convention,' and therefore precedes the
signatures. The interlined and rewritten words, mentioned in it, are in
this edition printed in their proper places in the text.]




Bill Of Rights

In addition to, and amendment of, the Constitution of the United States
of America, proposed by Congress and ratified by the Legislatures of
the several States, pursuant to the Fifth Article of the original
Constitution

Article I

Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion,
or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom
of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to
assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.

Article II

A well regulated Militia being necessary to the security of a free
State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms shall not be
infringed.

Article III

No Soldier shall in time of peace be quartered in any house without
the consent of the Owner, nor in time of war, but in a manner to be
prescribed by law.

Article IV

The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers,
and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not
be violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause,
supported by Oath or Affirmation, and particularly describing the place
to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.

Article V

No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous
crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a Grand Jury, except in
cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the Militia, when in
actual service in time of War or public danger; nor shall any person
be subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life
or limb; nor shall be compelled in any Criminal Case to be a witness
against himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without
due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use,
without just compensation.

Article VI

In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a
speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and district
wherein the crime shall have been committed, which district shall have
been previously ascertained by law, and to be informed of the nature
and cause of the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against
him; to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favour,
and to have the Assistance of Counsel for his defence.

Article VII

In suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed
twenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be preserved, and no
fact tried by a jury shall be otherwise re-examined in any Court of the
United States, than according to the rules of the common law.

Article VIII

Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor
cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.

Article IX

The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be
construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.

Article X

The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor
prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively,
or to the people.

Article XI

The Judicial power of the United States shall not be construed to extend
to any suit in law or equity, commenced or prosecuted against one of the
United States by Citizens of another State, or by Citizens or Subjects
of any Foreign State.

Article XII

The electors shall meet in their respective States, and vote by ballot
for President and Vice-President, one of whom, at least, shall not be an
inhabitant of the same State with themselves; they shall name in their
ballots the person voted for as President; and in distinct ballots the
person voted for as Vice-President; and they shall make distinct lists
of all persons voted for as President, and of all persons voted for as
Vice President, and of the number of votes for each, which lists
they shall sign and certify, and transmit sealed to the seat of the
government of the United States, directed to the President of the
Senate;--The President of the Senate shall, in the presence of the
Senate and House of Representatives, open all the certificates and the
votes shall then be counted;--The person having the greatest number
of votes for President, shall be the President, if such number be a
majority of the whole number of Electors appointed; and if no person
have such majority, then from the persons having the highest numbers not
exceeding three on the list of those voted for as President, the House of
Representatives shall choose immediately, by ballot, the President.
But in choosing the President, the votes shall be taken by States,
the representation from each State having one vote; a quorum for this
purpose shall consist of a member or members from two-thirds of the
States, and a majority of all the States shall be necessary to a
choice. And if the House of Representatives shall not choose a President
whenever the right of choice shall devolve upon them, before the fourth
day of March next following, then the Vice-President shall act
as President, as in the case of the death or other constitutional
disability of the President. The person having the greatest number of
votes as Vice-President, shall be the Vice-President, if such a number
be a majority of the whole number of Electors appointed, and if no
person have a majority, then from the two highest numbers on the list,
the Senate shall choose the Vice-President; a quorum for the purpose
shall consist of two-thirds of the whole number of Senators, and a
majority of the whole number shall be necessary to a choice. But no
person constitutionally ineligible to the office of President shall be
eligible to that of Vice-President of the United States.

Article XIII

Section 1. Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as a
punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted,
shall exist within the United States, or any place subject to their
jurisdiction.

Section 2. Congress shall have power to enforce this article by
appropriate legislation.

Article XIV

Section 1. All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and
subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States
and of the State wherein they reside. No State shall make or enforce any
law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the
United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty,
or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within
its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.

Section 2. Representatives shall be apportioned among the several States
according to their respective numbers, counting the whole number of
persons in each State, excluding Indians not taxed. But when the right
to vote at any election for the choice of electors for President and
Vice-President of the United States, Representatives in Congress,
the Executive and Judicial officers of a State, or the members of the
Legislature thereof, is denied to any of the male inhabitants of such
State, being twenty-one years of age, and citizens of the United States,
or in any way abridged, except for participation in rebellion, or other
crime, the basis of representation therein shall be reduced in the
proportion which the number of such male citizens shall bear to the
whole number of male citizens twenty-one years of age in such State.

Section 3. No person shall be a Senator or Representative in Congress,
or elector of President and Vice-President, or hold any office, civil
or military, under the United States, or under any State, who, having
previously taken an oath, as a member of Congress, or as an officer of
the United States, or as a member of any State legislature, or as an
executive or judicial officer of any State, to support the Constitution
of the United States, shall have engaged in insurrection or rebellion
against the same, or given aid or comfort to the enemies thereof.
But Congress may by a vote of two-thirds of each House, remove such
disability.

Section 4. The validity of the public debt of the United States,
authorized by law, including debts incurred for payment of pensions and
bounties for services in suppressing insurrection or rebellion, shall
not be questioned. But neither the United States nor any State shall
assume or pay any debt or obligation incurred in aid of insurrection
or rebellion against the United States, or any claim for the loss or
emancipation of any slave; but all such debts, obligations and claims
shall be held illegal and void.

Section 5. The Congress shall have power to enforce, by appropriate
legislation, the provisions of this article.

Article XV

Section 1. The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not
be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of
race, colour, or previous condition of servitude.

Section 2. The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by
appropriate legislation.








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEMOCRACY IN AMERICA — VOLUME 2 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Recollections of Alexis de Tocqueville
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Recollections of Alexis de Tocqueville

Author: Alexis de Tocqueville

Translator: Alexander Teixeira de Mattos

Release date: October 31, 2011 [eBook #37892]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Gary Rees and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
        produced from scanned images of public domain material
        from the Google Print project.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RECOLLECTIONS OF ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE ***




Produced by Gary Rees and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)









[Transcriber's Note: Words and phrases appearing in italics in the
original publication have been delimited with underscore characters in
this transcription. Additional notes appear at the end of this text.]




ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE




[Illustration: Alexis de Tocqueville]




THE RECOLLECTIONS OF ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE

EDITED BY THE COMTE DE TOCQUEVILLE AND NOW FIRST TRANSLATED INTO
ENGLISH BY ALEXANDER TEIXEIRA DE MATTOS


WITH A PORTRAIT IN HELIOGRAVURE


  NEW YORK
  THE MACMILLAN CO.
  1896




PREFACE

    "C'est tousiours plaisir de veoir les choses escriptes par ceulx
    qui ont essaye comme il les faut conduire."
    MONTAIGNE.


Alexis de Tocqueville made his entrance in political life in 1839.[1] At
the outbreak of the Revolution of February he was in the prime of his
age and in the maturity of his talent. He threw himself into the
struggle, resolving to devote himself to the interests of the country
and of society, and he was one of the first among those whole-hearted,
single-minded men who endeavoured to keep the Republic within a wise and
moderate course by steering clear of the two-fold perils of Caesarism on
the one hand and revolution on the other. A dangerous and thankless
enterprise, of which the difficulties were never hidden from a mind so
clear-sighted as his, and of which he soon foresaw the ephemeral
duration.

     [1: At the age of 34. Alexis Clerel de Tocqueville was born in
     1805 at Verneuil. His father was the Comte de Tocqueville, who was
     made a peer of France and a prefect under the Restoration; his
     mother, _nee_ Mlle. de Rosambo, was a grand-daughter of
     Malesherbes. Alexis de Tocqueville was appointed an assistant
     judge, and in 1831 was sent to America, in company with G. de
     Beaumont to study the penal system in that continent. On his
     return he published a treatise on this subject; and in 1835
     appeared his great work on American Democracy, which secured his
     election to the Academy of Moral Science in 1839 and to the French
     Academy in 1841. Two years earlier he had been sent to the Chamber
     as deputy for the arrondissement of Valognes in Normandy, in which
     the paternal property of Tocqueville was situated; and this seat
     he retained until his withdrawal from political life. He died in
     1859.--A.T. de M.]

After the fall of his short-lived ministry, which had been filled with
so many cares and such violent agitation, thinking himself removed for a
time (it was to be for ever) from the conduct of public affairs, he went
first to Normandy and then to Sorrento, on the Bay of Naples, in search
of the peace and repose of which he stood in need. The intellect,
however, but rarely shows itself the docile slave of the will, and his,
to which idleness was a cause of real suffering, immediately set about
to seek an object worthy of its attention. This was soon found in the
great drama of the French Revolution, which attracted him irresistibly,
and which was destined to form the subject-matter of his most perfect
work.

It was at this time, while Alexis de Tocqueville was also preoccupied by
the daily increasing gravity of the political situation at home, that he
wrote the Recollections now first published. These consisted of mere
notes jotted down at intervals on odds and ends of paper; and it was not
until the close of his life that, yielding to the persuasions of his
intimates, he gave a reluctant consent to their publication. He took a
certain pleasure in thus retracing and, as it were, re-enacting the
events in which he had taken part, the character of which seemed the
more transient, and the more important to establish definitely, inasmuch
as other events came crowding on, precipitating the crisis and altering
the aspect of affairs. Thus those travellers who, steering their
adventurous course through a series of dangerous reefs, alight upon a
wild and rugged island, where they disembark and live for some days, and
when about to depart for ever from its shores, throw back upon it a long
and melancholy gaze before it sinks from their eyes in the immensity of
the waves. Already the Assembly had lost its independence; the reign of
constitutional liberty, under which France had lived for thirty-three
years, was giving way; and, in the words of the famous phrase, "The
Empire was a fact."

We are to-day well able to judge the period described in these
Recollections, a period which seems still further removed from us by the
revolutions, the wars, and even the misfortunes which the country has
since undergone, and which now only appears to us in that subdued light
which throws the principal outlines into especial relief, while
permitting the more observant and penetrating eye to discover also the
secondary features. Living close enough to those times to receive
evidence from the lips of survivors, and not so close but that all
passion has become appeased and all rancour extinguished, we should be
in a position to lack neither light nor impartiality. As witness, for
instance, the impression retained by us of the figure of Ledru-Rollin,
which nevertheless terrified our fathers. We live in a generation which
has beheld Raoul, Rigault and Delescluze at work. The theories of Louis
Blanc and Considerant arouse no feeling of astonishment in these days,
when their ideas have become current coin, and when the majority of
politicians feel called upon to adopt the badge of some socialism or
other, whether we call it Christian, State, or revolutionary socialism.
Cormenin, Marrast and Lamartine belong to history as much as do Sieyes,
Petion or Mirabeau; and we are able to judge as freely of the men and
the events of 1848 as of those of 1830 or 1789.

Alexis de Tocqueville had the rare merit of being able to forestall this
verdict of posterity; and if we endeavour to discover the secret of this
prescience, of the loftiness of sight with which he was so specially
gifted, we shall find that, belonging to no party, he remained above all
parties; that, depending upon no leader, he kept his hands free; and
that, possessed of no vulgar ambition, he reserved his energies for the
noble aim which he had in view--the triumph of liberty and of the
dignity of man.

Interest will doubtless be taken in the account contained in these
Recollections of the revolutionary period, written by one of the
best-informed of its witnesses, and in the ebbs and flows of the
short-lived ministry which was conducted with so much talent and
integrity. But what will be especially welcome is the broad views taken
by this great mind of our collective history; his profound reflections
upon the future of the country and of society; the firm and
conscientious opinions which he expresses upon his contemporaries; and
the portraits drawn by a master hand, always striking and always alive.
When reading this private record, which has been neither revised nor
corrected by its author, we seem to approach more closely to the
sentiments, the desires, the aspirations, I was almost saying the dreams
of this rare mind, this great heart so ardently pursuing the chimera of
absolute good that nothing in men or institutions could succeed in
satisfying it.

Years passed, and the Empire foundered amid terrible disaster. Alexis de
Tocqueville was no more; and we may say that this proved at that time an
irreparable loss to his country. Who knows what part he might have been
called upon to play, what influence he could have brought to bear to
unmask the guilty intrigues and baffle the mean ambitions under whose
load, after the lapse of more than twenty years, we are still
staggering? Enlightened by his harsh experience of 1848, would he have
once again tried the experiment, which can never be more than an eternal
stop-gap, of governing the Republic with the support of the Monarchists?
Or rather, persuaded as he was that "the republican form of government
is not the best suited to the needs of France," that this "government
without stability always promises more, but gives less, liberty than a
Constitutional Monarchy," would he not have appealed to the latter to
protect the liberty so dear to him? One thing is certain, that he would
never have "subordinated to the necessity of maintaining his position
that of remaining true to himself."

We have thought that the present generation, which so rarely has the
opportunity of beholding a man of character, would take pleasure in
becoming acquainted with this great and stately figure; in spending some
short moments in those lofty regions, in which it may learn a powerful
lesson and find an example of public life in its noblest form, ever
faithful to its early aspirations, ever filled with two great ideas: the
cult of honour and the passion of liberty.

COMTE DE TOCQUEVILLE.




  CONTENTS


  PART THE FIRST


  CHAPTER I                                                       PAGE

  Origin and Character of these Recollections--General aspect of
      the period preceding the Revolution of 1848--Preliminary
      symptoms of the Revolution                                     3

  CHAPTER II

  The Banquets--Sense of security entertained by the
      Government--Anxiety of Leaders of the
      Opposition--Arraignment of Ministers                          19

  CHAPTER III

  Troubles of the 22nd of February--The Sitting of the 23rd--The
      New Ministry--Opinions of M. Dufaure and M. de Beaumont       33

  CHAPTER IV

  The 24th of February--The Ministers' Plan of Resistance--The
      National Guard--General Bedeau                                44

  CHAPTER V

  The Sitting of the Chamber--Madame la Duchesse D'Orleans--The
      Provisional Government                                        56


  PART THE SECOND


  CHAPTER I

  My Explanation of the 24th of February, and my views as to its
      effects upon the future                                       79

  CHAPTER II

  Paris on the morrow of the 24th of February and the next
      days--The socialistic character of the New Revolution         90

  CHAPTER III

  Vacillation of the Members of the Old Parliament as to the
      attitude they should adopt--My own reflections on my mode
      of action, and my resolves                                   102

  CHAPTER IV

  My candidature of the department of la Manche--The aspect of
      the country--The General Election                            114

  CHAPTER V

  The First Sitting of the Constituent Assembly--The appearance
      of this Assembly                                             129

  CHAPTER VI

  My relations with Lamartine--His Subterfuges                     145

  CHAPTER VII

  The 15th of May 1848                                             156

  CHAPTER VIII

  The Feast of Concord and the preparations for the Days of June   174

  CHAPTER IX

  The Days of June                                                 187

  CHAPTER X

  The Days of June--(_continued_)                                  215

  CHAPTER XI

  The Committee for the Constitution                               233


  PART THE THIRD


  CHAPTER I

  My return to France--Formation of the Cabinet                    263

  CHAPTER II

  Aspect of the Cabinet--Its first Acts until after the
      insurrectionary attempts of the 13th of June                 278

  CHAPTER III

  Our domestic policy--Internal quarrels in the Cabinet--Its
      difficulties in its relations with the Majority and the
      President                                                    301

  CHAPTER IV

  Foreign Affairs                                                  325


  APPENDIX


  I

  Gustave de Beaumont's version of the 24th of February            379

  II

  Barrot's version of the 24th of February (_10 October 1850_)     385

  III

  Some incidents of the 24th of February 1848                      389

      1

      M. Dufaure's efforts to prevent the Revolution of
          February--Responsibility of M. Thiers, which renders
          them futile                                              389

      2

      Dufaure's conduct on the 24th of February 1848               392

  IV

  My conversation with Berryer, on the 21st of June, at an
      appointment which I had given him at my house. We were
      both Members of the Committee for the revision of the
      Constitution                                                 394


  INDEX                                                            399




PART THE FIRST

     _Written in July 1850, at Tocqueville._




ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE




CHAPTER I

     ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF THESE RECOLLECTIONS--GENERAL ASPECT OF THE
     PERIOD PRECEDING THE REVOLUTION OF 1848--PRELIMINARY SYMPTOMS OF
     THE REVOLUTION.


Removed for a time from the scene of public life, I am constrained, in
the midst of my solitude, to turn my thoughts upon myself, or rather to
reflect upon contemporary events in which I have taken part or acted as
a witness. And it seems to me that the best use I can make of my leisure
is to retrace these events, to portray the men who took part in them
under my eyes, and thus to seize and engrave, if I can, upon my memory
the confused features which compose the disturbed physiognomy of my
time.

In taking this resolve I have taken another, to which I shall be no less
true: these recollections shall be a relaxation of the mind rather than
a contribution to literature. I write them for myself alone. They shall
be a mirror in which I will amuse myself in contemplating my
contemporaries and myself; not a picture painted for the public. My most
intimate friends shall not see them, for I wish to retain the liberty of
depicting them as I shall depict myself, without flattery. I wish to
arrive truly at the secret motives which have caused them, and me, and
others to act; and, when discovered, to reveal them here. In a word, I
wish this expression of my recollections to be a sincere one; and to
effect this, it is essential that it should remain absolutely secret.

I intend that my recollections shall not go farther back than the
Revolution of 1848, nor extend to a later date than the 30th of October
1849, the day upon which I resigned my office. It is only within these
limits that the events which I propose to relate have any importance, or
that my position has enabled me to observe them well.

My life was passed, although in a comparatively secluded fashion, in the
midst of the parliamentary world of the closing years of the Monarchy of
July. Nevertheless, it would be no easy task for me to recall distinctly
the events of a period so little removed from the present, and yet
leaving so confused a trace in my memory. The thread of my recollections
is lost amid the whirl of minor incidents, of paltry ideas, of petty
passions, of personal views and contradictory opinions in which the life
of public men was at that time spent. All that remains vivid in my mind
is the general aspect of the period; for I often regarded it with a
curiosity mingled with dread, and I clearly discerned the special
features by which it was characterized.

Our history from 1789 to 1830, if viewed from a distance and as a whole,
affords as it were the picture of a struggle to the death between the
Ancien Regime, its traditions, memories, hopes, and men, as represented
by the aristocracy, and New France under the leadership of the middle
class. The year 1830 closed the first period of our revolutions, or
rather of our revolution: for there is but one, which has remained
always the same in the face of varying fortunes, of which our fathers
witnessed the commencement, and of which we, in all probability, shall
not live to behold the end. In 1830 the triumph of the middle class had
been definite and so thorough that all political power, every franchise,
every prerogative, and the whole government was confined and, as it
were, heaped up within the narrow limits of this one class, to the
statutory exclusion of all beneath them and the actual exclusion of all
above. Not only did it thus alone rule society, but it may be said to
have formed it. It ensconced itself in every vacant place, prodigiously
augmented the number of places, and accustomed itself to live almost as
much upon the Treasury as upon its own industry.

No sooner had the Revolution of 1830 become an accomplished fact, than
there ensued a great lull in political passion, a sort of general
subsidence, accompanied by a rapid increase in the public wealth. The
particular spirit of the middle class became the general spirit of the
government; it ruled the latter's foreign policy as well as affairs at
home: an active, industrious spirit, often dishonourable, generally
sober, occasionally reckless through vanity or egoism, but timid by
temperament, moderate in all things, except in its love of ease and
comfort, and wholly undistinguished. It was a spirit which, mingled with
that of the people or of the aristocracy, can do wonders; but which, by
itself, will never produce more than a government shorn of both virtue
and greatness. Master of everything in a manner that no aristocracy had
ever been or may ever hope to be, the middle class, when called upon to
assume the government, took it up as a trade; it entrenched itself
behind its power, and before long, in their egoism, each of its members
thought much more of his private business than of public affairs, and of
his personal enjoyment than of the greatness of the nation.

Posterity, which sees none but the more dazzling crimes, and which loses
sight, in general, of mere vices, will never, perhaps, know to what
extent the government of that day, towards its close, assumed the ways
of a trading company, which conducts all its transactions with a view to
the profits accruing to the shareholders. These vices were due to the
natural instincts of the dominant class, to the absoluteness of its
power, and also to the character of the time. Possibly also King
Louis-Philippe had contributed to their growth.

This Prince was a singular medley of qualities, and one must have known
him longer and more nearly than I did to be able to portray him in
detail.

Nevertheless, although I was never one of his Council, I have frequently
had occasion to come into contact with him. The last time that I spoke
to him was shortly before the catastrophe of February. I was then
director of the Academie Francaise, and I had to bring to the King's
notice some matter or other which concerned that body. After treating
the question which had brought me, I was about to retire, when the King
detained me, took a chair, motioned me to another, and said, affably:

"Since you are here, Monsieur de Tocqueville, let us talk; I want to
hear you talk a little about America."

I knew him well enough to know that this meant: I shall talk about
America myself. And he did actually talk of it at great length and very
searchingly: it was not possible for me, nor did I desire, to get in a
word, for he really interested me. He described places as though he saw
them before him; he recalled the distinguished men whom he had met forty
years ago as though he had seen them the day before; he mentioned their
names in full, Christian name and surname, gave their ages at the time,
related their histories, their pedigrees, their posterity, with
marvellous exactness and with infinite, though in no way tedious,
detail. From America he returned, without taking breath, to Europe,
talked of all our foreign and domestic affairs with incredible
unconstraint (for I had no title to his confidence), spoke very badly of
the Emperor of Russia, whom he called "Monsieur Nicolas," casually
alluded to Lord Palmerston as a rogue, and ended by holding forth at
length on the Spanish marriages, which had just taken place, and the
annoyances to which they subjected him on the side of England.

"The Queen is very angry with me," he said, "and displays great
irritation; but, after all," he added, "all this outcry won't keep me
from _driving my own cart_."[2]

     [2: "_Mener mon fiacre_": to drive my hackney-coach.--A.T. de M.]

Although this phrase dated back to the Old Order, I felt inclined to
doubt whether Louis XIV. ever made use of it on accepting the Spanish
Succession. I believe, moreover, that Louis-Philippe was mistaken, and,
to borrow his own language, that the Spanish marriage helped not a
little to upset his cart.

After three-quarters of an hour, the King rose, thanked me for the
pleasure my conversation had given him (I had not spoken four words),
and dismissed me, feeling evidently as delighted as one generally is
with a man before whom one thinks one has spoken well. This was my last
audience of the King.

Louis-Philippe improvised all the replies which he made, even upon the
most critical occasions, to the great State bodies; he was as fluent
then as in his private conversation, although not so happy or
epigrammatic. He would suddenly become obscure, for the reason that he
boldly plunged headlong into long sentences, of which he was not able to
estimate the extent nor perceive the end beforehand, and from which he
finally emerged struggling and by force, shattering the sense, and not
completing the thought.

In this political world thus constituted and conducted, what was most
wanting, particularly towards the end, was political life itself. It
could neither come into being nor be maintained within the legal circle
which the Constitution had traced for it: the old aristocracy was
vanquished, the people excluded. As all business was discussed among
members of one class, in the interest and in the spirit of that class,
there was no battle-field for contending parties to meet upon. This
singular homogeneity of position, of interests, and consequently of
views, reigning in what M. Guizot had once called the legal country,
deprived the parliamentary debates of all originality, of all reality,
and therefore of all genuine passion. I have spent ten years of my life
in the company of truly great minds, who were in a constant state of
agitation without succeeding in heating themselves, and who spent all
their perspicacity in vain endeavours to find subjects upon which they
could seriously disagree.

On the other hand, the preponderating influence which King
Louis-Philippe had acquired in public affairs, which never permitted the
politicians to stray very far from that Prince's ideas, lest they should
at the same time be removed from power, reduced the different colours of
parties to the merest shades, and debates to the splitting of straws. I
doubt whether any parliament (not excepting the Constituent Assembly, I
mean the true one, that of 1789) ever contained more varied and
brilliant talents than did ours during the closing years of the Monarchy
of July. Nevertheless, I am able to declare that these great orators
were tired to death of listening to one another, and, what was worse,
the whole country was tired of listening to them. It grew unconsciously
accustomed to look upon the debates in the Chambers as exercises of the
intellect rather than as serious discussions, and upon all the
differences between the various parliamentary parties--the majority, the
left centre, or the dynastic opposition--as domestic quarrels between
children of one family trying to trick one another. A few glaring
instances of corruption, discovered by accident, led it to presuppose a
number of hidden cases, and convinced it that the whole of the governing
class was corrupt; whence it conceived for the latter a silent contempt,
which was generally taken for confiding and contented submission.

The country was at that time divided into two unequal parts, or rather
zones: in the upper, which alone was intended to contain the whole of
the nation's political life, there reigned nothing but languor,
impotence, stagnation, and boredom; in the lower, on the contrary,
political life began to make itself manifest by means of feverish and
irregular signs, of which the attentive observer was easily able to
seize the meaning.

I was one of these observers; and although I was far from imagining that
the catastrophe was so near at hand and fated to be so terrible, I felt
a distrust springing up and insensibly growing in my mind, and the idea
taking root more and more that we were making strides towards a fresh
revolution. This denoted a great change in my thoughts; since the
general appeasement and flatness that followed the Revolution of July
had led me to believe for a long time that I was destined to spend my
life amid an enervated and peaceful society. Indeed, anyone who had only
examined the inside of the governmental fabric would have had the same
conviction. Everything there seemed combined to produce with the
machinery of liberty a preponderance of royal power which verged upon
despotism; and, in fact, this result was produced almost without effort
by the regular and tranquil movement of the machine. King Louis-Philippe
was persuaded that, so long as he did not himself lay hand upon that
fine instrument, and allowed it to work according to rule, he was safe
from all peril. His only occupation was to keep it in order, and to
make it work according to his own views, forgetful of society, upon
which this ingenious piece of mechanism rested; he resembled the man who
refused to believe that his house was on fire, because he had the key in
his pocket. I had neither the same interests nor the same cares, and
this permitted me to see through the mechanism of institutions and the
agglomeration of petty every-day facts, and to observe the state of
morals and opinions in the country. There I clearly beheld the
appearance of several of the portents that usually denote the approach
of revolutions, and I began to believe that in 1830 I had taken for the
end of the play what was nothing more than the end of an act.

A short unpublished document which I composed at the time, and a speech
which I delivered early in 1848, will bear witness to these
preoccupations of my mind.

A number of my friends in Parliament met together in October 1847, to
decide upon the policy to be adopted during the ensuing session. It was
agreed that we should issue a programme in the form of a manifesto, and
the task of drawing it up was deputed to me. Later, the idea of this
publication was abandoned, but I had already written the document. I
have discovered it among my papers, and I give the following extracts.
After commenting on the symptoms of languor in Parliament, I continued:

     "... The time will come when the country will find itself once
     again divided between two great parties. The French Revolution,
     which abolished all privileges and destroyed all exclusive rights,
     has allowed one to remain, that of landed property. Let not the
     landlords deceive themselves as to the strength of their position,
     nor think that the rights of property form an insurmountable
     barrier because they have not as yet been surmounted; for our times
     are unlike any others. When the rights of property were merely the
     origin and commencement of a number of other rights, they were
     easily defended, or rather, they were never attacked; they then
     formed the surrounding wall of society, of which all other rights
     were the outposts; no blows reached them; no serious attempt was
     ever made to touch them. But to-day, when the rights of property
     are nothing more than the last remnants of an overthrown
     aristocratic world; when they alone are left intact, isolated
     privileges amid the universal levelling of society; when they are
     no longer protected behind a number of still more controversible
     and odious rights, the case is altered, and they alone are left
     daily to resist the direct and unceasing shock of democratic
     opinion....

     "... Before long, the political struggle will be restricted to
     those who have and those who have not; property will form the great
     field of battle; and the principal political questions will turn
     upon the more or less important modifications to be introduced into
     the rights of landlords. We shall then have once more among us
     great public agitations and great political parties.

     "How is it that these premonitory symptoms escape the general view?
     Can anyone believe that it is by accident, through some passing
     whim of the human brain, that we see appearing on every side these
     curious doctrines, bearing different titles, but all characterized
     in their essence by their denial of the rights of property, and all
     tending, at least, to limit, diminish, and weaken the exercise of
     these rights? Who can fail here to recognise the final symptom of
     the old democratic disease of the time, whose crisis would seem to
     be at hand?"

I was still more urgent and explicit in the speech which I delivered in
the Chamber of Deputies on the 29th of January 1848, and which appeared
in the _Moniteur_ of the 30th.

I quote the principal passages:

     "... I am told that there is no danger because there are no riots;
     I am told that, because there is no visible disorder on the surface
     of society, there is no revolution at hand.

     "Gentlemen, permit me to say that I believe you are deceived. True,
     there is no actual disorder; but it has entered deeply into men's
     minds. See what is passing in the breasts of the working classes,
     who, I grant, are at present quiet. No doubt they are not disturbed
     by political passion, properly so-called, to the same extent that
     they have been; but can you not see that their passions, instead of
     political, have become social? Do you not see that there are
     gradually forming in their breasts opinions and ideas which are
     destined not only to upset this or that law, ministry, or even form
     of government, but society itself, until it totters upon the
     foundations on which it rests to-day? Do you not listen to what
     they say to themselves each day? Do you not hear them repeating
     unceasingly that all that is above them is incapable and unworthy
     of governing them; that the present distribution of goods
     throughout the world is unjust; that property rests on a foundation
     which is not an equitable foundation? And do you not realize that
     when such opinions take root, when they spread in an almost
     universal manner, when they sink deeply into the masses, they are
     bound to bring with them sooner or later, I know not when nor how,
     a most formidable revolution?

     "This, gentlemen, is my profound conviction: I believe that we are
     at this moment sleeping on a volcano. I am profoundly convinced of
     it....

            *       *       *       *       *

     "... I was saying just now that this evil would, sooner or later, I
     know not how nor whence it will come, bring with it a most serious
     revolution: be assured that that is so.

     "When I come to investigate what, at different times, in different
     periods, among different peoples, has been the effective cause that
     has brought about the downfall of the governing classes, I perceive
     this or that event, man, or accidental or superficial cause; but,
     believe me, the real reason, the effective reason which causes men
     to lose their power is, that they have become unworthy to retain
     it.

     "Think, gentlemen, of the old Monarchy: it was stronger than you
     are, stronger in its origin; it was able to lean more than you do
     upon ancient customs, ancient habits, ancient beliefs; it was
     stronger than you are, and yet it has fallen to dust. And why did
     it fall? Do you think it was by some particular mischance? Do you
     think it was by the act of some man, by the deficit, the oath in
     the Tennis Court, La Fayette, Mirabeau? No, gentlemen; there was
     another reason: the class that was then the governing class had
     become, through its indifference, its selfishness and its vices,
     incapable and unworthy of governing the country.

     "That was the true reason.

     "Well, gentlemen, if it is right to have this patriotic prejudice
     at all times, how much more is it not right to have it in our own?
     Do you not feel, by some intuitive instinct which is not capable of
     analysis, but which is undeniable, that the earth is quaking once
     again in Europe? Do you not feel ... what shall I say? ... as it
     were a gale of revolution in the air? This gale, no one knows
     whence it springs, whence it blows, nor, believe me, whom it will
     carry with it; and it is in such times as these that you remain
     calm before the degradation of public morality--for the expression
     is not too strong.

     "I speak without bitterness; I am even addressing you without any
     party spirit; I am attacking men against whom I feel no
     vindictiveness. But I am obliged to communicate to my country my
     firm and decided conviction. Well then, my firm and decided
     conviction is this: that public morality is being degraded, and
     that the degradation of public morality will shortly, very shortly,
     perhaps, bring down upon you a new revolution. Is the life of kings
     held by stronger threads? Are these more difficult to snap than
     those of other men? Can you say to-day that you are certain of
     to-morrow? Do you know what may happen in France a year hence, or
     even a month or a day hence? You do not know; but what you must
     know is that the tempest is looming on the horizon, that it is
     coming towards us. Will you allow it to take you by surprise?

     "Gentlemen, I implore you not to do so. I do not ask you, I implore
     you. I would gladly throw myself on my knees before you, so
     strongly do I believe in the reality and the seriousness of the
     danger, so convinced am I that my warnings are no empty rhetoric.
     Yes, the danger is great. Allay it while there is yet time; correct
     the evil by efficacious remedies, by attacking it not in its
     symptoms but in itself.

     "Legislative changes have been spoken of. I am greatly disposed to
     think that these changes are not only very useful, but necessary;
     thus, I believe in the need of electoral reform, in the urgency of
     parliamentary reform; but I am not, gentlemen, so mad as not to
     know that no laws can affect the destinies of nations. No, it is
     not the mechanism of laws that produces great events, gentlemen,
     but the inner spirit of the government. Keep the laws as they are,
     if you wish. I think you would be very wrong to do so; but keep
     them. Keep the men, too, if it gives you any pleasure. I raise no
     objection so far as I am concerned. But, in God's name, change the
     spirit of the government; for, I repeat, that spirit will lead you
     to the abyss."[3]

     [3: This speech was delivered in the Chamber of Deputies on the
     27th of January 1848, in the debate on the Address in reply to the
     Speech from the Throne.--Cte. de T.]

These gloomy predictions were received with ironical cheers from the
majority. The Opposition applauded loudly, but more from party feeling
than conviction. The truth is that no one as yet believed seriously in
the danger which I was prophesying, although we were so near the
catastrophe. The inveterate habit contracted by all the politicians,
during this long parliamentary farce, of over-colouring the expression
of their opinions and grossly exaggerating their thoughts had deprived
them of all power of appreciating what was real and true. For several
years the majority had every day been declaring that the Opposition was
imperilling society; and the Opposition repeated incessantly that the
Ministers were ruining the Monarchy. These statements had been made so
constantly on both sides, without either side greatly believing in them,
that they ended by not believing in them at all, at the very moment when
the event was about to justify both of them. Even my own friends
themselves thought that I had overshot the mark, and that my facts were
a little blurred by rhetoric.

I remember that, when I stepped from the tribune, Dufaure took me on one
side, and said, with that sort of parliamentary intuition which is his
only note of genius:

"You have succeeded, but you would have succeeded much more if you had
not gone so far beyond the feeling of the Assembly and tried to frighten
us."

And now that I am face to face with myself, searching in my memory to
discover whether I was actually myself so much alarmed as I seemed, the
answer is no, and I readily recognise that the event justified me more
promptly and more completely than I foresaw (a thing which may sometimes
have happened to other political prophets, better authorized to predict
than I was). No, I did not expect such a revolution as we were destined
to have; and who could have expected it? I did, I believe, perceive more
clearly than the others the general causes which were making for the
event; but I did not observe the accidents which were to precipitate it.
Meantime the days which still separated us from the catastrophe passed
rapidly by.




CHAPTER II

     THE BANQUETS--SENSE OF SECURITY ENTERTAINED BY THE
     GOVERNMENT--ANXIETY OF LEADERS OF THE OPPOSITION--ARRAIGNMENT OF
     MINISTERS.


I refused to take part in the affair of the banquets. I had both serious
and petty reasons for abstaining. What I call my petty reasons I am
quite willing to describe as bad reasons, although they were consistent
with honour, and would have been unexceptionable in a private matter.
They were the irritation and disgust aroused in me by the character and
by the tactics of the leaders of this enterprise. Nevertheless, I
confess that the private prejudice which we entertain with regard to
individuals is a bad guide in politics.

A close alliance had at that time been effected between M. Thiers and M.
Barrot, and a real fusion formed between the two sections of the
Opposition, which, in our parliamentary jargon, we called the Left
Centre and the Left. Almost all the stubborn and intractable spirits
which were found in the latter party had successively been softened,
unbent, subjugated, made supple, by the promises of place spread
broadcast by M. Thiers. I believe that even M. Barrot had for the first
time allowed himself not exactly to be won over, but surprised, by
arguments of this kind. At any rate, the most complete intimacy reigned
between the two great leaders of the Opposition, whatever was the cause
of it, and M. Barrot, who likes to mingle a little simplicity with his
weaknesses as well as with his virtues, exerted himself to his utmost to
secure the triumph of his ally, even at his own expense. M. Thiers had
allowed him to involve himself in this matter of the banquets; I even
think that he had instigated Barrot in that direction without consenting
to involve himself. He was willing to accept the results, but not the
responsibilities, of that dangerous agitation. Wherefore, surrounded by
his personal friends, he stayed mute and motionless in Paris, while
Barrot travelled all over the country for three months, making long
speeches in every town he stopped at, and resembling, in my opinion,
those beaters who make a great noise in order to bring the game within
easy range of the sportsman's gun. Personally, I felt no inclination to
take part in the sport. But the principal and more serious reason which
restrained me was this: and I expounded it pretty often to those who
wanted to drag me to those political meetings:

"For the first time for eighteen years," I used to tell them, "you are
proposing to appeal to the people, and to seek support outside the
middle class. If you fail in rousing the people (and I think this will
be the most probable result), you will become still more odious than you
already are in the eyes of the Government and of the middle classes,
who for a great part support it. In this way you will strengthen the
administration which you desire to upset; while if, on the contrary, you
succeed in rousing the people, you are no more able than I am to foresee
whither an agitation of this kind will lead you."

In the measure that the campaign of the banquets was prolonged, the
latter hypothesis became, contrary to my expectation, the more probable.
A certain anxiety began to oppress the ringleaders themselves; an
indefinite anxiety, passing vaguely through their minds. I was told by
Beaumont, who was at that time one of the first among them, that the
excitement occasioned in the country by the banquets surpassed not only
the hopes, but the wishes, of those who had started it. The latter were
labouring to allay rather than increase it. Their intention was that
there should be no banquet in Paris, and that there should be none held
anywhere after the assembling of the Chambers. The fact is that they
were only seeking a way out of the mischievous road which they had
entered upon. And it was undoubtedly in spite of them that this final
banquet was resolved on; they were constrained to take part in it, drawn
into it; their vanity was compromised. The Government, by its defiance,
goaded the Opposition into adopting this dangerous measure, thinking
thus to drive it to destruction. The Opposition let itself be caught in
a spirit of bravado, and lest it should be suspected of retreating; and
thus irritating each other, spurring one another on, they dragged each
other towards the common abyss, which neither of them as yet perceived.

I remember that two days before the Revolution of February, at the
Turkish Ambassador's ball, I met Duvergier de Hauranne. I felt for him
both friendship and esteem; although he possessed very nearly all the
failings that arise from party spirit, he at least joined to them the
sort of disinterestedness and sincerity which one meets with in genuine
passions, two rare advantages in our day, when the only genuine passion
is that of self. I said to him, with the familiarity warranted by our
relations:

"Courage, my friend; you are playing a dangerous game."

He replied gravely, but with no sign of fear:

"Believe me, all will end well; besides, one must risk something. There
is no free government that has not had to go through a similar
experience."

This reply perfectly describes this determined but somewhat narrow
character; narrow, I say, although with plenty of brain, but with the
brain which, while seeing clearly and in detail all that is on the
horizon, is incapable of conceiving that the horizon may change;
scholarly, disinterested, ardent, vindictive, sprung from that learned
and sectarian race which guides itself in politics by imitation of
others and by historical recollection, and which restricts its thought
to one sole idea, at which it warms, in which it blinds itself.

For the rest, the Government were even less uneasy than the leaders of
the Opposition. A few days before the above conversation, I had had
another with Duchatel, the Minister of the Interior. I was on good terms
with this minister, although for the last eight years I had been very
boldly (even too boldly, I confess, in the case of its foreign policy)
attacking the Cabinet of which he was one of the principal members. I am
not sure that this fault did not even make me find favour in his eyes,
for I believe that at the bottom of his heart he had a sneaking fondness
for those who attacked his colleague at the Foreign Office, M. Guizot. A
battle which M. Duchatel and I had fought some years before in favour of
the penitentiary system had brought us together and given rise to a
certain intimacy between us. This man was very unlike the one I
mentioned above: he was as heavy in his person and his manners as the
other was meagre, angular, and sometimes trenchant and bitter. He was as
remarkable for his scepticism as the other for his ardent convictions,
for flabby indifference as the former for feverish activity; he
possessed a very supple, very quick, very subtle mind enclosed in a
massive body; he understood business admirably, while pretending to be
above it; he was thoroughly acquainted with the evil passions of
mankind, and especially with the evil passions of his party, and always
knew how to turn them to advantage. He was free from all rancour and
prejudice, cordial in his address, easy of approach, obliging, whenever
his own interests were not compromised, and bore a kindly contempt for
his fellow-creatures.

I was about to say that, some days before the catastrophe, I drew M.
Duchatel into a corner of the conference room, and observed to him that
the Government and the Opposition seemed to be striving in concert to
drive things to an extremity calculated to end by damaging everybody;
and I asked him if he saw no honest way of escape from a regrettable
position, some honourable transaction which would permit everyone to
draw back. I added that my friends and I would be happy to have such a
way pointed out to us, and that we would make every exertion to persuade
our colleagues in the Opposition to accept it. He listened attentively
to my remarks, and assured me that he understood my meaning, although I
saw clearly that he did not enter into it for a moment.

"Things had reached such a pitch," he said, "that the expedient which I
sought was no longer to be found. The Government was in the right, and
could not yield. If the Opposition persisted in its course, the result
might be a combat in the streets, but this combat had long been
foreseen, and if the Government was animated with the evil passions with
which it was credited, it would desire this fighting rather than dread
it, being sure to triumph in the end."

He went on in his complaisant fashion to tell me in detail of all the
military precautions that had been taken, the extent of the resources,
the number of the troops, and the quantity of ammunition.... I took my
leave, satisfied that the Government, without exactly striving to
promote an outbreak, was far from dreading one, and that the Ministry,
in its certainty of ultimate victory, saw in the threatening catastrophe
possibly its last means of rallying its scattered supporters and of
finally reducing its adversaries to powerlessness. I confess that I
thought as he did; his air of unfeigned assurance had proved contagious.

The only really uneasy people in Paris at that moment were the Radical
chiefs and the men who were sufficiently in touch with the people and
the revolutionary party to know what was taking place in that quarter. I
have reason to believe that most of these looked with dread upon the
events which were ready to burst forth, whether because they kept up the
tradition of their former passions rather than these passions
themselves, or because they had begun to grow accustomed to a state of
things in which they had taken up their position after so many times
cursing it; or again, because they were doubtful of success; or rather
because, being in a position to study and become well acquainted with
their allies, they were frightened at the last moment of the victory
which they expected to gain through their aid. On the very day before
the outbreak, Madame de Lamartine betrayed extraordinary anxiety when
calling upon Madame de Tocqueville, and gave such unmistakable signs of
a mind heated and almost deranged by ominous thoughts that the latter
became alarmed, and told me of it the same evening.

It is not one of the least curious characteristics of this singular
revolution that the incident which led to it was brought about and
almost longed for by the men whom it eventually precipitated from power,
and that it was only foreseen and feared by those who were to triumph by
its means.

Here let me for a moment resume the chain of history, so that I may the
more easily attach to it the thread of my personal recollections.

It will be remembered that, at the opening of the session of 1848, King
Louis-Philippe, in his Speech from the Throne, had described the authors
of the banquets as men excited by blind or hostile passions. This was
bringing Royalty into direct conflict with more than one hundred members
of the Chamber. This insult, which added anger to all the ambitious
passions which were already disturbing the hearts of the majority of
these men, ended by making them lose their reason. A violent debate was
expected, but did not take place at once. The earlier discussions on the
Address were calm: the majority and the Opposition both restrained
themselves at the commencement, like two men who feel that they have
lost their tempers, and who fear lest while in that condition they
should perpetrate some folly in word or deed.

But the storm of passion broke out at last, and continued with
unaccustomed violence. The extraordinary heat of these debates was
already redolent of civil war for those who knew how to scent
revolutions from afar.

The spokesmen of the moderate section of the Opposition were led, in the
heat of debate, to assert that the right of assembling at the banquets
was one of our most undeniable and essential rights;[4] that to question
it, was equivalent to trampling liberty itself underfoot and to
violating the Charter, and that those who did so unconsciously made an
appeal, not to discussion, but to arms. On his side M. Duchatel, who
ordinarily was very dexterous in debate, displayed in this circumstance
a consummate want of tact.[5] He absolutely denied the right of
assemblage, and yet would not say clearly that the Government had made
up its mind to prohibit thenceforth any manifestations of the kind. On
the contrary, he seemed to invite the Opposition to try the experiment
once more, so that the question might be brought before the Courts. His
colleague, M. Hebert, the Minister of Justice, was still more tactless,
but this was his habit. I have always observed that lawyers never make
statesmen; but I have never met anyone who was less of a statesman than
M. Hebert. He remained the Public-Prosecutor down to the marrow of his
bones; he had all the mental and physical characteristics of that
office. You must imagine a little wizened, sorry face, shrunk at the
temples, with a pointed forehead, nose and chin, cold, bright eyes, and
thin, in-drawn lips. Add to this a long quill generally held across the
mouth, and looking at a distance like a cat's bristling whiskers, and
you have a portrait of a man, than whom I have never seen anyone more
resembling a carnivorous animal. At the same time, he was neither stupid
nor even ill-natured; but he was by nature hot-headed and unyielding; he
always overshot his goal, for want of knowing when to turn aside or stop
still; and he fell into violence without intending it, and from sheer
want of discrimination. It showed how little importance M. Guizot
attached to conciliation, that under the circumstances he sent a speaker
of this stamp into the tribune;[6] his language while there was so
outrageous and so provoking that Barrot, quite beside himself and almost
without knowing what he was doing, exclaimed, in a voice half stifled
with rage, that the ministers of Charles X., that Polignac and
Peyronnet, had never dared to talk like that. I remember that I
shuddered involuntarily in my seat when I heard this naturally moderate
man exasperated into recalling, for the first time, the terrible
memories of the Revolution of 1830, holding it up in some sort as an
example, and unconsciously suggesting the idea of repeating it.

     [4: See the speech of M. Duvergier de Hauranne, 7 February
     1848.--Cte. de T.]

     [5: The minister replied to M. Leon de Mandeville. He quoted the
     laws of 1790 and 1791, which empowered the authorities to oppose
     any public meetings which seemed to threaten danger to the public
     peace, and he declared that the Government would be failing in its
     duty if it were to give way before manifestations of any
     description. At the end of his speech he again brought in the
     phrase "blind or hostile passions," and endeavoured to justify
     it.--Cte. de T.]

     [6: Replying to M. Odilon Barrot, M. Hebert maintained that, since
     the right of public meeting was not laid down in the Charter, it
     did not exist.--Cte. de T.]

The result of this heated discussion was a sort of challenge to mortal
combat exchanged between the Government and the Opposition, the scene of
the duel to be the law-courts. It was tacitly agreed that the challenged
party should meet at one final banquet; that the authorities, without
interfering to prevent the meeting, should prosecute its organizers, and
that the courts should pronounce judgment.

The debates on the Address were closed, if I remember rightly, on the
12th of February, and it is really from this moment that the
revolutionary movement burst out. The Constitutional Opposition, which
had for many months been constantly pushed on by the Radical party, was
from this time forward led and directed not so much by the members of
that party who occupied seats in the Chamber of Deputies (the greater
number of these had become lukewarm and, as it were, enervated in the
Parliamentary atmosphere), as by the younger, bolder, and more
irresponsible men who wrote for the democratic press. This change was
especially apparent in two principal facts which had an overwhelming
influence upon events--the programme of the banquet and the arraignment
of Ministers.

On the 20th of February, there appeared in almost all the Opposition
newspapers, by way of programme of the approaching banquet, what was
really a proclamation calling upon the entire population to join in an
immense political demonstration, convoking the schools and inviting the
National Guard itself to attend the ceremony in a body. It read like a
decree emanating from the Provisional Government which was to be set up
three days later. The Cabinet, which had already been blamed by many of
its followers for tacitly authorising the banquet, considered that it
was justified in retracing its steps. It officially announced that it
forbade the banquet, and that it would prevent it by force.

It was this declaration of the Government which provided the field for
the battle. I am in a position to state, although it sounds hardly
credible, that the programme which thus suddenly turned the banquet into
an insurrection was resolved upon, drawn up and published without the
participation or the knowledge of the members of Parliament who
considered themselves to be still leading the movement which they had
called into existence. The programme was the hurried work of a nocturnal
gathering of journalists and Radicals, and the leaders of the Dynastic
Opposition heard of it at the same time as the public, by reading it in
the papers in the morning.

And see how uncertain is the course of human affairs! M. Odilon Barrot,
who disapproved of the programme as much as anyone, dared not disclaim
it for fear of offending the men who, till then, had seemed to be moving
with him; and then, when the Government, alarmed by the publication of
this document, prohibited the banquet, M. Barrot, finding himself
brought face to face with civil war, drew back. He himself gave up this
dangerous demonstration; but at the same time that he was making this
concession to the men of moderation, he granted to the extremists the
impeachment of Ministers. He accused the latter of violating the
Constitution by prohibiting the banquet, and thus furnished an excuse to
those who were about to take up arms in the name of the violated
Constitution.

Thus the principal leaders of the Radical Party, who thought that a
revolution would be premature, and who did not yet desire it, had
considered themselves obliged, in order to differentiate themselves from
their allies in the Dynastic Opposition, to make very revolutionary
speeches and fan the flame of insurrectionary passion. On the other
hand, the Dynastic Opposition, which had had enough of the banquets, had
been forced to persevere in this bad course so as not to present an
appearance of retreating before the defiance of the Government. And
finally, the mass of the Conservatives, who believed in the necessity of
great concessions and were ready to make them, were driven by the
violence of their adversaries and the passions of some of their chiefs
to deny even the right of meeting in private banquets and to refuse the
country any hopes of reform.

One must have lived long amid political parties, and in the very
whirlwind in which they move, to understand to what extent men mutually
push each other away from their respective plans, and how the destinies
of this world proceed as the result, but often as the contrary result,
of the intentions that produce them, similarly to the kite which flies
by the antagonistic action of the wind and the cord.




CHAPTER III

     TROUBLES OF THE 22ND OF FEBRUARY--THE SITTING OF THE 23RD--THE NEW
     MINISTRY--OPINIONS OF M. DUFAURE AND M. DE BEAUMONT.


I did not perceive anything on the 22nd of February calculated to give
rise to serious apprehensions. There was a crowd in the streets, but it
seemed to be composed rather of sight-seers and fault-finders than of
the seditiously inclined: the soldier and the townsman chaffed each
other when they met, and I heard more jokes than cries uttered by the
crowd. I know that it is not safe to trust one's self to these
appearances. It is the street-boys of Paris who generally commence the
insurrections, and as a rule they do so light-heartedly, like schoolboys
breaking up for the holidays.

When I returned to the Chamber, I found a seeming listlessness reigning
there, beneath which one could perceive the inner seething of a thousand
restrained passions. It was the only place in Paris in which, since the
early morning, I had not heard discussed aloud what was then absorbing
all France. They were languidly discussing a bill for the creation of a
bank at Bordeaux; but in reality no one, except the man talking in the
tribune and the man who was to reply to him, showed any interest in the
matter. M. Duchatel told me that all was going well. He said this with
an air of combined confidence and nervousness which struck me as
suspicious. I noticed that he twisted his neck and shoulders (a common
trick with him) much more frequently and violently than usual; and I
remember that this little observation gave me more food for reflection
than all the rest.

I learnt that, as a matter of fact, there had been serious troubles in
many parts of the town which I had not visited; a certain number of men
had been killed or wounded. People were no longer accustomed to this
sort of incident, as they had been some years before and as they became
still more a few months later; and the excitement was great. I happened
to be invited to dine that evening at the house of one of my
fellow-members of Parliament and of the Opposition, M. Paulmier, the
deputy for Calvados. I had some difficulty in getting there through the
troops which guarded the surrounding streets. I found my host's house in
great disorder. Madame Paulmier, who was expecting her _accouchement_
and who had been frightened by a skirmish that had taken place beneath
her windows, had gone to bed. The dinner was magnificent, but the table
was deserted; out of twenty guests invited, only five presented
themselves; the others were kept back either by material impediments or
by the preoccupations of the day. We sat down with a very thoughtful air
amid all this abundance. Among the guests was M. Sallandrouze, the
inheritor of the great business house of that name, which had made a
large fortune by its manufacture of textile fabrics. He was one of those
young Conservatives, richer in money than in honours, who, from time to
time, made a show of opposition, or rather, of captious criticism,
mainly, I think, to give themselves a certain importance. In the course
of the last debate on the Address, M. Sallandrouze had moved an
amendment[7] which would have compromised the Cabinet, had it been
adopted. At the time when this incident was most occupying attention, M.
Sallandrouze one evening went to the reception at the Tuileries, hoping
that this time, at least, he would not remain unrecognized in the crowd.
And, in fact, no sooner had King Louis-Philippe seen him than he came up
to him with a very assiduous mien, and solemnly took him aside and began
to talk to him eagerly, and with a great display of interest, about the
branch of manufacture to which the young deputy owed his fortune. The
latter, at first, felt no astonishment, thinking that the King, who was
known to be clever at managing men's minds, had selected this little
private road in order to lead round to affairs of State. But he was
mistaken; for, after a quarter of an hour, the King changed not the
conversation but the person addressed, and left our friend standing very
confused amid his carpets and woollen stuffs. M. Sallandrouze had not
yet got over this trick played upon him, but he was beginning to feel
very much afraid that he would be revenged too well. He told us that M.
Emile Girardin had said to him the day before, "In two days, the
Monarchy of July will have ceased to exist." This seemed to all of us a
piece of journalistic hyperbole, and perhaps it was; but the events that
followed turned it into an oracle.

     [7: M. Sallandrouze de Lamornaix' amendment proposed to modify the
     expression "blind or hostile passions," by adding the words: "Amid
     these various demonstrations, your Government will know how to
     recognise the real and lawful desires of the country; it will, we
     trust, take the initiative by introducing certain wise and moderate
     reforms called for by public opinion, among which we must place
     first parliamentary reform. In a Constitutional Monarchy, the union
     of the great powers of the State removes all danger from a
     progressive policy, and allows every moral and material interest of
     the country to be satisfied."--Cte. de T.]

On the next day, the 23rd of February, I learnt, on waking, that the
excitement in Paris, so far from becoming calmer, was increasing. I went
early to the Chamber; silence reigned around the Assembly; battalions of
infantry occupied and closed the approaches, while troops of Cuirassiers
were drawn up along the walls of the Palace. Inside, men's feelings were
excited without their quite knowing the reason.

The sitting had been opened at the ordinary time; but the Assembly had
not had the courage to go through the same parliamentary comedy as on
the day before, and had suspended its labours; it sat receiving reports
from the different quarters of the town, awaiting events and counting
the hours, in a state of feverish idleness. At a certain moment, a loud
sound of trumpets was heard outside. It appeared that the Cuirassiers
guarding the Palace were amusing themselves, in order to pass the time,
by sounding flourishes on their instruments. The gay, triumphant tones
of the trumpets contrasted in so melancholy a fashion with the thoughts
by which all our minds were secretly disturbed, that a message was
hurriedly sent out to stop this offensive and indiscreet performance,
which caused such painful reflections to all of us.

At last, it was determined to speak aloud of what all had been
discussing in whispers for several hours. A Paris deputy, M. Vavin,
commenced to question the Cabinet upon the state of the city. At three
o'clock M. Guizot appeared at the door of the House. He entered with his
firmest step and his loftiest mien, silently crossed the gangway,
ascended the tribune, throwing his head almost back from his shoulders
for fear of seeming to lower it, and stated in two words that the King
had called upon M. Mole to form a new ministry. Never did I see such a
piece of clap-trap.

The Opposition kept their seats, most of them uttering cries of victory
and satisfied revenge; the leaders alone sat silent, busy in communing
with themselves upon the use they would make of their triumph, and
careful not to insult a majority of which they might soon be called upon
to make use. As to the majority, they seemed thunderstruck by this so
unexpected blow, moved to and fro like a mass that sways from side to
side, uncertain as to which side it shall fall on, and then descended
noisily into the semi-circle. A few surrounded the ministers to ask
them for explanations or to pay them their last respects, but the
greater number clamoured against them with noisy and insulting shouts.
"To throw up office, to abandon your political friends under such
circumstances," they said, "is a piece of gross cowardice;" while others
exclaimed that the members ought to repair to the Tuileries in a body,
and force the King to re-consider his fatal resolve.

This despair will arouse no astonishment when it is remembered that the
greater number of these men felt themselves attacked, not only in their
political opinions, but in the most sensitive part of their private
interest. The fall of the Government compromised the entire fortune of
one, the daughter's dowry of another, the son's career of a third. It
was by this that they were almost all held. Most of them had not only
bettered themselves by means of their votes, but one may say that they
had lived on them. They still lived on them, and hoped to continue to
live on them; for, the Ministry having lasted eight years, they had
accustomed themselves to think that it would last for ever; they had
grown attached to it with the honest, peaceful feeling of affection
which one entertains for one's fields. From my seat, I watched this
swaying crowd; I saw surprise, anger, fear and avarice mingle their
various expressions upon those bewildered countenances; and I drew an
involuntary comparison between all these legislators and a pack of
hounds which, with their jaws half filled, see the quarry withdrawn
from them.

I grant, however, that, so far as many of the Opposition were concerned,
it only wanted that they should be put to a similar test in order to
make the same display. If many of the Conservatives only defended the
Ministry with a view to keeping their places and emoluments, I am bound
to say that many of the Opposition seemed to me only to attack it in
order to reap the plunder in their turn. The truth--the deplorable
truth--is that a taste for holding office and a desire to live on the
public money are not with us a disease restricted to either party, but
the great, chronic ailment of the whole nation; the result of the
democratic constitution of our society and of the excessive
centralization of our Government; the secret malady which has undermined
all former powers, and which will undermine all powers to come.

At last the uproar ceased, as the nature of what had happened became
better known: we learnt that it had been brought about by the
insurrectionary inclinations of a battalion of the Fifth Legion and the
applications made direct to the King by several officers of that section
of the Guard.

So soon as he was informed of what was going on, King Louis-Philippe,
who was less prone to change his opinions, but more ready to change his
line of conduct, than any man I ever saw, had immediately made up his
mind; and after eight years of complacency, the Ministry was dismissed
by him in two minutes, and without ceremony.

The Chamber rose without delay, each member thinking only of the change
of government, and forgetting about the revolution.

I went out with M. Dufaure, and soon perceived that he was not only
preoccupied but constrained. I at once saw that he felt himself in the
critical and complicated position of a leader of the Opposition, who was
about to become a minister, and who, after experiencing the use his
friends could be to him, was beginning to think of the difficulties
which their pretentions might well cause him.

M. Dufaure had a somewhat cunning mind, which readily admitted such
thoughts as these, and he also possessed a sort of natural rusticity
which, combined with great integrity, but rarely permitted him to
conceal them. He was, moreover, the sincerest and by far the most
respectable of all those who at that moment had a chance of becoming
ministers. He believed that power was at last within his grasp, and his
ambition betrayed a passion that was the more eager inasmuch as it was
discreet and suppressed. M. Mole in his place would have felt much
greater egoism and still more ingratitude, but he would have been only
all the more open-hearted and amiable.

I soon left him, and went to M. de Beaumont's. There I found every heart
rejoicing. I was far from sharing this joy, and finding myself among
people with whom I could talk freely, I gave my reasons.

"The National Guard of Paris," I said, "has upset a Cabinet; therefore
it is during its good pleasure only that the new Ministers will remain
at the head of affairs. You are glad because the Government is upset;
but do you not see that it is authority itself which is overthrown?"

This sombre view of the political situation was not much to Beaumont's
taste; he was carried away by rancour and ambition.

"You always take a gloomy view of everything," he said. "Let us first
rejoice at the victory: we can lament over the results later."

Madame de Beaumont, who was present at the interview, seemed herself to
share her husband's elation, and nothing ever so thoroughly proved to me
the irresistible power of party feeling. For, by nature, neither hatred
nor self-interest had a place in the heart of this distinguished and
attractive woman, one of the most truly and consistently virtuous that I
have met in my life, and one who best knew how to make virtue both
touching and lovable. To the nobility of heart of the La Fayettes she
added a mind that was witty, refined, kindly and just.

I, nevertheless, sustained my theory against both him and her, arguing
that upon the whole the incident was a regrettable one, or rather that
we should see more in it than a mere incident, a great event which was
destined to change the whole aspect of affairs. It was very easy for me
to philosophize thus, since I did not share the illusions of my friend
Dufaure. The impulse given to the political machine seemed to me to be
too violent to permit of the reins of government falling into the hands
of the moderate party to which I belonged, and I foresaw that they would
soon fall to those who were almost as obnoxious to me as the men from
whose hands they had slipped.

I was dining with another of my friends, M. Lanjuinais, of whom I shall
have to speak often in future. The company was fairly numerous, and
embraced many shades of political opinion. Many of the guests rejoiced
at the result of the day's work, while others expressed alarm; but all
thought that the insurrectionary movement would stop of its own accord,
to break out again later on another occasion and in another form. All
the rumours that reached us from the town seemed to confirm this belief;
cries of war were replaced by cries of joy. Portalis, who became
Attorney-General of Paris a few days later, was of our number: not the
son, but the nephew of the Chief President of the Court of Appeal. This
Portalis had neither his uncle's rare intelligence, nor his exemplary
character, nor his solemn dulness. His coarse, violent, perverse mind
had quite naturally entered into all the false ideas and extreme
opinions of our times. Although he was in relation with most of those
who are regarded as the authors and leaders of the Revolution of 1848, I
can conscientiously declare that he did not that night expect the
revolution any more than we did. I am convinced that, even at that
supreme moment, the same might have been said of the greater number of
his friends. It would be a waste of time to try to discover what secret
conspiracies brought about events of this kind. Revolutions accomplished
by means of popular risings are generally longed for beforehand rather
than premeditated. Those who boast of having contrived them have done no
more than turn them to account. They spring spontaneously into being
from a general malady of men's minds, brought suddenly to the critical
stage by some fortuitous and unforeseen circumstance. As to the
so-called originators or leaders of these revolutions, they originate
and lead nothing; their only merit is identical with that of the
adventurers who have discovered most of the unknown countries. They
simply have the courage to go straight before them as long as the wind
impels them.

I took my leave early, and went straight home to bed. Although I lived
close to the Foreign Office, I did not hear the firing which so greatly
influenced our destinies, and I fell asleep without realizing that I had
seen the last day of the Monarchy of July.




CHAPTER IV

     THE 24TH OF FEBRUARY--THE MINISTERS' PLAN OF RESISTANCE--THE
     NATIONAL GUARD--GENERAL BEDEAU.


The next morning was the 24th of February. On leaving my bed-room, I met
the cook, who had been out; the good woman was quite beside herself, and
poured out a sorrowing rigmarole, of which I failed to understand a
word, except that the Government was massacring the poor people. I went
downstairs at once, and had no sooner set foot in the street than I
breathed for the first time the atmosphere of revolution. The roadway
was empty; the shops were not open; there were no carriages nor
pedestrians to be seen; none of the ordinary hawkers' cries were heard;
neighbours stood talking in little groups at their doors, with subdued
voices, with a frightened air; every face seemed distorted with fear or
anger. I met a National Guard hurrying along, gun in hand, with a tragic
gait; I accosted him, but I could learn nothing from him, save that the
Government was massacring the people (to which he added that the
National Guard would know how to put that right). It was the same old
refrain: it is easily understood that this explanation explained
nothing. I was too well acquainted with the vices of the Government of
July not to know that cruelty was not one of them. I considered it one
of the most corrupt, but also one of the least bloodthirsty, that had
ever existed, and I only repeat this observation in order to show the
sort of report that assists the progress of revolutions.

I hastened to M. de Beaumont, who lived in the next street. There I
learnt that the King had sent for him during the night. The same reply
was given to my enquiry at M. de Remusat's, where I went next. M. de
Corcelles, whom I met in the street, gave me his account of what was
happening, but in a very confused manner; for, in a city in state of
revolution, as on a battle-field, each one readily regards the incidents
of which himself is a witness as the events of the day. He told me of
the firing on the Boulevard des Capucines, and of the rapid development
of the insurrection of which this act of unnecessary violence was the
cause or the pretext; of M. Mole's refusal to take office under these
circumstances; and lastly, of the summons to the Palace of Messrs.
Thiers, Barrot and their friends, who were definitely charged with the
formation of a cabinet, facts too well known to permit of my lingering
over them. I asked M. de Corcelles how the ministers proposed to set
about appeasing people's minds.

"M. de Remusat," said he, "is my authority for saying that the plan
adopted is to withdraw all the troops and to flood Paris with National
Guards." These were his own words.

I have always observed that in politics people were often ruined through
possessing too good a memory. The men who were now charged to put an end
to the Revolution of 1848 were exactly the same who had made the
Revolution of 1830. They remembered that at that time the resistance of
the army had failed to stop them, and that on the other hand the
presence of the National Guard, so imprudently dissolved by Charles X.,
might have embarrassed them greatly and prevented them from succeeding.
They took the opposite steps to those adopted by the Government of the
Elder Branch, and arrived at the same result. So true is it that, if
humanity be always the same, the course of history is always different,
that the past is not able to teach us much concerning the present, and
that those old pictures, when forced into new frames, never have a good
effect.

After chatting for a little while on the dangerous position of affairs,
M. de Corcelles and I went to fetch M. Lanjuinais, and all three of us
went together to M. Dufaure, who lived in the Rue Le Peletier. The
boulevard, which we followed to get there, presented a strange
spectacle. There was hardly a soul to be seen, although it was nearly
nine o'clock in the morning, and one heard not the slightest sound of a
human voice; but all the little sentry-boxes which stand along this
endless avenue seemed to move about and totter upon their base, and from
time to time one of them would fall with a crash, while the great trees
along the curb came tumbling down into the roadway as though of their
own accord. These acts of destruction were the work of isolated
individuals, who went about their business silently, regularly, and
hurriedly, preparing in this way the materials for the barricades which
others were to erect. Nothing ever seemed to me more to resemble the
carrying on of an industry, and, as a matter of fact, for the greater
number of these men it was nothing less. The instinct of disorder had
given them the taste for it, and their experience of so many former
insurrections the practice. I do not know that during the whole course
of the day I was so keenly struck as in passing through this solitude in
which one saw, so to speak, the worst passions of mankind at play,
without the good ones appearing. I would rather have met in the same
place a furious crowd; and I remember that, calling Lanjuinais'
attention to those tottering edifices and falling trees, I gave vent to
the phrase which had long been on my lips, and said:

"Believe me, this time it is no longer a riot: it is a revolution."

M. Dufaure told us all that concerned himself in the occurrences of the
preceding evening and of the night. M. Mole had at first applied to him
to assist him to form the new Cabinet; but the increasing gravity of the
situation had soon made them both understand that the moment for their
intervention had passed. M. Mole told the King so about midnight, and
the King sent him to fetch M. Thiers, who refused to accept office
unless he was given M. Barrot for a colleague. Beyond this point, M.
Dufaure knew no more than we did. We separated without having succeeded
in deciding upon our line of action, and without coming to any
resolution beyond that of proceeding to the Chamber so soon as it
opened.

M. Dufaure did not come, and I never precisely learnt why. It was
certainly not from fear, for I have since seen him very calm and very
firm under much more dangerous circumstances. I believe that he grew
alarmed for his family, and desired to take them to a place of safety
outside Paris. His private and his public virtues, both of which were
very great, did not keep step: the first were always ahead of the
second, and we shall see signs of this on more than one subsequent
occasion. Nor, for that matter, would I care to lay this to his account
as a serious charge. Virtues of any kind are too rare to entitle us to
vex those who possess them about their character or their degree.

The time which we had spent with M. Dufaure had sufficed to enable the
rioters to erect a large number of barricades along the road by which we
had come; they were putting the finishing touches to them as we passed
on our way back. These barricades were cunningly constructed by a small
number of men, who worked very diligently: not like guilty men hurried
by the dread of being taken in the act, but like good workmen anxious to
get their task done well and expeditiously. The public watched them
quietly, without expressing disapproval or offering assistance. I did
not discover any signs of that sort of general seething which I had
witnessed in 1830, and which made me at the time compare the whole city
to a huge boiling caldron. This time the public was not overthrowing the
Government; it was allowing it to fall.

We met on the boulevard a column of infantry falling back upon the
Madeleine. No one addressed a word to it, and yet its retreat resembled
a rout. The ranks were broken, the soldiers marched in disorder, with
hanging heads and an air that was both downcast and frightened. Whenever
one of them became separated for a mere instant from the main body, he
was at once surrounded, seized, embraced, disarmed and sent back: all
this was the work of a moment.

Crossing the Place du Havre, I met for the first time a battalion of
that National Guard with which Paris was to be flooded. These men
marched with a look of astonishment and an uncertain step, surrounded by
street boys shouting, "Reform for ever!" to whom they replied with the
same cry, but in a smothered and somewhat constrained voice. This
battalion belonged to my neighbourhood, and most of those who composed
it knew me by sight, although I knew hardly any of them. They
surrounded me and greedily pressed me for news; I told them that we had
obtained all we wanted, that the ministry was changed, that all the
abuses complained of were to be reformed, and that the only danger we
now ran was lest people should go too far, and that it was for them to
prevent it. I soon saw that this view did not appeal to them.

"That's all very well, sir," said they; "the Government has got itself
into this scrape through its own fault, let it get out of it as best it
can."

It was of small use my representing to them that it was much less a
question for the Government at present than for themselves:

"If Paris is delivered to anarchy," I said, "and all the Kingdom is in
confusion, do you think that none but the King will suffer?"

It was of no avail, and all I could obtain in reply was this astounding
absurdity: it was the Government's fault, let the Government run the
danger; we don't want to get killed for people who have managed their
business so badly. And yet this was that middle class which had been
pampered for eighteen years: the current of public opinion had ended by
dragging it along, and was driving it against those who had flattered it
until it had become corrupt.

This was the occasion of a reflection which has often since presented
itself to my mind; in France a government always does wrong to rely
solely for support upon the exclusive interests and selfish passions of
one class. This can only succeed with nations more self-interested and
less vain than ours: with us, when a government established upon this
basis becomes unpopular, it follows that the members of the very class
for whose sake it has lost its popularity prefer the pleasure of
traducing it with all the world to the privileges which it assures them.
The old French aristocracy, which was more enlightened than our modern
middle class and possessed much greater _esprit de corps_, had already
given the same example; it had ended by thinking it a mark of
distinction to run down its own privileges, and by thundering against
the abuses upon which it existed. That is why I think that, upon the
whole, the safest method of government for us to adopt, in order to
endure, is that of governing well, of governing in the interest of
everybody. I am bound to confess, however, that, even when one follows
this course, it is not very certain that one will endure for long.

I soon set out to go to the Chamber, although the time fixed for the
opening of the sitting had not yet come: it was, I believe, about eleven
o'clock. I found the Place Louis XV still clear of people, but occupied
by several regiments of cavalry. When I saw all these troops drawn up in
such good order, I began to think that they had only deserted the
streets in order to mass themselves around the Tuileries and defend
themselves there. At the foot of the obelisk were grouped the staff,
among whom, as I drew nearer, I recognized Bedeau, whose unlucky star
had quite recently brought him back from Africa, in time to bury the
Monarchy. I had spent a few days with him, the year before, at
Constantine, and there had sprung up between us a sort of intimacy which
has since continued. So soon as Bedeau caught sight of me, he sprang
from his horse, came up to me, and grasped my hand in a way that clearly
betrayed his excitement. His conversation gave yet stronger evidence of
this, and I was not surprised, for I have always observed that the men
who lose their heads most easily, and who generally show themselves
weakest on days of revolution, are soldiers; accustomed as they are to
have an organized force facing them and an obedient force in their
hands, they readily become confused before the uproarious shouts of a
mob and in presence of the hesitation and the occasional connivance of
their own men. Unquestionably, Bedeau was confused, and everybody knows
what were the results of this confusion: how the Chamber was invaded by
a handful of men within pistol-shot of the squadrons protecting it, and
how, in consequence, the fall of the Monarchy was proclaimed and the
Provisional Government elected. The part played by Bedeau on this fatal
day was, unfortunately for himself, of so preponderating a character
that I propose to stop a moment in order to analyze this man and his
motives for acting as he did. We have been sufficiently intimate both
before and after this event to enable me to speak with knowledge. It is
true that he received the order not to fight; but why did he obey so
extraordinary an order, which circumstances had rendered so
impracticable?

Bedeau was assuredly not timid by nature, nor even, properly speaking,
undecided; for, when he had once made up his mind, you saw him making
for his goal with great firmness, coolness and courage; but his mind was
the most methodical, the least self-reliant, the least adventurous, and
the least adapted for unpremeditated action that can well be imagined.
He was accustomed to consider the action which he was about to undertake
in all its aspects before setting to work, taking the worst aspects
first, and losing much precious time in diluting a single thought in a
multitude of words. For the rest, he was a just man, moderate,
liberal-minded, as humane as though he had not waged war in Africa for
eighteen years, modest, moral, even refined, and religious: the kind of
honest, virtuous man who is very rarely to be met with in military
circles, or, to speak plainly, elsewhere. It was assuredly not from want
of courage that he did certain acts which seemed to point to this
defect, for he was brave beyond measure; still less was treachery his
motive: although he may not have been attached to the Orleans Family, he
was as little capable of betraying those Princes as their best friends
could have been, and much less so than their creatures eventually were.
His misfortune was that he was drawn into events which were greater than
himself, and that he had only merit where genius was needed, and
especially the genius to grapple with revolutions, which consists
principally in regulating one's actions according to events, and in
knowing how to disobey at the right time. The remembrance of February
poisoned General Bedeau's life, and left a cruel wound deep down in his
soul, a wound whose agony betrayed itself unceasingly by endless
recitals and explanations of the events of that period.

While he was engaged in telling me of his perplexities, and in
endeavouring to prove that the duty of the Opposition was to come down
to the streets in a body and calm the popular excitement with their
speeches, a crowd of people glided in between the trees of the
Champs-Elysees and came down the main avenue towards the Place Louis XV.
Bedeau perceived these men, dragged me towards them on foot until he was
more than a hundred paces from his cavalry, and began to harangue them,
for he was more disposed to speech-making than any military man I have
ever known.

While he was holding forth in this way, I observed that the circle of
his listeners was gradually extending itself around us, and would soon
close us in; and through the first rank of sight-seers I clearly caught
sight of men of riotous aspect moving about, while I heard dull murmurs
in the depths of the crowd of these dangerous words, "It's Bugeaud." I
leant towards the general and whispered in his ear:

"I have more experience than you of the ways of the populace; take my
word, get back to your horse at once, for if you stay here, you will be
killed or taken prisoner before five minutes are over."

He took my word for it, and it was well he did. A few moments later,
these same men whom he had undertaken to convert murdered the occupants
of the guard-house in the Rue des Champs-Elysees; I myself had some
difficulty in forcing my way through them. One of them, a short,
thick-set man, who seemed to belong to the lower class of workmen, asked
me where I was going.

I replied, "To the Chamber," adding, to show that I was a member of the
Opposition, "Reform for ever! You know the Guizot Ministry has been
dismissed?"

"Yes, sir, I know," replied the man, jeeringly, and pointing to the
Tuileries, "but we want more than that."




CHAPTER V

     THE SITTING OF THE CHAMBER--MADAME LA DUCHESSE D'ORLEANS--THE
     PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT.


I entered the Chamber; the sitting had not yet commenced. The deputies
were wandering about the lobbies like men distraught, living on rumours,
and quite without information. It was not so much an assembly as a mob,
for nobody was leading it.

The leaders of both parties were absent: the ex-ministers had fled, the
new ones had not appeared. Members cried loudly for the sitting to open,
impelled rather by a vague desire for action than by any definite
intention; the President refused: he was accustomed to do nothing
without instructions, and since there was no one left to instruct him,
he was unable to make up his mind. I was begged to go and find him, and
persuade him to take the chair, and I did so. I found this excellent
man--for so he was, in spite of the fact that he often indulged in
well-meaning pieces of trickery, in little pious frauds, in petty
villainies, in all the venial sins which a faint heart and a wavering
mind are able to suggest to an honest nature--I found him, as I have
said, walking to and fro in his room, a prey to the greatest excitement.
M. Sauzet possessed good but not striking features; he had the dignity
of a parish beadle, a big fat body, with very short arms. At times when
he was restless and perplexed--and he almost always was so--he used to
wave his little arms convulsively, and move them about like a swimmer.
His demeanour during our conversation was of the strangest: he walked
about, stopped still, sat down with one foot underneath his clumsy
frame, as he used to do in moments of great excitement, stood up again,
sat down anew, and came to no decision. It was very unfortunate for the
House of Orleans that it had an honest man of this kind to preside over
the Chamber on a day like this: an audacious rogue would have served its
turn better.

M. Sauzet gave me many reasons for not opening the sitting, but one
which he did not give me convinced me that he was right. Seeing him so
helpless and so incapable of adopting any resolution, I considered that
he would only confuse men's minds the more he tried to regulate them. I
therefore left him, and thinking it more important to find protectors
for the Chamber than to open its deliberations, I went out, intending to
proceed to the Ministry of the Interior and ask for help.

As I crossed the Place du Palais-Bourbon with this object, I saw a very
mixed crowd accompanying two men, whom I soon recognized as Barrot and
Beaumont, with loud cheers. Both of them wore their hats crushed down
over their eyes; their clothes were covered with dust, their cheeks
looked hollow, their eyes weary: never were two men in triumph so
suggestive of men about to be hanged. I ran up to Beaumont, and asked
him what was happening. He whispered that the King had abdicated in his
presence, and had taken to flight; that Lamoriciere had apparently been
killed when he went out to announce the abdication to the rioters (in
fact, an aide-de-camp had come back to say that he had seen him at a
distance fall from his horse), that everything was going wrong, and
finally, that he and Barrot were now on their way to the Ministry of the
Interior in order to take possession of it, and to try and establish
somewhere a centre of authority and resistance.

"And the Chamber!" I said. "Have you taken any precautions for the
defence of the Chamber?"

Beaumont received this observation with ill-humour, as though I had been
speaking of my own house. "Who is thinking of the Chamber?" he replied
brusquely. "What good or what harm can it do at the present juncture?"

I thought, and rightly, that he was wrong to speak like this. The
Chamber, it is true, was at that moment in a curious state of
powerlessness, its majority despised, and its minority left behind by
public opinion. But M. de Beaumont forgot that it is just in times of
revolution that the very least instruments of the law, and much more its
outer symbols, which recall the idea of the law to the minds of the
people, assume the greatest importance; for it is especially in the
midst of this universal anarchy and turmoil that the need is felt of
some simulacrum of authority and tradition in order to save the remnants
of a half-destroyed constitution or to complete its overthrow. Had the
deputies been able to proclaim the Regency, the latter might have ended
by triumphing, in spite of the unpopularity of the deputies; and, on the
other hand, it is an undoubted fact that the Provisional Government owed
much to the chance which caused it to come into being between the four
walls which had so long sheltered the representatives of the nation.

I followed my friends to the Ministry of the Interior, where they were
going. The crowd which accompanied us entered, or rather swept in,
tumultuously, and even penetrated with us as far as the room which M.
Duchatel had just quitted. Barrot tried to free himself and dismiss the
mob, but was unable to succeed.

These people, who held two very different sets of opinions, as I was
then enabled to observe, some being Republicans and others
Constitutionalists, began vehemently to discuss with us and among
themselves the measures which were to be taken; and as we were all
squeezed together in a very small space, the heat, dust, confusion, and
uproar soon became unbearable. Barrot, who always launched out into
long, pompous phrases at the most critical moments, and who preserved an
air of dignity, and even of mystery, in the most ludicrous
circumstances, was holding forth at his best _in angustis_. His voice
occasionally rose above the tumult, but never succeeded in quelling it.
In despair and disgust at so violent and ludicrous a scene, I left this
place, where they were exchanging almost as many cuffs as arguments, and
returned to the Chamber.

I reached the entrance to the building without suspecting what was
happening inside, when I saw people come running up, crying that Madame
la Duchesse d'Orleans, the Comte de Paris and the Duc de Nemours had
just arrived. At this news, I flew up the stairs of the Palace, four at
a time, and rushed into the House.

I saw the three members of the Royal Family whom I have named, at the
foot of the tribune, facing the House. The Duchesse d'Orleans was
seated, dressed in mourning, calm and pale; I could see that she was
greatly excited, but her excitement seemed to be that of courageous
natures, more prone to turn to heroism than fright.

The Comte de Paris displayed the carelessness of his age and the
precocious impassiveness of princes. Standing by their side was the Duc
de Nemours, tightly clad in his uniform--cold, stiff, and erect. He was,
to my mind, the only man who ran any real danger that day; and during
the whole time that I saw him exposed to it, I constantly observed in
him the same firm and silent courage.

Around these unhappy Princes pressed the National Guards who had come
with them, some deputies, and a small number of the people. The
galleries were empty and closed, with the exception of the press
gallery, into which an unarmed but clamorous crowd had forced its way. I
was more struck by the cries that issued at intervals from there than by
all else that occurred during the sitting.

Fifty years had passed since the last scene of this kind. Since the time
of the Convention, the galleries had been silent, and the silence of the
galleries had become part of our parliamentary customs. However, if the
Chamber at this moment already felt embarrassed in its actions, it was
not as yet in any way constrained; the deputies were in considerable
numbers, though the party leaders were still absent. I heard enquiries
on every side for M. Thiers and M. Barrot; I did not know what had
become of M. Thiers, but I knew only too well what M. Barrot was doing.
I hurriedly sent one of our friends to tell him of what was happening,
and he came running up with all speed. I can answer for that man that
his soul never knew fear.

After for a moment watching this extraordinary sitting, I had hastened
to take my usual seat on the upper benches of the Left Centre: it has
always been my contention that at critical moments one should not only
be present in the assembly of which one is a member, but occupy the
place where one is generally to be found.

A sort of confused and turbulent discussion had been opened: I heard M.
Lacrosse, who since became my colleague in office, cry amid the uproar:

"M. Dupin wishes to speak!"

"No, no!"

"No," replied M. Dupin, "I made no such request."

"No matter," came from every side; "speak, speak!"

Thus urged, M. Dupin ascended the tribune, and proposed in two words
that they should return to the law of 1842, and proclaim the Duchesse
d'Orleans Regent. This was received with applause in the Assembly,
exclamations in the gallery, and murmurs in the lobbies. The lobbies,
which at first were pretty clear, began to grow crowded in an alarming
manner. The people did not yet come into the Chamber in streams, but
entered little by little, one by one; each moment there appeared a new
face; the Chamber grew flooded as it were by drops. Most of the
new-comers belonged to the lowest classes; many of them were armed.

I witnessed this growing invasion from a distance, and I felt the danger
momentarily increase with it. I cast my eyes round the Chamber in search
of the man best able to resist the torrent; I saw only Lamartine, who
had the necessary position and the requisite capacity to make the
attempt; I remembered that in 1842 he was the only one who proposed the
regency of the Duchesse d'Orleans. On the other hand, his recent
speeches, and especially his recent writings, had obtained for him the
favour of the people. His talent, moreover, was of a kind that appeals
to the popular taste. I was not aware that, half an hour before, he had
been extolling the Republic to an assemblage of journalists and deputies
in one of the offices of the Chamber. I saw him standing by his bench. I
elbowed my way to him, and, when I reached him:

"We shall be lost," I whispered, hurriedly: "you alone can make yourself
heard at this supreme moment; go to the tribune and speak."

I can see him still, as I write these lines, so struck was I with his
appearance. I see his long, straight, slender figure, his eye turned
towards the semi-circle, his fixed and vacant gaze absorbed in inward
contemplation rather than in observing what was passing around him. When
he heard me speak, he did not turn towards me, but only stretched out
his arm towards the place where the Princes stood, and, replying to his
own thought rather than to mine, said:

"I shall not speak so long as that woman and that child remain where
they are."

I said no more; I had heard enough. Returning to my bench, I passed by
the Right Centre, near where Lanjuinais and Billault were sitting, and
asked, "Can you suggest nothing that we could do?" They mournfully shook
their heads, and I continued on my way.

Meantime, the crowd had accumulated to such an extent in the
semi-circle, that the Princes ran the risk of being crushed or
suffocated at any moment.

The President made vain efforts to clear the House; failing in his
endeavours, he begged the Duchesse d'Orleans to withdraw. The courageous
Princess refused, whereupon her friends, with great difficulty,
extricated her from the throng, and made her climb to the top bench of
the Left Centre, where she sat down with her son and the Duc de Nemours.

Marie and Cremieux had just, amid the silence of the deputies and the
acclamations of the people, proposed the establishment of a provisional
government, when Barrot at last appeared. He was out of breath, but not
alarmed. Climbing the stairs of the tribune:

"Our duty lies before us," he said; "the Crown of July lies on the head
of a child and a woman."

The Chamber, recovering its courage, plucked up heart to burst into
acclamations, and the people in their turn were silent. The Duchesse
d'Orleans rose from her seat, seemed to wish to speak, hesitated,
listened to timid counsels, and sat down again: the last glimmer of her
fortune had gone out. Barrot finished his speech without renewing the
impression of his opening words; nevertheless, the Chamber had gathered
strength, and the people wavered.

At that moment, the crowd filling the semi-circle was driven back, by a
stream from outside, towards the centre benches, which were already
almost deserted; it burst and spread over the benches. Of the few
deputies who still occupied them, some slipped away and left the House,
while others retreated from bench to bench, like victims surprised by
the tide, who retreat from rock to rock always pursued by the rising
waters. All this commotion was produced by two troops of men, for the
most part armed, which marched through the two lobbies, each with
officers of the National Guards and flags at its head. The two officers
who carried the flags, of whom one, a swaggering individual, was, as I
heard later, a half-pay colonel called Dumoulin, ascended the tribune
with a theatrical air, waved their standards, and with much skipping
about and great melodramatic gestures, bawled out some revolutionary
balderdash or other. The President declared the sitting suspended, and
proceeded to put on his hat, as is customary; but, since he had the
knack of making himself ridiculous in the most tragic situations, in his
precipitation he seized the hat of a secretary instead of his own, and
pulled it down over his eyes and ears.

Sittings of this sort, as may be believed, are not easily suspended, and
the President's attempts only succeeded in adding to the disorder.

Thenceforth there was nothing but one continuous uproar, broken by
occasional moments of silence. The speakers appeared in the tribune in
groups: Cremieux, Ledru-Rollin, and Lamartine sprang into it at the same
time. Ledru-Rollin drove Cremieux out, and himself held on with his two
great hands, while Lamartine, without leaving or struggling, waited for
his colleague to finish speaking. Ledru-Rollin began incoherently,
interrupted every instant by the impatience of his own friends. "Finish!
finish!" cried Berryer, more experienced than he, and warier in his
dynastic ill-will than was the other in his republican passion.
Ledru-Rollin ended by demanding the appointment of a provisional
government and descended the stair.

Then Lamartine stepped forward and obtained silence. He commenced with a
splendid eulogium on the courage of the Duchesse d'Orleans, and the
people themselves, sensible, as always, to generous sentiments wrapped
up in fine phrases, applauded. The deputies breathed again. "Wait," said
I to my neighbours, "this is only the exordium." And in fact, before
long, Lamartine tacked round and proceeded straight in the same
direction as Ledru-Rollin.

Until then, as I said, all the galleries except the one reserved for the
press had remained empty and closed; but while Lamartine was speaking,
loud blows were heard at the door of one of them, and yielding to the
strain, the door burst into atoms. In a moment the gallery was invaded
by an armed mob of men, who noisily filled it and soon afterwards all
the others. A man of the lower orders, placing one foot on the cornice,
pointed his gun at the President and the speaker; others seemed to
level theirs at the assembly. The Duchesse d'Orleans and her son were
hurried out of the Chamber by some devoted friends and into the corridor
behind the Chair. The President muttered a few words to the effect that
the sitting was adjourned, and stepped, or rather slid, off the platform
on which the chair was placed. I saw him passing before my eyes like a
shapeless mass: never would I have believed that fear could have
inspired with such activity, or rather, suddenly reduced to a sort of
fluidity, so huge a body. All who had remained of the Conservative
members then dispersed, and the populace sprawled over the centre
benches, crying, "Let us take the place of the corrupt crew!"

During all the turbulent scenes which I have just described, I remained
motionless in my seat, very attentive, but not greatly excited; and now,
when I ask myself why I felt no keener emotion in presence of an event
bound to exercise so great an influence upon the destinies of France and
upon my own, I find that the form assumed by this great occurrence did
much to diminish the impression it made upon me.

In the course of the Revolution of February, I was present at two or
three scenes which possessed the elements of grandeur (I shall have
occasion to describe them in their turn); but this scene lacked them
entirely, for the reason that there was nothing genuine in it. We
French, especially in Paris, are prone to introduce our literary or
theatrical reminiscences into our most serious demonstrations; this
often gives rise to the belief that the sentiments we express are not
genuine, whereas they are only clumsily adorned. In this case the
imitation was so evident that the terrible originality of the facts
remained concealed beneath it. It was a time when every imagination was
besmeared with the crude colours with which Lamartine had been daubing
his _Girondins_. The men of the first Revolution were living in every
mind, their deeds and words present to every memory. All that I saw that
day bore the visible impress of those recollections; it seemed to me
throughout as though they were engaged in acting the French Revolution,
rather than continuing it.

Despite the presence of drawn swords, bayonets and muskets, I was unable
to persuade myself for a single instant not only that I was in danger of
death, but that anybody was, and I honestly believe that no one really
was. Bloodthirsty hatreds only showed themselves later: they had not yet
had the time to spring up; the special spirit which was to characterize
the Revolution of February did not yet manifest itself. Meantime, men
were fruitlessly endeavouring to warm themselves at the fire of our
fathers' passions, imitating their gestures and attitudes as they had
seen them represented on the stage, but unable to imitate their
enthusiasm or to be inflamed with their fury. It was the tradition of
violent deeds that was being imitated by cold hearts, which understood
not the spirit of it. Although I clearly saw that the catastrophe of the
piece would be a terrible one, I was never able to take the actors very
seriously, and the whole seemed to me like a bad tragedy performed by
provincial actors.

I confess that what moved me most that day was the sight of that woman
and child, who were made to bear the whole weight of faults that they
had not committed. I frequently looked with compassion towards that
foreign Princess, thrown into the midst of our civil discords; and when
she had fled, the remembrance of the sweet, sad, firm glances which I
had seen her cast upon the Assembly during that long agony came back so
vividly to my memory, I felt so touched with pity when I thought of the
perils attending her flight that, suddenly springing from my seat, I
rushed in the direction which my knowledge of the building led me to
believe that she and her son would have taken to seek a place of safety.
In a moment I made my way through the crowd, crossed the floor, passed
out through the cloak-room, and reached the private staircase which
leads from the entrance in the Rue de Bourgogne to the upper floor of
the Palace. A messenger whom I questioned as I ran past him told me that
I was on the track of the Royal party; and, indeed, I heard several
persons hurriedly mounting the upper portion of the stairs. I therefore
continued my pursuit, and reached a landing; the steps which preceded
me had just ceased. Finding a closed door in front of me, I knocked at
it, but it was not opened. If princes were like God, who reads our
hearts and accepts the intention for the deed, assuredly these would be
pleased with me for what I wished to do that day; but they will never
know, for no one saw me and I told no one.

I returned to the House and resumed my seat. Almost all the members had
left; the benches were occupied by men of the populace. Lamartine was
still in the tribune between the two banners, continuing to address the
crowd, or rather conversing with them; for there seemed to be almost as
many orators as listeners. The confusion was at its height. In a moment
of semi-silence, Lamartine began to read out a list containing the names
of the different people proposed by I don't know whom to take share in
the Provisional Government that had just been decreed, nobody knows how.
Most of these names were accepted with acclamations, some rejected with
groans, others received with jests, for in scenes in which the people
take part, as in the plays of Shakspeare, burlesque often rubs shoulders
with tragedy, and wretched jokes sometimes come to the relief of the
ardour of revolution. When Garnier-Pages' name was proposed, I heard a
voice cry, "You've made a mistake, Lamartine; it's the dead one that's
the good one;" Garnier-Pages having had a celebrated brother, to whom he
bore no resemblance except in name.

M. de Lamartine, I think, was beginning to grow greatly embarrassed at
his position; for in a rebellion, as in a novel, the most difficult part
to invent is the end. When, therefore, someone took it into his head to
cry, "To the Hotel de Ville!" Lamartine echoed, "Yes, to the Hotel de
Ville," and went out forthwith, taking half the crowd with him; the
others remained with Ledru-Rollin, who, in order, I suppose, to retain a
leading part for himself, felt called upon in his turn to go through the
same mock election, after which he too set out for the Hotel de Ville.
There the same electoral display was gone through once more; in
connection with which I cannot refrain from repeating an anecdote which
I was told, a few months later, by M. Marrast. It interrupts the thread
of my story a little, but it gives a marvellous picture of two men who
were both at that moment playing a great part, and shows the difference,
if not in their opinions, at least in their education and habits of
thought.

"A list of candidates for the Provisional Government," said Marrast,
"had hurriedly been drawn up. It had to be read out to the people, and I
handed it to Lamartine, asking him to read it aloud from the top of the
steps. 'I can't,' replied Lamartine, after looking at it; 'my name is on
it.' I then passed it on to Cremieux, who, after reading it, said,
'You're making fun of me: you're asking me to read out to the people a
list which has not got my name on it!'"

When I saw Ledru-Rollin leave the House, where remained behind none but
the sheer dregs of the insurrection, I saw that there was nothing more
to be done there. I accordingly went away, but as I did not care to find
myself in the middle of the mob marching towards the Hotel de Ville, I
took the opposite direction, and began to go down those steep steps,
like cellar stairs, which lead to the inner yard of the Palace. I then
saw coming towards me a column of armed National Guards, ascending the
same staircase at a run, with set bayonets. In front of them were two
men in civilian dress, who seemed to be leading them, shouting at the
top of their voices, "Long live the Duchesse d'Orleans and the Regency!"
In one I recognized General Oudinot and in the other Andryane, who was
imprisoned in the Spielberg, and who wrote his Memoirs in imitation of
those of Silvio Pellico. I saw no one else, and nothing could prove more
clearly how difficult it is for the public ever to learn the truth of
events happening amid the tumult of a revolution. I know that a letter
exists, written by Marshal Bugeaud, in which he relates that he
succeeded in getting together a few companies of the Tenth Legion,
inspired them in favour of the Duchesse d'Orleans, and led them at the
double through the yard of the Palais Bourbon and to the door of the
Chamber, which he found empty. The story is true, but for the presence
of the marshal, whom I should most certainly have seen had he been
there; but there was no one, I repeat, except General Oudinot and M.
Andryane. The latter, seeing me standing still and saying nothing, took
me sharply by the arm, exclaiming:

"Monsieur, you must join us, to help to free Madame la Duchesse
d'Orleans and save the Monarchy."

"Monsieur," I replied, "your intention is good, but you are too late:
the Duchesse d'Orleans has disappeared, and the Chamber has risen."

Now, where was the spirited defender of the Monarchy that evening? The
incident is worthy of being told and noted among the many incidents of
versatility with which the history of revolutions abounds.

M. Andryane was in the office of M. Ledru-Rollin, officiating in the
name of the Republic as general secretary to the Ministry of the
Interior.

To return to the column which he was leading: I joined it, although I
had no longer any hope of success for its efforts. Mechanically obeying
the impulse communicated to it, it proceeded as far as the doors of the
Chamber. There the men who composed it learnt what had taken place; they
turned about for a moment, and then dispersed in every direction. Half
an hour earlier, this handful of National Guards might (as on the
ensuing 15th of May) have changed the fortunes of France. I allowed this
new crowd to pass by me, and then, alone and very pensive, I resumed my
road home, not without casting a last look on the Chamber, now silent
and deserted, in which, during nine years, I had listened to the sound
of so many eloquent and futile words.

M. Billault, who had left the Chamber a few minutes before me by the
entrance in the Rue de Bourgogne, told me that he met M. Barrot in this
street.

"He was walking," he said, "at a rapid rate, without perceiving that he
was hatless, and that his grey hair, which he generally carefully
brushed back along his temples, was falling on either side and
fluttering in disorder over his shoulders; he seemed beside himself."

This man had made heroic efforts all day long to maintain the Monarchy
on the declivity down which he himself had pushed it, and he remained as
though crushed beneath its fall. I learned from Beaumont, who had not
left him during any part of the day, that in the morning M. Barrot faced
and mounted twenty barricades, walking up to each unarmed, meeting
sometimes with insults, often with shots, and always ending by
overcoming with his words those who guarded them. His words, in fact,
were all-powerful with the multitude. He had all that was wanted to act
upon them at a given moment: a strong voice, an inflated eloquence, and
a fearless heart.

While M. Barrot, in disorder, was leaving the Chamber, M. Thiers, still
more distraught, wandered round Paris, not daring to venture home. He
was seen for an instant at the Assembly before the arrival of the
Duchesse d'Orleans, but disappeared at once, giving the signal for the
retreat of many others. The next morning, I learnt the details of his
flight through M. Talabot, who had assisted in it. I was connected with
M. Talabot by fairly intimate party ties, and M. Thiers, I believe, by
former business relations. M. Talabot was a man full of mental vigour
and resolution, very fit for an emergency of that kind. He told me as
follows--I believe I have neither omitted nor added anything:

"It seems," he said, "that M. Thiers, when crossing the Place Louis XV,
had been insulted and threatened by some of the populace. He was greatly
excited and upset when I saw him enter the House; he came up to me, led
me aside, and told me that he would be murdered by the mob if I did not
assist him to escape. I took him by the arm and begged him to go with me
and fear nothing. M. Thiers wished to avoid the Pont Louis XVI, for fear
of meeting the crowd. We went to the Pont des Invalides, but when we got
there, he thought he saw a gathering on the other side of the river, and
again refused to cross. We then made for the Pont d'Iena, which was
free, and crossed it without any difficulty. When we reached the other
side, M. Thiers discovered some street-boys, shouting, on the
foundations of what was to have been the palace of the King of Rome, and
forthwith turned down the Rue d'Auteuil and made for the Bois de
Boulogne. There we had the good luck to find a cabman, who consented to
drive us along the outer boulevards to the neighbourhood of the
Barriere de Clichy, through which we were able to reach his house.
During the whole journey," added M. Talabot, "and especially at the
start, M. Thiers seemed almost out of his senses, gesticulating,
sobbing, uttering incoherent phrases. The catastrophe he had just
beheld, the future of his country, his own personal danger, all
contributed to form a chaos amid which his thoughts struggled and
strayed unceasingly."




PART THE SECOND




     _Everything contained in this note-book (Chapters I. to XI.
     inclusive) was written in stray moments at Sorrento, in November
     and December 1850, and January, February, and March 1851._




CHAPTER I

     MY EXPLANATION OF THE 24TH OF FEBRUARY, AND MY VIEWS AS TO ITS
     EFFECTS UPON THE FUTURE.


And so the Monarchy of July was fallen, fallen without a struggle, and
before rather than beneath the blows of the victors, who were as
astonished at their triumph as were the vanquished at their defeat. I
have often, since the Revolution of February, heard M. Guizot and even
M. Mole and M. Thiers declare that this event should only be attributed
to a surprise and regarded as a mere accident, a bold and lucky stroke
and nothing more. I have always felt tempted to answer them in the words
which Moliere's Misanthrope uses to Oronte:

     Pour en juger ainsi, vous avez vos raisons;

for these three men had conducted the affairs of France, under the
guidance of King Louis-Philippe, during eighteen years, and it was
difficult for them to admit that it was the King's bad government which
had prepared the catastrophe which hurled him from the Throne.

As for me, I have not the same motives for forming an opinion, and I
could hardly persuade myself to be of theirs. I am not prepared to say
that accidents played no part in the Revolution of February: on the
contrary, they played a great one; but they were not the only thing.

I have come across men of letters, who have written history without
taking part in public affairs, and politicians, who have only concerned
themselves with producing events without thinking of describing them. I
have observed that the first are always inclined to find general causes,
whereas the others, living in the midst of disconnected daily facts, are
prone to imagine that everything is attributable to particular
incidents, and that the wires which they pull are the same that move the
world. It is to be presumed that both are equally deceived.

For my part, I detest these absolute systems, which represent all the
events of history as depending upon great first causes linked by the
chain of fatality, and which, as it were, suppress men from the history
of the human race. They seem narrow, to my mind, under their pretence of
broadness, and false beneath their air of mathematical exactness. I
believe (_pace_ the writers who have invented these sublime theories in
order to feed their vanity and facilitate their work) that many
important historical facts can only be explained by accidental
circumstances, and that many others remain totally inexplicable.
Moreover, chance, or rather that tangle of secondary causes which we
call chance, for want of the knowledge how to unravel it, plays a great
part in all that happens on the world's stage; although I firmly believe
that chance does nothing that has not been prepared beforehand.
Antecedent facts, the nature of institutions, the cast of minds and the
state of morals are the materials of which are composed those impromptus
which astonish and alarm us.

The Revolution of February, in common with all other great events of
this class, sprang from general causes, impregnated, if I am permitted
the expression, by accidents; and it would be as superficial a judgment
to ascribe it necessarily to the former or exclusively to the latter.

The industrial revolution which, during the past thirty years, had
turned Paris into the principal manufacturing city of France and
attracted within its walls an entire new population of workmen (to whom
the works of the fortifications had added another population of
labourers at present deprived of work) tended more and more to inflame
this multitude. Add to this the democratic disease of envy, which was
silently permeating it; the economical and political theories which were
beginning to make their way and which strove to prove that human misery
was the work of laws and not of Providence, and that poverty could be
suppressed by changing the conditions of society; the contempt into
which the governing class, and especially the men who led it, had
fallen, a contempt so general and so profound that it paralyzed the
resistance even of those who were most interested in maintaining the
power that was being overthrown; the centralization which reduced the
whole revolutionary movement to the overmastering of Paris and the
seizing of the machinery of government; and lastly, the mobility of all
things, institutions, ideas, men and customs, in a fluctuating state of
society which had, in less than sixty years, undergone the shock of
seven great revolutions, without numbering a multitude of smaller,
secondary upheavals. These were the general causes without which the
Revolution of February would have been impossible. The principal
accidents which led to it were the passions of the dynastic Opposition,
which brought about a riot in proposing a reform; the suppression of
this riot, first over-violent, and then abandoned; the sudden
disappearance of the old Ministry, unexpectedly snapping the threads of
power, which the new ministers, in their confusion, were unable either
to seize upon or to reunite; the mistakes and disorder of mind of these
ministers, so powerless to re-establish that which they had been strong
enough to overthrow; the vacillation of the generals; the absence of the
only Princes who possessed either personal energy or popularity; and
above all, the senile imbecility of King Louis-Philippe, his weakness,
which no one could have foreseen, and which still remains almost
incredible, after the event has proved it.

I have sometimes asked myself what could have produced this sudden and
unprecedented depression in the King's mind. Louis-Philippe had spent
his life in the midst of revolutions, and certainly lacked neither
experience, courage, nor readiness of mind, although these qualities all
failed him so completely on that day. In my opinion, his weakness was
due to his excessive surprise; he was overwhelmed with consternation
before he had grasped the meaning of things. The Revolution of February
was _unforeseen_ by all, but by him more than any other; he had been
prepared for it by no warning from the outside, for since many years his
mind had withdrawn into that sort of haughty solitude into which in the
end the intellect almost always settles down of princes who have long
lived happily, and who, mistaking luck for genius, refuse to listen to
anything, because they think that there is nothing left for them to
learn from anybody. Besides, Louis-Philippe had been deceived, as I have
already said that his ministers were, by the misleading light cast by
antecedent facts upon present times. One might draw a strange picture of
all the errors which have thus been begotten, one by the other, without
resembling each other. We see Charles I. driven to tyranny and violence
at the sight of the progress which the spirit of opposition had made in
England during the gentle reign of his father; Louis XVI. determined to
suffer everything because Charles I. had perished by refusing to endure
anything; Charles X. provoking the Revolution, because he had with his
own eyes beheld the weakness of Louis XVI.; and lastly, Louis-Philippe,
who had more perspicacity than any of them, imagining that, in order to
remain on the Throne, all he had to do was to observe the letter of the
law while violating its spirit, and that, provided he himself kept
within the bounds of the Charter, the nation would never exceed them. To
warp the spirit of the Constitution without changing the letter; to set
the vices of the country in opposition to each other; gently to drown
revolutionary passion in the love of material enjoyment: such was the
idea of his whole life. Little by little, it had become, not his
leading, but his sole idea. He had wrapped himself in it, he had lived
in it; and when he suddenly saw that it was a false idea, he became like
a man who is awakened in the night by an earthquake, and who, feeling
his house crumbling in the darkness, and the very ground seeming to yawn
beneath his feet, remains distracted amid this unforeseen and universal
ruin.

I am arguing very much at my ease to-day concerning the causes that
brought about the events of the 24th of February; but on the afternoon
of that day I had many other things in my head: I was thinking of the
events themselves, and sought less for what had produced them than for
what was to follow.

I returned slowly home. I explained in a few words to Madame de
Tocqueville what I had seen, and sat down in a corner to think. I cannot
remember ever feeling my soul so full of sadness. It was the second
revolution I had seen accomplish itself, before my eyes, within
seventeen years!

On the 30th of July 1830, at daybreak, I had met the carriages of King
Charles X. on the outer boulevards of Versailles, with damaged
escutcheons, proceeding at a foot pace, in Indian file, like a funeral,
and I was unable to restrain my tears at the sight. This time my
impressions were of another kind, but even keener. Both revolutions had
afflicted me; but how much more bitter were the impressions caused by
the last! I had until the end felt a remnant of hereditary affection for
Charles X.; but that King fell for having violated rights that were dear
to me, and I had every hope that my country's freedom would be revived
rather than extinguished by his fall. But now this freedom seemed dead;
the Princes who were fleeing were nothing to me, but I felt that the
cause I had at heart was lost.

I had spent the best days of my youth amid a society which seemed to
increase in greatness and prosperity as it increased in liberty; I had
conceived the idea of a balanced, regulated liberty, held in check by
religion, custom and law; the attractions of this liberty had touched
me; it had become the passion of my life; I felt that I could never be
consoled for its loss, and that I must renounce all hope of its
recovery.

I had gained too much experience of mankind to be able to content myself
with empty words; I knew that, if one great revolution is able to
establish liberty in a country, a number of succeeding revolutions make
all regular liberty impossible for very many years.

I could not yet know what would issue from this last revolution, but I
was already convinced that it could give birth to nothing that would
satisfy me; and I foresaw that, whatever might be the lot reserved for
our posterity, our own fate was to drag on our lives miserably amid
alternate reactions of licence and oppression.

I began to pass in review the history of our last sixty years, and I
smiled bitterly when I thought of the illusions formed at the conclusion
of each period in this long revolution; the theories on which these
illusions had been fed; the sapient dreams of our historians, and all
the ingenious and deceptive systems by the aid of which it had been
endeavoured to explain a present which was still incorrectly seen, and a
future which was not seen at all.

The Constitutional Monarchy had succeeded the Ancien Regime; the
Republic, the Monarchy; the Empire, the Republic; the Restoration, the
Empire; and then came the Monarchy of July. After each of these
successive changes it was said that the French Revolution, having
accomplished what was presumptuously called its work, was finished; this
had been said and it had been believed. Alas! I myself had hoped it
under the Restoration, and again after the fall of the Government of the
Restoration; and here is the French Revolution beginning over again, for
it is still the same one. As we go on, its end seems farther off and
shrouded in greater darkness. Shall we ever--as we are assured by other
prophets, perhaps as delusive as their predecessors--shall we ever
attain a more complete and more far-reaching social transformation than
our fathers foresaw and desired, and than we ourselves are able to
foresee; or are we not destined simply to end in a condition of
intermittent anarchy, the well-known chronic and incurable complaint of
old races? As for me, I am unable to say; I do not know when this long
voyage will be ended; I am weary of seeing the shore in each successive
mirage, and I often ask myself whether the _terra firma_ we are seeking
does really exist, and whether we are not doomed to rove upon the seas
for ever.

I spent the rest of the day with Ampere, who was my colleague at the
Institute, and one of my best friends. He came to discover what had
become of me in the affray, and to ask himself to dinner. I wished at
first to relieve myself by making him share my vexation; but I soon
perceived that his impression was not the same as mine, and that he
looked differently upon the revolution which was in progress. Ampere was
a man of intelligence and, better still, a man full of heart, gentle in
manner, and reliable. His good-nature caused him to be liked; and he was
popular because of his versatile, witty, amusing, good-humoured
conversation, in which he made many remarks that were at once
entertaining and agreeable to hear, but too shallow to remember.
Unfortunately, he was inclined to carry the _esprit_ of the salons into
literature and the _esprit_ of literature into politics. What I call
literary _esprit_ in politics consists in seeking for what is novel and
ingenious rather than for what is true; in preferring the showy to the
useful; in showing one's self very sensible to the playing and elocution
of the actors, without regard to the results of the play; and, lastly,
in judging by impressions rather than reasons. I need not say that this
eccentricity exists among others besides Academicians. To tell the
truth, the whole nation is a little inclined that way, and the French
Public very often takes a man-of-letters' view of politics. Ampere held
the fallen Government in great contempt, and its last actions had
irritated him greatly. Moreover, he had witnessed many instances of
courage, disinterestedness, and even generosity among the insurgents;
and he had been bitten by the popular excitement.

I saw that he not only did not enter into my view, but that he was
disposed to take quite an opposite one. Seeing this, I was suddenly
impelled to turn against Ampere all the feelings of indignation, grief
and anger that had been accumulating in my heart since the morning; and
I spoke to him with a violence of language which I have often since
recalled with a certain shame, and which none but a friendship so
sincere as his could have excused. I remember saying to him, _inter
alia_:

"You understand nothing of what is happening; you are judging like a
poet or a Paris cockney. You call this the triumph of liberty, when it
is its final defeat. I tell you that the people which you so artlessly
admire has just succeeded in proving that it is unfit and unworthy to
live a life of freedom. Show me what experience has taught it! Where are
the new virtues it has gained, the old vices it has laid aside? No, I
tell you, it is always the same, as impatient, as thoughtless, as
contemptuous of law and order, as easily led and as cowardly in the
presence of danger as its fathers were before it. Time has altered it in
no way, and has left it as frivolous in serious matters as it used to be
in trifles."

After much vociferation we both ended by appealing to the future, that
enlightened and upright judge who always, alas! arrives too late.




CHAPTER II

     PARIS ON THE MORROW OF THE 24TH OF FEBRUARY AND THE NEXT DAYS--THE
     SOCIALISTIC CHARACTER OF THE NEW REVOLUTION.


The night passed without accidents, although not until the morning did
the streets cease to resound with cries and gun-shots; but these were
sounds of triumph, not of combat. So soon as it was light, I went out to
observe the appearance of the town, and to discover what had become of
my two young nephews,[8] who were being educated at the Little Seminary.
The Little Seminary was in the Rue de Madame, at the back of the
Luxembourg, so that I had to cross a great part of the town to reach it.

     [8: Hubert and Rene de Tocqueville.--Cte. de T.]

I found the streets quiet, and even half deserted, as they usually are
in Paris on a Sunday morning, when the rich are still asleep and the
poor are resting. From time to time, along the walls, one met the
victors of the preceding day; but they were filled with wine rather than
political ardour, and were, for the most part, making for their homes
without taking heed of the passers-by. A few shops were open, and one
caught sight of the frightened, but still more astonished, shopkeepers,
who reminded one of spectators witnessing the end of a play which they
did not quite understand. What one saw most of in the streets deserted
by the people, was soldiers; some walking singly, others in little
groups, all unarmed, and crossing the city on their roads home. The
defeat these men had just sustained had left a very vivid and lasting
impression of shame and anger upon them. This was noticed later, but was
not apparent at the time: the pleasure of finding themselves at liberty
seemed to absorb every other feeling in these lads; they walked with a
careless air, with a light and easy gait.

The Little Seminary had not been attacked nor even insulted. My nephews,
however, were not there; they had been sent home the evening before to
their maternal grandmother. Accordingly, I turned back, taking the Rue
du Bac, to find out what had become of Lamoriciere, who was then living
in that street; and it was only after recognizing me that the servants
admitted that their master was at home, and consented to take me to him.

I found this singular person, whom I shall have occasion to mention more
than once, stretched upon his bed, and reduced to a state of immobility
very much opposed to his character or taste. His head was half broken
open; his arms pierced with bayonet-thrusts; all his limbs bruised and
powerless. For the rest, he was the same as ever, with his bright
intelligence and his indomitable heart. He told me of all that happened
to him the day before, and of the thousand dangers which he had only
escaped by miracle. I strongly advised him to rest until he was cured,
and even long after, so as not uselessly to endanger his person and his
reputation in the chaos about to ensue: good advice, undoubtedly, to
give to a man so enamoured of action and so accustomed to act that,
after doing what is necessary and useful, he is always ready to
undertake the injurious and dangerous, rather than do nothing; but no
more effective than all those counsels which go against nature.

I spent the whole afternoon in walking about Paris. Two things in
particular struck me: the first was, I will not say the mainly, but the
uniquely and exclusively popular character of the revolution that had
just taken place; the omnipotence it had given to the people properly
so-called--that is to say, the classes who work with their hands--over
all others. The second was the comparative absence of malignant passion,
or, as a matter of fact, of any keen passion--an absence which at once
made it clear that the lower orders had suddenly become masters of
Paris.

Although the working classes had often played the leading part in the
events of the First Revolution, they had never been the sole leaders and
masters of the State, either _de facto_ or _de jure_; it is doubtful
whether the Convention contained a single man of the people; it was
composed of _bourgeois_ and men of letters. The war between the Mountain
and the Girondists was conducted on both sides by members of the middle
class, and the triumph of the former never brought power down into the
hands of the people alone. The Revolution of July was effected by the
people, but the middle class had stirred it up and led it, and secured
the principal fruits of it. The Revolution of February, on the contrary,
seemed to be made entirely outside the _bourgeoisie_ and against it.

In this great concussion, the two parties of which the social body in
France is mainly composed had, in a way, been thrown more completely
asunder, and the mass of the people, which had stood alone, remained in
sole possession of power. Nothing more novel had been known in our
annals. Similar revolutions had taken place, it is true, in other
countries and other days; for the history of our own times, however new
and unexpected it may seem, always belongs at bottom to the old history
of humanity, and what we call new facts are oftenest nothing more than
facts forgotten. Florence, in particular, towards the close of the
middle ages, had presented on a small scale a spectacle analogous to
ours; the noble classes had first been succeeded by the burgher classes,
and then one day the latter were, in their turn, expelled from the
government, and a _gonfalonier_ was seen marching barefoot at the head
of the people, and thus leading the Republic. But in Florence this
popular revolution was the result of transient and special causes, while
with us it was brought about by causes very permanent and of a kind so
general that, after stirring up France, it was to be expected that it
would excite all the rest of Europe. This time it was not only a
question of the triumph of a party; the aim was to establish a social
science, a philosophy, I might almost say a religion, fit to be learned
and followed by all mankind. This was the really new portion of the old
picture.

Throughout this day, I did not see in Paris a single one of the former
agents of the public authority: not a soldier, not a gendarme, not a
policeman; the National Guard itself had disappeared. The people alone
bore arms, guarded the public buildings, watched, gave orders, punished;
it was an extraordinary and terrible thing to see in the sole hands of
those who possessed nothing all this immense town, so full of riches, or
rather this great nation: for, thanks to centralization, he who reigns
in Paris governs France. Hence the affright of all the other classes was
extreme; I doubt whether at any period of the Revolution it had been so
great, and I should say that it was only to be compared to that which
the civilized cities of the Roman Empire must have experienced when they
suddenly found themselves in the power of the Goths and Vandals. As
nothing like this had ever been seen before, many people expected acts
of unexampled violence. For my part I did not once partake of these
fears. What I saw led me to predict strange disturbances in the near
future--singular crises. But I never believed that the rich would be
pillaged; I knew the men of the people in Paris too well not to know
that their first movements in times of revolution are usually generous,
and that they are best pleased to spend the days immediately following
their triumph in boasting of their victory, laying down the law, and
playing at being great men. During that time it generally happens that
some government or other is set up, the police returns to its post, and
the judge to his bench; and when at last our great men consent to step
down to the better known and more vulgar ground of petty and malicious
human passion, they are no longer able to do so, and are reduced to live
simply like honest men. Besides, we have spent so many years in
insurrections that there has arisen among us a kind of morality peculiar
to times of disorder, and a special code for days of rebellion.
According to these exceptional laws, murder is tolerated and havoc
permitted, but theft is strenuously forbidden; although this, whatever
one may say, does not prevent a good deal of robbery from occurring upon
those days, for the simple reason that society in a state of rebellion
cannot be different from that at any other time, and it will always
contain a number of rascals who, as far as they are concerned, scorn the
morality of the main body, and despise its point of honour when they are
unobserved. What reassured me still more was the reflection that the
victors had been as much surprised by success as their adversaries were
by defeat: their passions had not had time to take fire and become
intensified in the struggle; the Government had fallen undefended by
others, or even by itself. It had long been attacked, or at least keenly
censured, by the very men who at heart most deeply regretted its fall.

For a year past the dynastic Opposition and the republican Opposition
had been living in fallacious intimacy, acting in the same way from
different motives. The misunderstanding which had facilitated the
revolution tended to mitigate its after effects. Now that the Monarchy
had disappeared, the battle-field seemed empty; the people no longer
clearly saw what enemies remained for them to pursue and strike down;
the former objects of their anger, themselves, were no longer there; the
clergy had never been completely reconciled to the new dynasty, and
witnessed its ruin without regret; the old nobility were delighted at
it, whatever the ultimate consequences might be: the first had suffered
through the system of intolerance of the middle classes, the second
through their pride: both either despised or feared their government.

For the first time in sixty years, the priests, the old aristocracy and
the people met in a common sentiment--a feeling of revenge, it is true,
and not of affection; but even that is a great thing in politics, where
a community of hatred is almost always the foundation of friendships.
The real, the only vanquished were the middle class; but even this had
little to fear. Its reign had been exclusive rather than oppressive;
corrupt, but not violent; it was despised rather than hated. Moreover,
the middle class never forms a compact body in the heart of the nation,
a part very distinct from the whole; it always participates a little
with all the others, and in some places merges into them. This absence
of homogeneity and of exact limits makes the government of the middle
class weak and uncertain, but it also makes it intangible, and, as it
were, invisible to those who desire to strike it when it is no longer
governing.

From all these united causes proceeded that languor of the people which
had struck me as much as its omnipotence, a languor which was the more
discernible, in that it contrasted strangely with the turgid energy of
the language used and the terrible recollections which it evoked. The
lukewarm passions of the time were made to speak in the bombastic
periods of '93, and one heard cited at every moment the name and example
of the illustrious ruffians whom no one possessed either the energy or
even a sincere desire to resemble.

It was the Socialistic theories which I have already described as the
philosophy of the Revolution of February that later kindled genuine
passion, embittered jealousy, and ended by stirring up war between the
classes. If the actions at the commencement were less disorderly than
might have been feared, on the very morrow of the Revolution there was
displayed an extraordinary agitation, an unequalled disorder, in the
ideas of the people.

From the 25th of February onwards, a thousand strange systems came
issuing pell-mell from the minds of innovators, and spread among the
troubled minds of the crowd. Everything still remained standing except
Royalty and Parliament; yet it seemed as though the shock of the
Revolution had reduced society itself to dust, and as though a
competition had been opened for the new form that was to be given to the
edifice about to be erected in its place. Everyone came forward with a
plan of his own: this one printed it in the papers, that other on the
placards with which the walls were soon covered, a third proclaimed his
loud-mouthed in the open air. One aimed at destroying inequality of
fortune, another inequality of education, a third undertook to do away
with the oldest of all inequalities, that between man and woman.
Specifics were offered against poverty, and remedies for the disease of
work which has tortured humanity since the first days of its existence.

These theories were of very varied natures, often opposed and sometimes
hostile to one another; but all of them, aiming lower than the
government and striving to reach society itself, on which government
rests, adopted the common name of Socialism.

Socialism will always remain the essential characteristic and the most
redoubtable remembrance of the Revolution of February. The Republic
will only appear to the on-looker to have come upon the scene as a
means, not as an end.

It does not come within the scope of these Recollections that I should
seek for the causes which gave a socialistic character to the Revolution
of February, and I will content myself with saying that the discovery of
this new facet of the French Revolution was not of a nature to cause so
great surprise as it did. Had it not long been perceived that the people
had continually been improving and raising its condition, that its
importance, its education, its desires, its power had been constantly
increasing? Its prosperity had also grown greater, but less rapidly, and
was approaching the limit which it hardly ever passes in old societies,
where there are many men and but few places. How should the poor and
humbler and yet powerful classes not have dreamt of issuing from their
poverty and inferiority by means of their power, especially in an epoch
when our view into another world has become dimmer, and the miseries of
this world become more visible and seem more intolerable? They had been
working to this end for the last sixty years. The people had first
endeavoured to help itself by changing every political institution, but
after each change it found that its lot was in no way improved, or was
only improving with a slowness quite incompatible with the eagerness of
its desire. Inevitably, it must sooner or later discover that that which
held it fixed in its position was not the constitution of the
government but the unalterable laws that constitute society itself; and
it was natural that it should be brought to ask itself if it had not
both the power and the right to alter those laws, as it had altered all
the rest. And to speak more specially of property, which is, as it were,
the foundation of our social order--all the privileges which covered it
and which, so to speak, concealed the privilege of property having been
destroyed, and the latter remaining the principal obstacle to equality
among men, and appearing to be the only sign of inequality--was it not
necessary, I will not say that it should be abolished in its turn, but
at least that the thought of abolishing it should occur to the minds of
those who did not enjoy it?

This natural restlessness in the minds of the people, this inevitable
perturbation of its thoughts and its desires, these needs, these
instincts of the crowd formed in a certain sense the fabric upon which
the political innovators embroidered so many monstrous and grotesque
figures. Their work may be regarded as ludicrous, but the material on
which they worked is the most serious that it is possible for
philosophers and statesmen to contemplate.

Will Socialism remain buried in the disdain with which the Socialists of
1848 are so justly covered? I put the question without making any reply.
I do not doubt that the laws concerning the constitution of our modern
society will in the long run undergo modification: they have already
done so in many of their principal parts. But will they ever be
destroyed and replaced by others? It seems to me to be impracticable. I
say no more, because--the more I study the former condition of the world
and see the world of our own day in greater detail, the more I consider
the prodigious variety to be met with not only in laws, but in the
principles of law, and the different forms even now taken and retained,
whatever one may say, by the rights of property on this earth--the more
I am tempted to believe that what we call necessary institutions are
often no more than institutions to which we have grown accustomed, and
that in matters of social constitution the field of possibilities is
much more extensive than men living in their various societies are ready
to imagine.




CHAPTER III

     VACILLATION OF THE MEMBERS OF THE OLD PARLIAMENT AS TO THE ATTITUDE
     THEY SHOULD ADOPT--MY OWN REFLECTIONS ON MY MODE OF ACTION, AND MY
     RESOLVES.


During the days immediately following upon the 24th of February, I
neither went in search of nor fell in with any of the politicians from
whom the events of that day had separated me. I felt no necessity nor,
to tell the truth, any inclination to do so. I felt a sort of
instinctive repugnance to remembering this wretched parliamentary world,
in which I had spent six years of my life, and in whose midst I had seen
the Revolution sprouting up.

Moreover, at that time I saw the great vanity of any sort of political
conversation or combination. However feeble the reasons may have been
which first imparted the movement to the mob, that movement had now
become irresistible. I felt that we were all in the midst of one of
those great floods of democracy in which the embankments, intended to
resist individuals and even parties, only serve to drown those who build
them, and in which, for a time, there is nothing to be done but to study
the general character of the phenomenon. I therefore spent all my time
in the streets with the victors, as though I had been a worshipper of
fortune. True, I paid no homage to the new sovereign, and asked no
favours of it. I did not even address it, but contented myself with
listening to and observing it.

Nevertheless, after the lapse of some days, I resumed relations with the
vanquished: I once more met ex-deputies, ex-peers, men of letters, men
of business and finance, land-owners, all who in the language of the
moment were commencing to be known as the idle. I found that the aspect
of the Revolution was no less extraordinary when thus seen from above
than it had seemed to me when, at the commencement, I viewed it from
below. I encountered much fear, but as little genuine passion as I had
seen in other quarters; a curious feeling of resignation, no vestige of
hope, and I should almost say no idea of ever returning to the
Government which they had only just left. Although the Revolution of
February was the shortest and the least bloody of all our revolutions,
it had filled men's minds and hearts with the idea of its omnipotence to
a much greater extent than any of its predecessors. I believe this was,
to a great extent, due to the fact that these minds and hearts were void
of political faith and ardour, and that, after so many disappointments
and vain agitations, they retained nothing but a taste for comfort--a
very tenacious and very exclusive, but also a very agreeable feeling,
which easily accommodates itself to any form of government, provided it
be allowed to satisfy itself.

I beheld, therefore, an universal endeavour to make the best of the new
state of things and to win over the new master. The great landlords
were glad to remember that they had always been hostile to the middle
class and always favoured the people; the _bourgeois_ themselves
remembered with a certain pride that their fathers had been working men,
and when they were unable, owing to the inevitable obscurity of their
pedigrees, to trace back their descent to a labourer who had worked with
his hands, they at least strove to discover a plebeian ancestor who had
been the architect of his own fortune. They took as great pains to make
a display of the latter as, not long before, they would have taken to
conceal his existence: so true is it that human vanity, without changing
its nature, can show itself under the most diverse aspects. It has an
obverse and a reverse side, but it is always the same medal.

As there was no longer any genuine feeling left save that of fear, far
from breaking with those of his relations who had thrown themselves into
the Revolution, each strove to draw closer to them. The time had come to
try and turn to account any scapegrace whom one had in one's family. If
good luck would have it that one had a cousin, a brother, or a son who
had become ruined by his disorderly life, one could be sure that he was
in a fair way to succeed; and if he had become known by the promulgation
of some extravagant theory or other, he might hope to attain to any
height. Most of the commissaries and under-commissaries of the
Government were men of this type.

As to King Louis-Philippe, there was no more question of him than if he
had belonged to the Merovingian Dynasty. Nothing struck me more than the
absolute silence that had suddenly surrounded his name. I did not hear
it pronounced a single time, so to speak, either by the people or by the
upper class. Those of his former courtiers whom I saw did not speak of
him, and I honestly believe they did not think of him. The Revolution
had so completely turned their thoughts in another direction, that they
had forgotten their Sovereign. I may be told that this is the ordinary
fate of fallen kings; but what seems more worthy of remark, his enemies
even had forgotten him: they no longer feared him enough to slander him,
perhaps even to hate him, which is one of fortune's greatest, or at
least rarest, insults.

I do not wish to write the history of the Revolution of 1848, I only
wish to retrace my own actions, ideas, and impressions during the course
of this revolution; and I therefore pass over the events that took place
during the weeks immediately following the 24th of February, and come to
the period preceding the General Election.

The time had come to decide whether one cared merely to watch the
progress of this singular revolution or to take part in events. I found
the former party leaders divided among themselves; and each of them,
moreover, seemed divided also within himself, to judge by the
incoherence of the language used and the vacillation of opinion. These
politicians, who had almost all been trained to public business amid the
regulated, restrained movement of constitutional liberty, and upon whom
a great revolution had unexpectedly come, were like river oarsmen who
should suddenly find themselves called upon to navigate their boat in
mid-ocean. The knowledge they had acquired in their fresh water trips
would be of more trouble than assistance to them in this greater
adventure, and they would often display more confusion and uncertainty
than the passengers themselves.

M. Thiers frequently expressed the opinion that they should go to the
poll and get elected, and as frequently urged that it would be wiser to
stand aside. I do not know whether his hesitation arose from his dread
of the dangers that might follow upon the election, or his fear lest he
should not be elected. Remusat, who always sees so clearly what might,
and so dimly what should be done, set forth the good reasons that
existed for staying at home, and the no less good reasons for going to
the country. Duvergier was distracted. The Revolution had overthrown the
system of the balance of power in which his mind had sat motionless
during so many years, and he felt as though he were hung up in mid-air.
As for the Duc de Broglie, he had not put his head out of his shell
since the 24th of February, and in this attitude he awaited the end of
society, which in his opinion was close at hand. M. Mole alone,
although he was by far the oldest of all the former parliamentary
leaders, and possibly for that very reason, resolutely maintained the
opinion that they should take part in public affairs and try to lead the
Revolution; perhaps because his longer experience had taught him that in
troubled times it is dangerous to play the looker-on; perhaps because
the hope of again having something to lead cheered him and hid from him
the danger of the undertaking; or perhaps because, after being so often
bent in contrary directions, under so many different _regimes_, his mind
had become firmer as well as more supple and more indifferent as to the
kind of master it might serve. On my side, as may be imagined, I very
attentively considered which was the best resolution to adopt.

I should like here to inquire into the reasons which determined my
course of action, and having found them, to set them down without
evasion: but how difficult it is to speak well of one's self! I have
observed that the greater part of those who have written their Memoirs
have only well shown us their bad actions or their weaknesses when they
happened to have taken them for deeds of prowess or fine instincts, a
thing which often occurs. As in the case of the Cardinal de Retz, who,
in order to be credited with what he considers the glory of being a good
conspirator, confesses his schemes for assassinating Richelieu, and
tells us of his hypocritical devotions and charities lest he should fail
to be taken for a clever man. In such cases it is not the love of truth
that guides the pen, but the warped mind which involuntarily betrays the
vices of the heart.

And even when one wishes to be sincere, it is very rarely that one
succeeds in the endeavour. The fault lies, in the first place, with the
public, which likes to see one accuse, but will not suffer him to
praise, himself; even one's friends are wont to describe as amiable
candour all the harm, and as unbecoming vanity all the good, that he
says of himself: so that at this rate sincerity becomes a very thankless
trade, by which one has everything to lose and nothing to gain. But the
difficulty, above all, lies with the subject himself: he is too close to
himself to see well, and prone to lose himself amid the views,
interests, ideas, thoughts and inclinations that have guided his
actions. This net-work of little foot-paths, which are little known even
by those who use them, prevent one from clearly discerning the main
roads followed by the will before arriving at the most important
conclusions.

Nevertheless, I will try to discover myself amid this labyrinth, for it
is only right that I should take the same liberties with myself which I
have taken, and shall often continue to take, with others.

Let me say, then, that when I came to search carefully into the depths
of my own heart, I discovered, with some surprise, a certain sense of
relief, a sort of gladness mingled with all the griefs and fears to
which the Revolution had given rise. I suffered from this terrible
event for my country, but clearly not for myself; on the contrary, I
seemed to breathe more freely than before the catastrophe. I had always
felt myself stifled in the atmosphere of the parliamentary world which
had just been destroyed: I had found it full of disappointments, both
where others and where I myself was concerned; and to commence with the
latter, I was not long in discovering that I did not possess the
necessary qualifications to play the brilliant role that I had imagined:
both my qualities and my defects were impediments. I had not the virtues
necessary to command respect, and I was too upright to stoop to all the
petty practices which were at that time essential to a speedy success.
And observe that this uprightness was irremediable; for it forms so
integral a part both of my temperament and my principles, that without
it I am never able to turn myself to any account. Whenever I have, by
ill-luck, been obliged to speak in defence of a bad cause, or to assist
in bad measures, I have immediately found myself deprived of all talent
and all ardour; and I confess that nothing has consoled me more at the
want of success with which my uprightness has often met, than the
certainty I have always been in that I could never have made more than a
very clumsy and mediocre rogue. I also ended by perceiving that I was
absolutely lacking in the art of grouping and leading a large number of
men. I have always been incapable of dexterity, except in _tete-a-tete_,
and embarrassed and dumb in the presence of a crowd; I do not mean to
say that at a given moment I am unable to say and do what will please
it, but that is not enough: those great occasions are very rare in
parliamentary warfare. The trick of the trade, in a party leader, is to
be able to mix continually with his followers and even his adversaries,
to show himself, to move about daily, to play continually now to the
boxes, now to the gallery, so as to reach the level of every
intelligence, to discuss and argue without end, to say the same things a
thousand times in different ways, and to be impassioned eternally in the
face of the same objects. These are all things of which I am quite
incapable. I find it troublesome to discuss matters which interest me
little, and painful to discuss those in which I am keenly concerned.
Truth is for me so rare and precious a thing that, once found, I do not
like to risk it on the hazard of a debate; it is a light which I fear to
extinguish by waving it to and fro. And as to consorting with men, I
could not do so in any habitual and general fashion, because I never
recognize more than a very few. Unless a person strikes me by something
out of the common in his intellect or opinions, I, so to speak, do not
see him. I have always taken it for granted that mediocrities, as well
as men of merit, had a nose, a mouth, eyes; but I have never, in their
case, been able to fix the particular shape of these features in my
memory. I am constantly inquiring the name of strangers whom I see
every day, and as constantly forgetting them; and yet, I do not despise
them, only I consort but little with them, treating them as constant
quantities. I honour them, for the world is made up of them; but they
weary me profoundly.

What completed my disgust was the mediocrity and monotony of the
parliamentary events of that period, as well as the triviality of the
passions and the vulgar perversity of the men who pretended to cause or
to guide them.

I have sometimes thought that, though the habits of different societies
may differ, the morality of the politicians at the head of affairs is
everywhere the same. What is very certain is that, in France, all the
party leaders whom I have met in my time have, with few exceptions,
appeared to me to be equally unworthy of holding office, some because of
their lack of personal character or of real parts, most by their lack of
any sort of virtue. I thus experienced as great a difficulty in joining
with others as in being satisfied with myself, in obeying as in acting
on my own initiative.

But that which most tormented and depressed me during the nine years I
had spent in business, and which to this day remains my most hideous
memory of that time, is the incessant uncertainty in which I had to live
as to the best daily course to adopt. I am inclined to think that my
uncertainty of character arises rather from a want of clearness of idea
than from any weakness of heart, and that I never experienced either
hesitation or difficulty in following the most rugged road, when once I
clearly saw where it would lead me. But amid all these little dynastic
parties, differing so little in aim, and resembling one another so much
in the bad methods which they put into practice, which was the
thoroughfare that led visibly to honour, or even to utility? Where lay
truth? Where falsehood? On which side were the rogues? On which side the
honest men? I was never, at that time, fully able to distinguish it, and
I declare that even now I should not well be able to do so. Most party
men allow themselves to be neither distressed nor unnerved by doubts of
this kind; many even have never known them, or know them no longer. They
are often accused of acting without conviction; but my experience has
proved that this was much less frequently the case than one might think.
Only they possess the precious and sometimes, in politics, even
necessary faculty of creating transient convictions for themselves,
according to the passions and interests of the moment, and thus they
succeed in committing, honourably enough, actions which in themselves
are little to their credit. Unfortunately, I could never bring myself to
illuminate my intelligence with these special and artificial lights, nor
so readily to convince myself that my own advantage was one and the same
with the general good.

It was this parliamentary world, in which I had suffered all the
wretchedness that I have just described, which was broken up by the
Revolution; it had mingled and confounded the old parties in one common
ruin, deposed their leaders, and destroyed their traditions and
discipline. There had issued from this, it was true, a disordered and
confused state of society, but one in which ability became less
necessary and less highly rated than courage and disinterestedness; in
which personal character was more important than elocution or the art of
leadership; but, above all, in which there was no field left for
vacillation of mind: on this side lay the salvation of the country; on
that, its destruction. There was no longer any mistake possible as to
the road to follow; we were to walk in broad daylight, supported and
encouraged by the crowd. The road seemed dangerous, it is true, but my
mind is so constructed that it is less afraid of danger than of doubt. I
felt, moreover, that I was still in the prime of life, that I had few
needs, and, above all, that I was able to find at home the support, so
rare and precious in times of revolution, of a devoted wife, whom a firm
and penetrating mind and a naturally lofty soul would easily maintain at
the level of every situation and above every reverse.

I therefore determined to plunge boldly into the arena, and in defence,
not of any particular government, but of the laws which constitute
society itself, to risk my fortune, my person, and my peace of mind. The
first thing was to secure my election, and I left speedily for Normandy
in order to put myself before the electors.




CHAPTER IV

     MY CANDIDATURE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF LA MANCHE--THE ASPECT OF THE
     COUNTRY--THE GENERAL ELECTION.


As every one knows, the Department of la Manche is peopled almost
exclusively by farmers. It contains few large towns, few manufactures,
and, with the exception of Cherbourg, no places in which workmen are
gathered in large numbers. At first, the Revolution was hardly noticed
there. The upper classes immediately bent beneath the blow, and the
lower classes scarcely felt it. Generally speaking, agricultural
populations are slower than others in perceiving, and more stubborn in
retaining, political impressions; they are the last to rise and the last
to settle down again. The steward of my estate, himself half a peasant,
describing what was taking place in the country immediately after the
24th of February, wrote:

"People here say that if Louis-Philippe has been sent away, it is a good
thing, and that he deserved it...."

This was to them the whole moral of the play. But when they heard tell
of the disorder reigning in Paris, of the new taxes to be imposed, and
of the general state of war that was to be feared; when they saw
commerce cease and money seem to sink down into the ground, and when, in
particular, they learnt that the principle of property was being
attacked, they did not fail to perceive that there was something more
than Louis-Philippe in question.

Fear, which had first displayed itself in the upper circles of society,
then descended into the depths of the people, and universal terror took
possession of the whole country. This was the condition in which I found
it when I arrived about the middle of March. I was at once struck by a
spectacle that both astonished and charmed me. A certain demagogic
agitation reigned, it is true, among the workmen in the towns; but in
the country all the landed proprietors, whatever their origin,
antecedents, education or means, had come together, and seemed to form
but one class: all former political hatred and rivalry of caste or
fortune had disappeared from view. There was no more jealousy or pride
displayed between the peasant and the squire, the nobleman and the
commoner; instead, I found mutual confidence, reciprocal friendliness,
and regard. Property had become, with all those who owned it, a sort of
badge of fraternity. The wealthy were the elder, the less endowed the
younger brothers; but all considered themselves members of one family,
having the same interest in defending the common inheritance. As the
French Revolution had infinitely increased the number of land-owners,
the whole population seemed to belong to that vast family. I had never
seen anything like it, nor had anyone in France within the memory of
man. Experience has shown that this union was not so close as it
appeared, and that the former parties and the various classes had drawn
closer rather than mingled together; fear had acted upon them as a
mechanical pressure might upon very hard bodies, which are compelled to
adhere to one another so long as the pressure continues, but which
separate so soon as it is relaxed.

As a matter of fact, from the first moment I saw no trace whatever of
political opinions, properly so-called. One would have thought that the
republican form of government had suddenly become not only the best, but
the only one imaginable for France. Dynastic hopes and regrets were
buried so profoundly in the souls of men that not even the place they
had once occupied was visible. The Republic respected persons and
property, and it was accepted as lawful. In the spectacle I have just
described, I was most struck at witnessing the universal hatred,
together with the universal terror, now for the first time inspired by
Paris. In France, provincials have for Paris, and for the central power
of which Paris is the seat, feelings analogous to those which the
English entertain for their aristocracy, which they sometimes support
with impatience and often regard with jealousy, but which at bottom they
love, because they always hope to turn its privileges to their private
advantage. This time Paris and those who spoke in its name had so
greatly abused their power, and seemed to be giving so little heed to
the rest of the country, that the idea of shaking off the yoke and of
acting for themselves came to many who had never before conceived it:
uncertain and timid desires, it is true, feeble and ephemeral passions
from which I never believed that there was much to be either hoped or
feared; but these new feelings were then turning into electoral ardour.
Everyone clamoured for the elections; for to elect the enemies of the
demagogues of Paris presented itself to public opinion less as the
constitutional exercise of a right, than as the least dangerous method
one could employ of making a stand against the tyrant.

I fixed my head-quarters in the little town of Valognes, which was the
natural centre of my influence; and as soon as I had ascertained the
condition of the country, I set about my candidature. I then saw what I
have often observed under a thousand different circumstances, that
nothing makes more for success than not to desire it too ardently. I
very much wanted to get elected; but in the difficult and critical
condition of affairs then reigning, I easily reconciled myself to the
idea of being rejected; and from this placid anticipation of a rebuff I
drew a tranquillity and clearness of mind, a respect for myself and a
contempt for the follies of the time, that I should perhaps not have
found in the same degree had I been swayed only by a longing to
succeed.

The country began to fill with roving candidates, hawking their
protestations of Republicanism from hustings to hustings. I refused to
present myself before any other electoral body than that of the place
where I lived. Each small town had its club, and each club questioned
the candidates regarding their opinions and actions, and subjected them
to formulas. I refused to reply to any of these insolent
interrogatories. These refusals, which might have seemed disdainful,
appeared in the light of dignity and independence in the face of the new
rulers, and I was more esteemed for my rebelliousness than the others
for their obedience. I therefore contented myself with publishing an
address and having it posted up throughout the department.

Most of the candidates had resumed the old customs of '92. When writing
to people they called them "Citizens," and signed themselves
"fraternally yours." I would never consent to adopt this revolutionary
nonsense. I headed my address, "Gentlemen," and ended by proudly
declaring myself my electors' "very humble servant."

     "I do not come to solicit your suffrages," I said, "I come only to
     place myself at the orders of my country. I asked to be your
     representative when the times were easy and peaceful; my honour
     forbids me to refuse to be so in a period full of agitation, which
     may become full of danger. That is the first thing I had to tell
     you."

I added that I had been faithful to the end to the oath I had taken to
the Monarchy, but that the Republic, which had been brought about
without my aid, should have my energetic support, and that I would not
only accept but assist it. Then I went on:

     "But of what Republic is it a question? There are some who, by a
     Republic, understand a dictatorship exercised in the name of
     liberty; who think that the Republic should not only change
     political institutions but the face of society itself. There are
     some who think that the Republic should needs be of an aggressive
     and propagandist kind. I am not a Republican after this fashion. If
     this were your manner of being Republicans, I could be of no use to
     you, for I should not be of your opinion; but if you understand the
     Republic as I understand it myself, you can rely upon me to devote
     myself heart and soul to the triumph of a cause which is mine as
     well as yours."

Men who show no fear in times of revolution are like princes with the
army: they produce a great effect by very ordinary actions, because the
peculiar position which they occupy naturally places them above the
level of the crowd and brings them very much in view. My address was so
successful that I myself was astonished at it; within a few days it made
me the most popular man in the department of la Manche, and the object
of universal attention. My old political adversaries, the agents of the
old Government, the Conservatives themselves who had so vigorously
opposed me, and whom the Republic had overthrown, came in crowds to
assure me that they were ready not only to vote for me, but to follow my
views in everything.

In the meantime, the first meeting of the electors of the Arrondissement
of Valognes took place. I appeared together with the other candidates. A
shed did duty for a hall; the chairman's platform was at the bottom, and
at the side was a professorial pulpit which had been transformed into a
tribune. The chairman, who himself was a professor at the College of
Valognes, said to me with a loud voice and a magisterial air, but in a
very respectful tone: "Citizen de Tocqueville, I will tell you the
questions which are put to you, and to which you will have to reply;" to
which I replied, carelessly, "Mr Chairman, pray put the questions."

A parliamentary orator, whose name I will not mention, once said to me:

"Look here, my dear friend, there is only one way of speaking well from
the tribune, and that is to be fully persuaded, as you get into it, that
you are the cleverest man in the world."

This had always appeared to me easier to say than to do, in the presence
of our great political assemblies. But I confess that here the maxim was
easy enough to follow, and that I thought it a wonderfully good one.
Nevertheless, I did not go so far as to convince myself that I was
cleverer than all the world; but I soon saw that I was the only one who
was well acquainted with the facts they brought up, and even with the
political language they wished to speak. It would be difficult to show
one's self more maladroit and more ignorant than did my adversaries;
they overwhelmed me with questions which they thought very close, and
which left me very free, while I on my side made replies which were
sometimes not very brilliant, but which always to them appeared most
conclusive. The ground on which they hoped, above all, to crush me was
that of the banquets. I had refused, as I have already said, to take
part in these dangerous demonstrations. My political friends had found
fault with me for abandoning them in that matter, and many continued to
bear me ill-will, although--or perhaps because--the Revolution had
proved me to be right.

"Why did you part from the Opposition on the occasion of the banquets?"
I was asked.

I replied, boldly:

"I could easily find a pretext, but I prefer to give you my real reason:
I did not want the banquets because I did not want a revolution; and I
venture to say that hardly any of those who sat down to the banquets
would have done so had they foreseen, as I did, the events to which
these would lead. The only difference I can see between you and myself
is that I knew what you were doing while you did not know it
yourselves." This bold profession of anti-revolutionary had been
preceded by one of republican faith; the sincerity of the one seemed to
bear witness to that of the other; the meeting laughed and applauded. My
adversaries were scoffed at, and I came off triumphant.

I had won the agricultural population of the department by my address; I
won the Cherbourg workmen by a speech. The latter had been assembled to
the number of two thousand at a patriotic dinner. I received a very
obliging and pressing invitation to attend, and I did.

When I arrived, the procession was ready to start for the
banqueting-hall, with, at its head, my old colleague Havin, who had come
expressly from Saint-Lo to take the chair. It was the first time I had
met him since the 24th of February. On that day, I saw him giving his
arm to the Duchesse d'Orleans, and the next morning I heard that he was
Commissary of the Republic in the department of la Manche. I was not
surprised, for I knew him as one of those easily bewildered, ambitious
men who had found themselves fixed for ten years in opposition, after
thinking at first that they were in it only for a little. How many of
these men have I not seen around me, tortured with their own virtue, and
despairing because they saw themselves spending the best part of their
lives in criticizing the faults of others without ever in some measure
realizing by experience what were their own, and finding nothing to
feed upon but the sight of public corruption! Most of them had
contracted during this long abstinence so great an appetite for places,
honours and money that it was easy to predict that at the first
opportunity they would throw themselves upon power with a sort of
gluttony, without taking time to choose either the moment or the morsel.
Havin was the very type of these men. The Provisional Government had
given him as his associate, and even as his chief, another of my former
colleagues in the Chamber of Deputies, M. Vieillard, who has since
become famous as a particular friend of Prince Louis Napoleon's.
Vieillard was entitled to serve the Republic, since he had been one of
the seven or eight republican deputies under the Monarchy. Moreover, he
was one of the Republicans who had passed through the salons of the
Empire before attaining demagogism. In literature he was a bigoted
classic; a Voltairean in religious belief; rather fatuous, very
kind-hearted; an honest man, and even an intelligent; but a very fool in
politics. Havin had made him his tool: whenever he wished to strike a
blow at one of his own enemies, or to reward one of his own friends, he
invariably put forward Vieillard, who allowed him to do as he pleased.
In this manner Havin made his way sheltered beneath the honesty and
republicanism of Vieillard, whom he always kept before him, as the miner
does his gabion.

Havin scarcely seemed to recognize me; he did not invite me to take a
place in the procession. I modestly withdrew into the midst of the
crowd; and when we arrived at the banqueting-hall, I sat down at one of
the lower tables. We soon got to the speeches: Vieillard delivered a
very proper written speech, and Havin read out another written speech,
which was well received. I, too, was very much inclined to speak, but my
name was not down, and moreover I did not quite see how I was to begin.
A word which one of the orators (for all the speakers called themselves
orators) dropped to the memory of Colonel Briqueville gave me my
opportunity. I asked for permission to speak, and the meeting consented.
When I found myself perched in the tribune, or rather in that pulpit
placed twenty feet above the crowd, I felt a little confused; but I soon
recovered myself, and delivered a little piece of oratorical fustian
which I should find it impossible to recollect to-day. I only know that
it contained a certain appositeness, besides the warmth which never
fails to make itself apparent through the disorder of an improvised
speech, a merit quite sufficient to succeed with a popular assembly, or
even with an assembly of any sort; for, it cannot be too often repeated,
speeches are made to be listened to and not to be read, and the only
good ones are those that move the audience.

The success of mine was marked and complete, and I confess it seemed
very sweet to me to revenge myself in this way on the manner in which
my former colleague had endeavoured to abuse what he considered the
favours of fortune.

If I am not mistaken, it was between this time and the elections that I
made my journey to Saint-Lo, as member of the Council General. The
Council had been summoned to an extraordinary sitting. It was still
composed as under the Monarchy: most of its members had shown themselves
complaisant towards Louis-Philippe's ministers, and may be reckoned
among those who had most contributed to bring that Prince's government
into contempt in our country. The only thing I can recall of the
Saint-Lo journey is the singular servility of these ex-Conservatives.
Not only did they make no opposition to Havin, who had insulted them for
the past ten years, but they became his most attentive courtiers. They
praised him with their words, supported him with their votes, smiled
upon him approvingly; they even spoke well of him among themselves, for
fear of indiscretion. I have often seen greater pictures of human
baseness, but never any that was more perfect; and I think it deserves,
despite its pettiness, to be brought fully to light. I will, therefore,
display it in the light of subsequent events, and I will add that some
months later, when the turn of the popular tide had restored them to
power, they at once set about pursuing this same Havin anew with
unheard-of violence and even injustice. All their old hatred became
visible amid the quaking of their terror, and it seemed to have become
still greater at the remembrance of their temporary complaisance.

Meantime the general election was drawing nigh, and each day the aspect
of the future became more sinister. All the news from Paris represented
the capital as on the point of constantly falling into the hands of
armed Socialists. It was doubted whether these latter would allow the
electors to vote freely, or at least whether they would submit to the
National Assembly. Already in every part of the country the officers of
the National Guard were being made to swear that they would march
against the Assembly if a conflict arose between that body and the
people. The provinces were becoming more and more alarmed, but were also
strengthening themselves at the sight of the danger.

I spent the few days preceding the contest at my poor, dear Tocqueville.
It was the first time I had visited it since the Revolution: I was
perhaps about to leave it for ever! I was seized on my arrival with so
great and uncommon a feeling of sadness that it has left in my memory
traces which have remained marked and visible to this day amid all the
vestiges of the events of that time. I was not expected. The empty
rooms, in which there was none but my old dog to receive me, the
undraped windows, the heaped-up dusty furniture, the extinct fires, the
run-down clocks--all seemed to point to abandonment and to foretell
ruin. This little isolated corner of the earth, lost, as it were, amid
the fields and hedges of our Norman coppices, which had so often seemed
to me the most charming of solitudes, now appeared to me, in the actual
state of my thoughts, as a desolate desert; but across the desolation of
its present aspect I discovered, as though from the depth of a tomb, the
sweetest and most attractive episodes of my life. I wonder how our
imagination gives so much deeper colour and so much more attractiveness
to things than they possess. I had just witnessed the fall of the
Monarchy; I have since been present at the most sanguinary scenes; and
nevertheless I declare that none of these spectacles produced in me so
deep and painful an emotion as that which I experienced that day at the
sight of the ancient abode of my forefathers, when I thought of the
peaceful days and happy hours I had spent there without knowing their
value--I say that it was then and there that I best understood all the
bitterness of revolutions.

The local population had always been well disposed to me; but this time
I found them affectionate, and I was never received with more respect
than now, when all the walls were placarded with the expression of
degrading equality. We were all to go and vote together at the borough
of Saint-Pierre, about one league away from our village. On the morning
of the election, all the voters (that is to say, all the male population
above the age of twenty) collected together in front of the church. All
these men formed themselves in a double column, in alphabetical order.
I took up my place in the situation denoted by my name, for I knew that
in democratic times and countries one must be nominated to the head of
the people, and not place one's self there. At the end of the long
procession, in carts or on pack-horses, came the sick or infirm who
wished to follow us; we left none behind save the women and children. We
were one hundred and sixty-six all told. At the top of the hill which
commands Tocqueville there came a halt; they wished me to speak. I
climbed to the other side of a ditch; a circle was formed round me, and
I spoke a few words such as the circumstances inspired. I reminded these
worthy people of the gravity and importance of what they were about to
do; I recommended them not to allow themselves to be accosted or turned
aside by those who, on our arrival at the borough, might seek to deceive
them, but to march on solidly and stay together, each in his place,
until they had voted. "Let no one," I said, "go into a house to seek
food or shelter [it was raining] before he has done his duty." They
cried that they would do as I wished, and they did. All the votes were
given at the same time, and I have reason to believe that they were
almost all given to the same candidate.

After voting myself, I took my leave of them, and set out to return to
Paris.




CHAPTER V

     THE FIRST SITTING OF THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY--THE APPEARANCE OF
     THIS ASSEMBLY.


I stopped at Valognes only long enough to bid good-bye to some of my
friends. Many left me with tears in their eyes, for there was a belief
current in the country that the representatives would be exposed to
great danger in Paris. Several of these worthy people said to me, "If
they attack the National Assembly, we will come and defend you." I feel
a certain remorse at having seen only vain words in this promise at the
time; for, as a matter of fact, they did all come, they and many more,
as I shall show later.

It was only when I reached Paris that I learnt that I had received
110,704 votes out of a possible 120,000. Most of my new colleagues
belonged to the old dynastic Opposition: two only had professed
republican principles before the Revolution, and were what was called in
the jargon of the day "Republicans of yesterday." The same was the case
in most parts of France.

There have certainly been more wicked revolutionaries than those of
1848, but I doubt if there were ever any more stupid; they neither knew
how to make use of universal suffrage nor how to do without it. If they
had held the elections immediately after the 24th of February, while the
upper classes were still bewildered by the blow they had just received,
and the people more amazed than discontented, they would perhaps have
obtained an assembly after their hearts; if, on the other hand, they had
boldly seized the dictatorship, they might have been able for some time
to retain it. But they trusted themselves to the nation, and at the same
time did all that was most likely to set the latter against them; they
threatened it while placing themselves in its power; they alarmed it by
the recklessness of their proposals and the violence of their language,
while inviting it to resistance by the feebleness of their actions; they
pretended to lay down the law to it at the very time that they were
placing themselves at its disposal. Instead of opening out their ranks
after the victory, they jealously closed them up, and seemed, in one
word, to be striving to solve this insoluble problem, namely, how to
govern through the majority and yet against its inclination.

Following the examples of the past without understanding them, they
foolishly imagined that to summon the crowd to take part in political
life was sufficient to attach it to their cause; and that to popularize
the Republic, it was enough to give the public rights without offering
them any profits. They forgot that their predecessors, when they gave
every peasant the vote, at the same time did away with tithes, abolished
statute labour and the other seignorial privileges, and divided the
property of the nobles among the peasants; whereas they were not in a
position to do anything of the kind. In establishing universal suffrage
they thought they were summoning the people to the assistance of the
Revolution: they were only giving them arms against it. Nevertheless, I
am far from believing that it was impossible to arouse revolutionary
passions, even in the country districts. In France, every agriculturist
owns some portion of the soil, and most of them are more or less
involved in debt; it was not, therefore, the landlords that should have
been attacked, but the creditors; not the abolition promised of the
rights of property, but the abolition of debts. The demagogues of 1848
did not think of this scheme; they showed themselves much clumsier than
their predecessors, but no less dishonest, for they were as violent and
unjust in their desires as the others in their acts. Only, to commit
violent and unjust acts, it is not enough for a government to have the
will, or even the power; the habits, ideas, and passions of the time
must lend themselves to the committal of them.

As the party which held the reins of government saw its candidates
rejected one after the other, it displayed great vexation and rage,
complaining now sadly and now rudely of the electors, whom it treated as
ignorant, ungrateful blockheads, and enemies of their own good; it lost
its temper with the whole nation; and, its impatience exhausted by the
latter's coldness, it seemed ready to say with Moliere's Arnolfe, when
he addresses Agnes:

     "Pourquoi ne m'aimer pas, madame l'impudente?"

One thing was not ridiculous, but really ominous and terrible; and that
was the appearance of Paris on my return. I found in the capital a
hundred thousand armed workmen formed into regiments, out of work, dying
of hunger, but with their minds crammed with vain theories and visionary
hopes. I saw society cut into two: those who possessed nothing, united
in a common greed; those who possessed something, united in a common
terror. There were no bonds, no sympathy between these two great
sections; everywhere the idea of an inevitable and immediate struggle
seemed at hand. Already the _bourgeois_ and the _peuple_ (for the old
nicknames had been resumed) had come to blows, with varying fortunes, at
Rouen, Limoges, Paris; not a day passed but the owners of property were
attacked or menaced in either their capital or income: they were asked
to employ labour without selling the produce; they were expected to
remit the rents of their tenants when they themselves possessed no other
means of living. They gave way as long as they could to this tyranny,
and endeavoured at least to turn their weakness to account by publishing
it. I remember reading in the papers of that time this advertisement,
among others, which still strikes me as a model of vanity, poltroonery,
and stupidity harmoniously mingled:

"Mr Editor," it read, "I make use of your paper to inform my tenants
that, desiring to put into practice in my relations with them the
principles of fraternity that should guide all true democrats, I will
hand to those of my tenants who apply for it a formal receipt for their
next quarter's rent."

Meanwhile, a gloomy despair had overspread the middle class thus
threatened and oppressed, and imperceptibly this despair was changing
into courage. I had always believed that it was useless to hope to
settle the movement of the Revolution of February peacefully and
gradually, and that it could only be stopped suddenly, by a great battle
fought in the streets of Paris. I had said this immediately after the
24th of February; and what I now saw persuaded me that this battle was
not only inevitable but imminent, and that it would be well to seize the
first opportunity to deliver it.

The National Assembly met at last on the 4th of May; it was doubtful
until the last moment whether it would meet at all. I believe, in fact,
that the more ardent of the demagogues were often tempted to do without
it, but they dared not; they remained crushed beneath the weight of
their own dogma of the sovereignty of the people.

I should have before my eyes the picture which the Assembly presented at
its opening; but I find, on the contrary, that only a very confused
recollection of it has lingered in my mind. It is a mistake to believe
that events remain present in one's memory in proportion to their
importance or their greatness alone; rather is it certain little
particularities which occur, and cause them to penetrate deep into the
mind, and fix them there in a lasting manner. I only remember that we
shouted, "Long live the Republic" fifteen times during the course of the
sitting, trying who could out-shout the other. The history of the
Assemblies is full of parallel incidents, and one constantly sees one
party exaggerating its feelings in order to embarrass its opponents,
while the latter feign to hold sentiments which they do not possess, in
order to avoid the trap. Both sides, with a common effort, went either
beyond, or in the contrary direction to, the truth. Nevertheless, I
think the cry was sincere enough; only it responded to diverse or even
contrary thoughts. All at that time wished to preserve the Republic; but
some wished to use it for purposes of attack, others for purposes of
defence The newspapers spoke of the enthusiasm of the Assembly and of
the public; there was a great deal of noise, but no enthusiasm at all.
Everyone was too greatly preoccupied with the immediate future to allow
himself to be carried beyond that thought by sentiment of any kind. A
decree of the Provisional Government laid down that the representatives
should wear the costume of the Conventionals, and especially the white
waistcoat with turn-down collar in which Robespierre was always
represented on the stage. I thought at first that this fine notion
originated with Louis Blanc or Ledru-Rollin; but I learned later that it
was due to the flowery and literary imagination of Armand Marrast. No
one obeyed the decree, not even its author; Caussidiere was the only one
to adopt the appointed disguise. This drew my attention to him; for I
did not know him by sight any more than most of those who were about to
call themselves the Montagnards, always with the idea of keeping up the
recollection of '93. I beheld a very big and very heavy body, on which
was placed a sugar-loaf head, sunk deep between the two shoulders, with
a wicked, cunning eye, and an air of general good-nature spread over the
rest of his face. In short, he was a mass of shapeless matter, in which
worked a mind sufficiently subtle to know how to make the most of his
coarseness and ignorance.

In the course of the two subsequent days, the members of the Provisional
Government, one after the other, told us what they had done since the
24th of February. Each said a great deal of good of himself, and even a
certain amount of good of his colleagues, although it would be difficult
to meet a body of men who mutually hated one another more sincerely than
these did. Independently of the political hatred and jealousy that
divided them, they seemed still to feel towards each other that peculiar
irritation common to travellers who have been compelled to live
together upon the same ship during a long and stormy passage, without
suiting or understanding one another. At this first sitting I met again
almost all the members of Parliament among whom I had lived. With the
exception of M. Thiers, who had been defeated; of the Duc de Broglie,
who had not stood, I believe; and of Messrs Guizot and Duchatel, who had
fled, all the famous orators and most of the better-known talkers of the
political world were there; but they found themselves, as it were, out
of their element, they felt isolated and suspected, they both felt and
inspired fear, two contraries often to be met with in the political
world. As yet they possessed none of that influence which their talents
and experience were soon to restore to them. All the remainder of the
Assembly were as much novices as though we had issued fresh from the
Ancien Regime; for, thanks to our system of centralization, public life
had always been confined within the limits of the Chambers, and those
who were neither peers nor deputies scarcely knew what an Assembly was,
nor how one should speak or behave in one. They were absolutely ignorant
of its most ordinary, everyday habits and customs; and they were
inattentive at decisive moments, and listened eagerly to unimportant
things. Thus, on the second day, they crowded round the tribune and
insisted on perfect silence in order to hear read the minutes of the
preceding sitting, imagining that this insignificant form was a most
important piece of business. I am convinced that nine hundred English
or American peasants, picked at random, would have better represented
the appearance of a great political body.

Continuing to imitate the National Convention, the men who professed the
most radical and the most revolutionary opinions had taken their seats
on the highest benches; they were very uncomfortable up there; but it
gave them the right to call themselves Montagnards, and as men always
like to feed on pleasant imaginations, these very rashly flattered
themselves that they bore a resemblance to the celebrated blackguards
whose name they took.

The Montagnards soon divided themselves into two distinct bands: the
Revolutionaries of the old school and the Socialists. Nevertheless, the
two shades were not sharply defined. One passed from the one to the
other by imperceptible tints: the Montagnards proper had almost all some
socialistic ideas in their heads, and the Socialists quite approved of
the revolutionary proceedings of the others. However, they differed
sufficiently among themselves to prevent them from always marching in
step, and it was this that saved us. The Socialists were the more
dangerous, because they answered more nearly to the true character of
the Revolution of February, and to the only passions which it had
aroused; but they were men of theory rather than action, and in order to
upset Society at their pleasure they would have needed the practical
energy and the science of insurrections which only their colleagues in
any measure possessed.

From the seat I occupied it was easy for me to hear what was said on the
benches of the Mountain, and especially to see what went on. This gave
me the opportunity of studying pretty closely the men sitting in that
part of the Chamber. It was for me like discovering a new world. We
console ourselves for not knowing foreign countries, with the reflection
that at least we know our own; but we are wrong, for even in the latter
there are always districts which we have not visited, and races which
are new to us. I experienced this now. It was as though I saw these
Montagnards for the first time, so greatly did their idioms and manners
surprise me. They spoke a lingo which was not, properly speaking, the
French of either the ignorant or the cultured classes, but which partook
of the defects of both, for it abounded in coarse words and ambitious
phrases. One heard issuing from the benches of the Mountain a ceaseless
torrent of insulting or jocular comments; and at the same time there was
poured forth a host of quibbles and maxims; in turns they assumed a very
humorous or a very superb tone. It was evident that these people
belonged neither to the tavern nor the drawing-room; I think they must
have polished their manners in the cafes, and fed their minds on no
literature but that of the daily press. In any case, it was the first
time since the commencement of the Revolution that this type made any
display in one of our Assemblies; until then it had only been
represented by sporadic and unnoticed individuals, who were more
occupied in concealing than in showing themselves.

The Constituent Assembly had two other peculiarities which struck me as
quite as novel as this, although very different from it. It contained an
infinitely greater number of landlords and even of noblemen than any of
the Chambers elected in the days when it was a necessary condition, in
order to be an elector or elected, that you should have money. And also
there was a more numerous and more powerful religious party than even
under the Restoration: I counted three bishops, several vicars-general,
and a Dominican monk, whereas Louis XVIII. and Charles X. had never
succeeded in securing the election of more than one single abbe.

The abolition of all quit-rents, which made part of the electors
dependent upon the rich, and the danger threatening property, which led
the people to choose for their representatives those who were most
interested in defending it, are the principal reasons which explain the
presence of so great a number of landlords. The election of the
ecclesiastics arose from similar causes, and also from a different cause
still worthier of consideration. This cause was the almost general and
very unexpected return of a great part of the nation towards the
concerns of religion.

The Revolution of 1792, when striking the upper classes, had cured them
of their irreligiousness; it had taught them, if not the truth, at least
the social uses of belief. This lesson was lost upon the middle class,
which remained their political heir and their jealous rival; and the
latter had even become more sceptical in proportion as the former seemed
to become more religious. The Revolution of 1848 had just done on a
small scale for our tradesmen what that of 1792 had done for the
nobility: the same reverses, the same terrors, the same conversion; it
was the same picture, only painted smaller and in less bright and, no
doubt, less lasting colours. The clergy had facilitated this conversion
by separating itself from all the old political parties, and entering
into the old, true spirit of the Catholic clergy, which is that it
should belong only to the Church. It readily, therefore, professed
republican opinions, while at the same time it gave to long-established
interests the guarantee of its traditions, its customs and its
hierarchy. It was accepted and made much of by all. The priests sent to
the Assembly were treated with very great consideration, and they
deserved it through their good sense, their moderation and their
modesty. Some of them endeavoured to speak from the tribune, but they
were never able to learn the language of politics. They had forgotten it
too long ago, and all their speeches turned imperceptibly into homilies.

For the rest, the universal voting had shaken the country from top to
bottom without bringing to light a single new man worthy of coming to
the front. I have always held that, whatever method be followed in a
general election, the great majority of the exceptional men whom the
nation possesses definitively succeed in getting elected. The system of
election adopted exercises a great influence only upon the class of
ordinary individuals in the Assembly, who form the ground-work of every
political body. These belong to very different orders and are of very
diverse natures, according to the system upon which the election has
been conducted. Nothing confirmed me in this belief more than did the
sight of the Constituent Assembly. Almost all the men who played the
first part in it were already known to me, but the bulk of the rest
resembled nothing that I had seen before. They were imbued with a new
spirit, and displayed a new character and new manners.

I will say that, in my opinion, and taken all round, this Assembly
compared favourably with those which I had seen. One met in it more men
who were sincere, disinterested, honest and, above all, courageous than
in the Chambers of Deputies among which I had spent my life.

The Constituent Assembly had been elected to make a stand against civil
war. This was its principal merit; and, in fact, so long as it was
necessary to fight, it was great, and only became contemptible after the
victory, and when it felt that it was breaking up in consequence of
this very victory and under the weight of it.

I selected my seat on the left side of the House, on a bench from which
it was easy for me to hear the speakers and to reach the tribune when I
wished to speak myself. A large number of my old friends joined me
there; Lanjuinais, Dufaure, Corcelles, Beaumont and several others sat
near me.

Let me say a word concerning the House itself, although everybody knows
it. This is necessary in order to understand the narrative; and,
moreover, although this monument of wood and plaster is probably
destined to last longer than the Republic of which it was the cradle, I
do not think it will enjoy a very long existence; and when it is
destroyed, many of the events that took place in it will be difficult to
understand.

The house formed an oblong of great size. At one end, against the wall,
was the President's platform and the tribune; nine rows of benches rose
gradually along the three other walls. In the middle, facing the
tribune, spread a huge, empty space, like the arena of an amphitheatre,
with this difference, that this arena was square, not round. The
consequence was that most of the listeners only caught a side glimpse of
the speaker, and the only ones who saw him full face were very far away:
an arrangement curiously calculated to promote inattention and disorder.
For the first, who saw the speaker badly, and were continually looking
at one another, were more engaged in threatening and apostrophizing each
other; and the others did not listen any better, because, although able
to see the occupant of the tribune, they heard him badly.

Large windows, placed high up in the walls, opened straight outside, and
admitted air and light; the walls were decorated only with a few flags;
time had, luckily, been wanting in which to add to them all those
spiritless allegories on canvas or pasteboard with which the French love
to adorn their monuments, in spite of their being insipid to those who
can understand them and utterly incomprehensible to the mass of the
people. The whole bore an aspect of immensity, together with an air that
was cold, solemn, and almost melancholy. There were seats for nine
hundred members, a larger number than that of any of the assemblies that
had sat in France for sixty years.

I felt at once that the atmosphere of this assembly suited me.
Notwithstanding the gravity of events, I experienced there a sense of
well-being that was new to me. For the first time since I had entered
public life, I felt myself caught in the current of a majority, and
following in its company the only road which my tastes, my reason and my
conscience pointed out to me: a new and very welcome sensation. I
gathered that this majority would disown the Socialists and the
Montagnards, but was sincere in its desire to maintain and organize the
Republic. I was with it on these two leading points: I had no monarchic
faith, no affection nor regrets for any prince; I felt called upon to
defend no cause save that of liberty and the dignity of mankind. To
protect the ancient laws of Society against the innovators with the help
of the new force which the republican principle might lend to the
government; to cause the evident will of the French people to triumph
over the passions and desires of the Paris workmen; to conquer
demagogism by democracy--that was my only aim. I am not sure that the
dangers to be passed through before it could be attained did not make it
still more attractive to me; for I have a natural inclination for
adventure, and a spice of danger has always seemed to me the best
seasoning that can be given to most of the actions of life.




CHAPTER VI

     MY RELATIONS WITH LAMARTINE--HIS SUBTERFUGES


Lamartine was now at the climax of his fame: to all those whom the
Revolution had injured or alarmed, that is to say, to the great majority
of the nation, he appeared in the light of a saviour. He had been
elected to the Assembly by the city of Paris and no fewer than eleven
departments; I do not believe that ever anybody inspired such keen
transports as those to which he was then giving rise; one must have seen
love thus stimulated by fear to know with what excess of idolatry men
are capable of loving. The transcendental favour which was shown him at
this time was not to be compared with anything except, perhaps, the
excessive injustice which he shortly afterwards received. All the
deputies who came to Paris with the desire to put down the excesses of
the Revolution and to combat the demagogic party regarded him beforehand
as their only possible leader, and looked to him unhesitatingly to place
himself at their head to attack and overthrow the Socialists and
demagogues. They soon discovered that they were deceived, and that
Lamartine did not see the part he was called upon to play in so simple
a light. It must be confessed that his was a very complex and difficult
position. It was forgotten at the time, but he could not himself forget,
that he had contributed more than any other to the success of the
Revolution of February. Terror effaced this remembrance for the moment
from the public mind; but a general feeling of security could not fail
soon to restore it. It was easy to foresee that, so soon as the current
which had brought affairs to their present pitch was arrested, a
contrary current would set in, which would impel the nation in the
opposite direction, and drive it faster and further than Lamartine could
or would go. The success of the Montagnards would involve his immediate
ruin; but their complete defeat would render him useless and must,
sooner or later, remove the government from his hands. He saw,
therefore, that for him there was almost as much danger and loss in
triumph as in defeat.

As a matter of fact, I believe that, if Lamartine had resolutely, from
the first, placed himself at the head of the immense party which desired
to moderate and regulate the course of the Revolution, and had succeeded
in leading it to victory, he would before long have been buried beneath
his own triumph; he would not have been able to stop his army in time,
and it would have left him behind and chosen other leaders.

I doubt whether, whatever line of conduct he had adopted, he could have
retained his power for long. I believe his only remaining chance was to
be gloriously defeated while saving his country. But Lamartine was the
last man to sacrifice himself in this way. I do not know that I have
ever, in this world of selfishness and ambition in which I lived, met a
mind so void of any thought of the public welfare as his. I have seen a
crowd of men disturbing the country in order to raise themselves: that
is an everyday perversity; but he is the only one who seemed to me
always ready to turn the world upside down in order to divert himself.
Neither have I ever known a mind less sincere, nor one that had a more
thorough contempt for the truth. When I say he despised it, I am wrong:
he did not honour it enough to heed it in any way whatever. When
speaking or writing, he spoke the truth or lied, without caring which he
did, occupied only with the effect he wished to produce at the moment.

I had not seen Lamartine since the 24th of February. I saw him the first
time on the day before the opening of the Assembly in the new house,
where I had gone to choose my seat, but I did not speak to him; he was
surrounded by some of his new friends. The instant he saw me, he
pretended some business at the other end of the house, and hurried away
as fast as he could. He sent me word afterwards by Champeaux (who
belonged to him, half as a friend and half as a servant) that I must not
take it ill of him that he avoided me; that his position obliged him to
act in this way towards the members of the late parliament; that my
place was, of course, marked out among the future leaders of the
Republic; but that we must wait till the first temporary difficulties
were surmounted before coming to an agreement. Champeaux also declared
that he was instructed to ask my opinion on the state of business; I
gave it him very readily, but to very little purpose. This established
certain indirect relations between Lamartine and myself through the
intermediary of Champeaux. The latter often came to see me, to inform
me, on behalf of his patron, of the arrangements that were being
prepared; and I sometimes went to see him in a little room he had hired
on the top floor of a house in the Rue Saint-Honore, where he used to
receive suspicious visitors, although he had a complete set of rooms at
the Foreign Office.

I usually found him overwhelmed with place-hunters; for in France
political mendicancy exists under every form of government. It even
increases through the very revolutions that are directed against it,
because all revolutions ruin a certain number of men, and with us a
ruined man always looks to the State to repair his fortunes. They were
of all kinds, all attracted by the reflection of power which Lamartine's
friendship very transiently cast over Champeaux. I remember among others
a certain cook, not particularly distinguished in his calling, as far as
I could see, who insisted upon entering the service of Lamartine, who
had, he said, become President of the Republic.

"But he's not President yet!" cried Champeaux.

"If he's not so yet, as you say," said the man, "he's going to be, and
he must already be thinking of his kitchen."

In order to rid himself of this scullion's obstinate ambition, Champeaux
promised to bring his name before Lamartine so soon as the latter should
be President of the Republic. The poor man went away quite satisfied,
dreaming no doubt of the very imaginary splendours of his approaching
condition.

I frequented Champeaux pretty assiduously during that time, although he
was exceedingly vain, loquacious, and tedious, because, in talking with
him, I became better acquainted with Lamartine's thoughts and projects
than if I had been talking to the great man himself. Lamartine's
intelligence was seen through Champeaux' folly as you see the sun
through a smoked glass, which shows you the luminary deprived of its
heat-rays, but less dazzling to the eye. I easily gathered that in this
world every one was feeding on pretty well the same chimeras as the cook
of whom I have just spoken, and that Lamartine already tasted at the
bottom of his heart the sweets of that sovereign power which was
nevertheless at that very moment escaping from his hands. He was then
following the tortuous road that was so soon to lead him to his ruin,
struggling to dominate the Mountain without overthrowing it, and to
slacken the revolutionary fire without extinguishing it, so as to give
the country a feeling of security strong enough for it to bless him, not
strong enough to cause it to forget him. What he dreaded above all was
that the conduct of the Assembly should be allowed to fall into the
hands of the former parliamentary leaders. This was, I believe, at the
time his dominant passion. One could see this during the great
discussion on the constitution of the Executive Power; never did the
different parties display more visibly the pedantic hypocrisy which
induces them to conceal their interests beneath their ideas: an ordinary
spectacle enough, but more striking at this time than usual, because the
needs of the moment compelled each party to shelter itself behind
theories which were foreign or even opposed to it. The old royalist
party maintained that the Assembly itself should govern and choose its
ministers: a theory that was almost demagogic; and the demagogues
declared that the Executive Power should be entrusted to a permanent
commission, which should govern and select all the agents of the
government: a system that approached the monarchic idea. All this
verbiage only meant that one side wished to remove Ledru-Rollin from
power, and the other to keep him there.

The nation saw in Ledru-Rollin the bloody image of the Terror; it beheld
in him the genius of evil as in Lamartine the genius of good, and it was
mistaken in both cases. Ledru-Rollin was nothing more than a very
sensual and sanguine heavy fellow, quite without principles and almost
without brains, possessing no real courage of mind or heart, and even
free from malice: for he naturally wished well to all the world, and was
incapable of cutting the throats of any one of his adversaries, except,
perhaps, for the sake of historical reminiscences, or to accommodate his
friends.

The result of the debate remained long doubtful: Barrot turned it
against us by making a very fine speech in our favour. I have witnessed
many of these unforeseen incidents in parliamentary life, and have seen
parties constantly deceived in the same way, because they always think
only of the pleasure they themselves derive from their great orator's
words, and never of the dangerous excitement he promotes in their
opponents.

When Lamartine, who till then had kept silent and remained, I believe,
in indecision, heard, for the first time since February, the voice of
the ex-leader of the Left resounding with brilliancy and success, he
suddenly made up his mind, and spoke. "You understand," said Champeaux
to me the next day, "that before all it was necessary to prevent the
Assembly from coming to a resolution upon Barrot's advice." So Lamartine
spoke, and, according to his custom, spoke in brilliant fashion.

The majority, who had already adopted the course that Barrot had urged
upon them, wheeled round as they listened to him (for this Assembly was
more credulous and more submissive than any that I had ever seen to the
wiles of eloquence: it was novice and innocent enough to seek for
reasons for their decisions in the speeches of the orators). Thus
Lamartine won his cause, but missed his fortune; for he that day gave
rise to the mistrust which soon arose and hurled him from his pinnacle
of popularity more quickly than he had mounted it. Suspicion took a
definite form the very next day, when he was seen to patronize
Ledru-Rollin and force the hand of his own friends in order to induce
them to appoint the latter as his colleague on the Executive Commission.
At this sight there arose in the Assembly and in the nation
inexpressible disappointment, terror and rage. For my part, I
experienced these two last emotions in the highest degree; I clearly
perceived that Lamartine was turning out of the high-road that led us
away from anarchy, and I could not guess into what abyss he might lead
us if we followed the byways which he was treading. How was it possible,
indeed, to foresee how far an always exuberant imagination might go,
unrestrained by reason or virtue? Lamartine's common-sense impressed me
no more than did his disinterestedness; and, in fact, I believed him
capable of everything except cowardly behaviour or vulgar oratory.

I confess that the events of June to a certain extent modified the
opinion I had formed of his manner of proceeding. They showed that our
adversaries were more numerous, better organized and, above all, more
determined than I had thought.

Lamartine, who had seen nothing but Paris during the last two months,
and who had there, so to speak, lived in the very heart of the
revolutionary party, exaggerated the power of the Capital and the
inactivity of the rest of France. He over-estimated both. But I am not
sure that I, on my side, did not strain a point on the other side. The
road we ought to follow seemed to me so clearly and visibly traced that
I would not admit the possibility of deviating from it by mistake; it
seemed obvious to me that we should hasten to profit by the moral force
possessed by the Assembly in order to escape from the hands of the
people, seize upon the government, and by a great effort establish it
upon a solid basis. Every delay seemed to me calculated to diminish our
power, and to strengthen the hand of our adversaries.

It was, in fact, during the six months that elapsed between the opening
of the Assembly and the events of June that the Paris workmen grew bold,
and took courage to resist, organized themselves, procured both arms and
ammunition, and made their final preparations for the struggle. In any
case, I am led to believe that it was Lamartine's tergiversations and
his semi-connivance with the enemy that saved us, while it ruined him.
Their effect was to amuse the leaders of the Mountain, and to divide
them. The Montagnards of the old school, who were retained in the
Government, separated themselves from the Socialists, who were excluded
from it. Had all been united by a common interest, and impelled by
common despair before our victory, as they became since, it is doubtful
whether that victory would have been won. When I consider that we were
almost effaced, although we were opposed only by the revolutionary party
without its leaders, I ask myself what the result of the contest would
have been if those leaders had come forward, and if the insurrection had
been supported by a third of the National Assembly.

Lamartine saw these dangers more closely and clearly than I, and I
believe to-day that the fear of arousing a mortal conflict influenced
his conduct as much as did his ambition. I might have formed this
opinion at the time had I listened to Madame de Lamartine, whose alarm
for the safety of her husband, and even of the Assembly, amounted to
extravagance. "Beware," she said to me, each time she met me, "beware of
pushing things to extremes; you do not know the strength of the
revolutionary party. If we enter into conflict with it, we shall
perish." I have often reproached myself for not cultivating Madame de
Lamartine's acquaintance, for I have always found her to possess real
virtue, although she added to it almost all the faults which can cling
to virtue, and which, without impairing it, render it less lovable: an
imperious temper, great personal pride, an upright but unyielding, and
sometimes bitter, spirit; so much so that it was impossible not to
respect her, and impossible to like her.




CHAPTER VII

     THE 15TH OF MAY 1848.


The revolutionary party had not dared to oppose the meeting of the
Assembly, but it refused to be dominated by it. On the contrary, it well
understood how to keep the Assembly in subjection, and to obtain from it
by constraint what it refused to grant from sympathy. Already the clubs
rang with threats and insults against the deputies. And as the French,
in their political passions, are as argumentative as they are insensible
to argument, these popular meeting-places were incessantly occupied in
manufacturing theories that formed the ground-work of subsequent acts of
violence. It was held that the people always remained superior to its
representatives, and never completely surrendered its will into their
hands: a true principle from which the false conclusion was drawn that
the Paris workmen were the French people. Since our first sitting, a
vague and widespread agitation had never ceased to reign in the town.
The mob met every day in the streets and squares; it spread aimlessly,
like the swell of the waves. The approaches to the Assembly were always
filled with a gathering of these redoubtable idlers. A demagogic party
has so many heads, chance always plays so great, and reason so small, a
part in its actions that it is almost impossible to say, either before
or after the event, what it wants or what it wanted. Nevertheless, my
opinion then was, and has since remained, that the leading demagogues
did not aim at destroying the Assembly, and that, as yet, they only
sought to make use of it by mastering it. The attack directed against it
on the 15th of May seemed intended rather to frighten than to overthrow
it; it was at least one of those equivocal enterprises which so
frequently occur in times of popular excitement, in which the promoters
themselves are careful not to trace or define precisely their plan or
their aim, so as to remain free to limit themselves to a peaceful
demonstration or force on a revolution, according to the incidents of
the day.

Some attempt of this kind had been expected for over a week; but the
habit of living in a continual state of alarm ends in rendering both
individuals and assemblies incapable of discerning, amid the signs
announcing the approach of danger, that which immediately precedes it.
We only knew that there was a question of a great popular demonstration
in favour of Poland, and we were but vaguely disturbed at it. Doubtless
the members of the Government were better informed and more alarmed than
we, but they kept their own counsel, and I was not sufficiently in touch
with them to penetrate into their secret thoughts.

Thus it happened that, on the 15th of May, I reached the Assembly
without foreseeing what was going to happen. The sitting began as any
other sitting might have begun; and what was very strange, twenty
thousand men already surrounded the chamber, without a single sound from
the outside having announced their presence. Wolowski was in the
tribune: he was mumbling between his teeth I know not what commonplaces
about Poland, when the mob at last betrayed its approach with a terrible
shout, which penetrated from every side through the upper windows, left
open because of the heat, and fell upon us as though from the sky. Never
had I imagined that a number of human voices could together produce so
immense a volume of sound, and the sight of the crowd itself, when it
surged into the Assembly, did not seem to me so formidable as that first
roar which it had uttered before showing itself. Many members, yielding
to a first impulse of curiosity or fear, sprang to their feet; others
shouted violently, "Keep your seats!" Everyone sat down again firmly on
his bench, and kept silence. Wolowski resumed his speech, and continued
it for some time. It must have been the first time in his life that he
was listened to in silence; and even now it was not he to whom we
listened, but the crowd outside, whose murmurs grew momentarily louder
and nearer.

Suddenly Degousee, one of our questors, solemnly mounted the steps of
the tribune, silently pushed Wolowski aside, and said, "Contrary to the
wishes of the questors, General Courtais has ordered the Gardes Mobiles
guarding the doors of the Assembly to sheathe their bayonets."

After uttering these few words he stopped. This Degousee, who was a very
good man, had the most hang-dog look and the hollowest voice imaginable.
The news, the man and the voice combined to create a curious impression.
The Assembly was roused, but immediately grew calm again; it was too
late to do anything: the chamber was forced.

Lamartine, who had gone out at the first noise, returned to the door
with a disconcerted air; he crossed the central gangway and regained his
seat with great strides, as though pursued by some enemy invisible to
us. Almost immediately, there appeared behind him a number of men of the
people, who stopped still on the threshold, surprised at the sight of
this immense seated assembly. At the same moment, as on the 24th of
February, the galleries were noisily opened and invaded by a flood of
people, who filled and more than filled them. Pressed forward by the mob
who followed and pushed them without seeing them, the first comers
climbed over the balustrades of the galleries, trusting to find room in
the Chamber itself, the floor of which was not more than ten feet
beneath them, hung down along the walls, and dropped the distance of
four or five feet into the Chamber. The fall of each of these bodies
striking the floor in succession produced a dull concussion which at
first, amid the tumult, I took for the distant sound of cannon. While
one part of the mob was thus falling into the house, the other, composed
principally of the club-leaders, entered by every door. They carried
various emblems of the Terror, and waved flags of which some were
surmounted by a red cap.

In an instant the mob had filled the large empty space in the centre of
the Assembly; and finding itself pressed for room, it climbed all the
little gangways leading to our benches, and crowded more and more into
these narrow spaces without ceasing its agitation. Amid this tumultuous
and incessant commotion, the dust became very thick and the heat so
oppressive that perhaps I would have gone out to breathe some fresh air,
had it been merely a question of the public interest. But honour kept us
glued to our seats.

Some of the intruders were openly armed, others showed glimpses of
concealed weapons, but none seemed to entertain a fixed intention of
striking us. Their expression was one of astonishment and ill-will
rather than enmity; with many of them a sort of vulgar curiosity in
course of gratifying itself seemed to dominate every other sentiment;
for even in our most sanguinary insurrections there are always a number
of people half scoundrels, half sight-seers, who fancy themselves at the
play. Moreover, there was no common leader whom they seemed to obey; it
was a mob of men, not a troop. I saw some drunken men among them, but
the majority seemed to be the prey of a feverish excitement imparted to
them by the enthusiasm and shouting without and the stifling heat, the
close packing and general discomfort within. They dripped with sweat,
although the nature and condition of their clothing was not calculated
to make the heat very uncomfortable for them, for several were quite
bare-breasted. There rose from this multitude a confused noise from the
midst of which one sometimes heard very threatening observations. I
caught sight of men who shook their fists at us and called us their
agents. This expression was often repeated; for several days the
ultra-democratic newspapers had done nothing but call the
representatives the agents of the people, and these blackguards had
taken kindly to the idea. A moment after, I had an opportunity of
observing with what vivacity and clearness the popular mind receives and
reflects images. I heard a man in a blouse, standing next to me, say to
his fellow, "See that vulture down there? I should like to twist its
neck." I followed the movement of his arm and his eyes and saw without
difficulty that he was speaking of Lacordaire, who was sitting in his
Dominican's frock on the top bench of the Left. The sentiment struck me
as very unhandsome, but the comparison was admirable; the priest's long,
bony neck issuing from its white cowl, his bald head surrounded only
with a tuft of black hair, his narrow face, his hooked nose and his
fixed, glittering eyes really gave him a striking resemblance to the
bird of prey in question.

During all this disorder in its midst, the Assembly sat passive and
motionless on its benches, neither resisting nor giving way, silent and
firm. A few members of the Mountain fraternized with the mob, but
stealthily and in whispers. Raspail had taken possession of the tribune
and was preparing to read the petition of the clubs; a young deputy,
d'Adelsward, rose and exclaimed, "By what right does Citizen Raspail
claim to speak here?" A furious howling arose; some men of the people
made a rush at d'Adelsward, but were stopped and held back. With great
difficulty, Raspail obtained a moment's silence from his friends, and
read the petition, or rather the orders, of the clubs, which enjoined us
to pronounce forthwith in favour of Poland.

"No delay, we're waiting for the answer!" was shouted on every side. The
Assembly continued to give no sign of life; the mob, in its disorder and
impatience, made a horrible noise, which by itself alone saved us from
making a reply. Buchez, the President, whom some would make out to be a
rascal and others a saint, but who undoubtedly, on that day, was a great
blockhead, rang his bell with all his might to obtain silence, as though
the silence of that multitude was not, under the present circumstances,
more to be dreaded than its cries.

It was then that I saw appear, in his turn, in the tribune a man whom I
have never seen since, but the recollection of whom has always filled me
with horror and disgust. He had wan, emaciated cheeks, white lips, a
sickly, wicked and repulsive expression, a dirty pallor, the appearance
of a mouldy corpse; he wore no visible linen; an old black frock-coat
tightly covered his lean, withered limbs; he seemed to have passed his
life in a sewer, and to have just left it. I was told it was Blanqui.[9]

     [9: Auguste Blanqui, brother to Jerome Adolphe Blanqui the
     economist.--A.T. de M.]

Blanqui said one word about Poland; then, turning sharply to domestic
affairs, he asked for revenge for what he called the massacres of Rouen,
recalled with threats the wretchedness in which the people had been
left, and complained of the wrongs done to the latter by the Assembly.
After thus exciting his hearers, he returned to Poland and, like
Raspail, demanded an immediate vote.

The Assembly continued to sit motionless, the people to move about and
utter a thousand contradictory exclamations, the President to ring his
bell. Ledru-Rollin tried to persuade the mob to withdraw, but nobody was
now able to exercise any influence over it. Ledru-Rollin, almost hooted,
left the tribune.

The tumult was renewed, increased, multiplied itself as it were, for the
mob was no longer sufficiently master of itself to be able even to
understand the necessity for a moment's self-restraint in order to
attain the object of its passion. A long interval passed; at last Barbes
darted up and climbed, or rather leapt, into the tribune. He was one of
those men in whom the demagogue, the madman and the knight-errant are so
closely intermingled that it is not possible to say where one ends or
the other commences, and who can only make their way in a society as
sick and troubled as ours. I am inclined to believe that it was the
madman that predominated in him, and his madness became raging when he
heard the voice of the people. His soul boiled as naturally amid popular
passion as water does on the fire. Since our invasion by the mob, I had
not taken my eyes from him; I considered him by far the most formidable
of our adversaries, because he was the most insane, the most
disinterested, and the most resolute of them all. I had seen him mount
the platform on which the President sat, and stand for a long time
motionless, only turning his agitated gaze about the Assembly; I had
observed and pointed out to my neighbours the distortion of his
features, his livid pallor, the convulsive excitement which caused him
each moment to twist his moustache between his fingers; he stood there
as the image of irresolution, leaning already towards an extreme side.
This time, Barbes had made up his mind; he proposed in some way to sum
up the passions of the people, and to make sure of victory by stating
its object in terms of precision:

"I demand," said he, in panting, jerking tones, "that, immediately and
before rising, the Assembly shall vote the departure of an army for
Poland, a tax of a milliard upon the rich, the removal of the troops
from Paris, and shall forbid the beating to arms; if not, the
representatives to be declared traitors to the country."

I believe we should have been lost if Barbes had succeeded in getting
his motion put to the vote; for if the Assembly had accepted it, it
would have been dishonoured and powerless, whereas, if it had rejected
it, which was probable, we should have run the risk of having our
throats cut. But Barbes himself did not succeed in obtaining a brief
space of silence so as to compel us to take a decision. The huge clamour
that followed his last words was not to be appeased; on the contrary, it
continued in a thousand varied intonations. Barbes exhausted himself in
his efforts to still it, but in vain, although he was powerfully aided
by the President's bell, which, during all this time, never ceased to
sound, like a knell.

This extraordinary sitting had lasted since two o'clock; the Assembly
held out, its ears pricked up to catch any sound from the outside,
waiting for assistance to come. But Paris seemed a dead city. Listen as
we might, we heard no rumour issue from it.

This passive resistance irritated and incensed the people; it was like a
cold, even surface upon which its fury glided without knowing what to
catch hold of; it struggled and writhed in vain, without finding any
issue to its undertaking. A thousand diverse and contradictory clamours
filled the air: "Let us go away," cried some.... "The organization of
labour.... A ministry of labour.... A tax on the rich.... We want Louis
Blanc!" cried others; they ended by fighting at the foot of the tribune
to decide who should mount it; five or six orators occupied it at once,
and often all spoke together. As always happens in insurrections, the
terrible was mingled with the ridiculous. The heat was so stifling that
many of the first intruders left the Chamber; they were forthwith
replaced by others who had been waiting at the doors to come in. In this
way I saw a fireman in uniform making his way down the gangway that
passed along my bench. "We can't make them vote!" they shouted to him.
"Wait, wait," he replied, "I'll see to it, I'll give them a piece of my
mind." Thereupon he pulled his helmet over his eyes with a determined
air, fastened the straps, squeezed through the crowd, pushing aside all
who stood in his way, and mounted the tribune. He imagined he would be
as much at his ease there as upon a roof, but he could not find his
words and stopped short. The people cried, "Speak up, fireman!" but he
did not speak a word, and they ended by turning him out of the tribune.
Just then a number of men of the people caught Louis Blanc in their arms
and carried him in triumph round the Chamber. They held him by his
little legs above their heads; I saw him make vain efforts to extricate
himself: he twisted and turned on every side without succeeding in
escaping from their hands, talking all the while in a choking, strident
voice. He reminded me of a snake having its tail pinched. They put him
down at last on a bench beneath mine. I heard him cry, "My friends, the
right you have just won...." but the remainder of his words were lost in
the din. I was told that Sobrier was carried in the same way a little
lower down.

A very tragic incident nearly put an end to these saturnalia: the
benches at the bottom of the house suddenly cracked, gave way more than
a foot, and threatened to hurl into the Chamber the crowd which
overloaded it, and which fled off in affright. This alarming occurrence
put a momentary stop to the commotion; and I then first heard, in the
distance, the sound of drums beating the call to arms in Paris. The mob
heard it too, and uttered a long yell of rage and terror. "Why are they
beating to arms?" exclaimed Barbes, beside himself, making his way to
the tribune afresh. "Who is beating to arms? Let those who have given
the order be outlawed!" Cries of "We are betrayed, to arms! To the Hotel
de Ville!" rose from the crowd.

The President was driven from his chair, whence, if we are to believe
the version he since gave, he caused himself to be driven voluntarily. A
club-leader called Huber climbed to his seat and hoisted a flag
surmounted by a red cap. The man had, it seemed, just recovered from a
long epileptic swoon, caused doubtless by the excitement and the heat;
it was on recovering from this sort of troubled sleep that he came
forward. His clothes were still in disorder, his look scared and
haggard. He exclaimed twice over in a resounding voice, which, uttered
from aloft, filled the house and dominated every other sound, "In the
name of the people, betrayed by its representatives, I declare the
National Assembly dissolved!"

The Assembly, deprived of its President, broke up. Barbes and the bolder
of the club politicians went out to go to the Hotel de Ville. This
conclusion to the affair was far from meeting the general wishes. I
heard men of the people beside me say to each other, in an aggrieved
tone, "No, no, that's not what we want." Many sincere Republicans were
in despair. I was first accosted, amid this tumult, by Tretat, a
revolutionary of the sentimental kind, a dreamer who had plotted in
favour of the Republic during the whole existence of the Monarchy.
Moreover, he was a physician of distinction, who was at that time at the
head of one of the principal mad-houses in Paris, although he was a
little cracked himself. He took my hands effusively, and with tears in
his eyes:

"Ah, monsieur," he said, "what a misfortune, and how strange it is to
think that it is madmen, real madmen, who have brought this about! I
have treated or prescribed for each one of them. Blanqui is a madman,
Barbes is a madman, Sobrier is a madman, Huber is the greatest madman of
them all: they are all madmen, monsieur, who ought to be locked up at my
Salpetriere instead of being here."

He would certainly have added his own name to the list, had he known
himself as well as he knew his old friends. I have always thought that
in revolutions, especially democratic revolutions, madmen, not those so
called by courtesy, but genuine madmen, have played a very considerable
political part. One thing at least is certain, and that is that a
condition of semi-madness is not unbecoming at such times, and often
even leads to success.

The Assembly had dispersed, but it will be readily believed that it did
not consider itself dissolved. Nor did it even regard itself as
defeated. The majority of the members who left the House did so with the
firm intention of soon meeting again elsewhere; they said so to one
another, and I am convinced that they were, in fact, quite resolved upon
it. As for myself, I decided to stay behind, kept back partly by the
feeling of curiosity that irresistibly retains me in places where
anything uncommon is proceeding, and partly by the opinion which I held
then, as I did on the 24th of February, that the strength of an assembly
in a measure resides in the hall it occupies. I therefore remained and
witnessed the grotesque and disorderly, but meaningless and
uninteresting, scenes that followed. The mob set itself, amid a
thousand disorders and a thousand cries, to form a Provisional
Government. It was a parody of the 24th of February, just as the 24th of
February was a parody of other revolutionary scenes. This had lasted
some time, when I thought that among all the noise I heard an irregular
sound coming from the outside of the Palace. I have a very quick ear,
and I was not slow in distinguishing the sound of a drum approaching and
beating the charge; for in our days of civil disorder, everyone has
learnt to know the language of these warlike instruments. I at once
hurried to the door by which these new arrivals would enter.

It was, in fact, a drum preceding some forty Gardes Mobiles. These lads
pierced through the crowd with a certain air of resolution, although one
could not clearly say at first what they proposed to do. Soon they
disappeared from sight and remained as though submerged; but a short
distance behind them marched a compact column of National Guards, who
rushed into the House with significant shouts of "Long live the National
Assembly!" I stuck my card of membership in my hat-band and entered with
them. They first cleared the platform of five or six orators, who were
at that moment speaking at once, and flung them, with none too great
ceremony, down the steps of the little staircase that leads to it. At
the sight of this, the insurgents at first made as though to resist; but
a panic seized them. Climbing over the empty benches, tumbling over one
another in the gangways, they made for the outer lobbies and sprang into
the court-yards from every window. In a few minutes there remained only
the National Guards, whose cries of "Long live the National Assembly"
shook the walls of the Chamber.

The Assembly itself was absent; but little by little the members who had
dispersed in the neighbourhood hastened up. They shook the hands of the
National Guards, embraced each other, and regained their seats. The
National Guards cried, "Long live the National Assembly!" and the
members, "Long live the National Guard! and long live the Republic!"

No sooner was the hall recaptured, than General Courtais, the original
author of our danger, had the incomparable impudence to present himself;
the National Guards received him with yells of fury; he was seized and
dragged to the foot of the rostrum. I saw him pass before my eyes, pale
as a dying man among the flashing swords: thinking they would cut his
throat, I cried with all my might, "Tear off his epaulettes, but don't
kill him!" which was done.

Then Lamartine reappeared. I never learnt how he had employed his time
during the three hours wherein we were invaded. I had caught sight of
him during the first hour: he was seated at that moment on a bench below
mine, and he was combing his hair, glued together with perspiration,
with a little comb he drew from his pocket; the crowd formed again and
I saw him no more. Apparently he went to the inner rooms of the Palace,
into which the mob had also penetrated, with the intention of haranguing
it, and was very badly received. I was given, on the next day, some
curious details of this scene, which I would have related here if I had
not resolved to set down only what I have myself observed. They say
that, subsequently, he withdrew to the palace then being built, close at
hand, and destined for the Foreign Office. He would certainly have done
better had he placed himself at the head of the National Guards and come
to our release. I think he must have been seized with the faintness of
heart that overcomes the bravest (and he was one of these) when
possessed of a restless and lively imagination.

When he returned to the Chamber, he had recovered his energy and his
eloquence. He told us that his place was not in the Assembly, but in the
streets, and that he was going to march upon the Hotel de Ville and
crush the insurrection. This was the last time I heard him
enthusiastically cheered. True, it was not he alone that they applauded,
but the victory: those cheers and clappings were but an echo of the
tumultuous passions that still agitated every breast. Lamartine went
out. The drums, which had beat the charge half-an-hour before, now beat
the march. The National Guards and the Gardes Mobiles, who were still
with us in crowds, formed themselves into order and followed him. The
Assembly, still very incomplete, resumed its sitting; it was six
o'clock.

I went home an instant to take some food; I then returned to the
Assembly, which had declared its sitting permanent. We soon learnt that
the members of the new Provisional Government had been arrested. Barbes
was impeached, as was that old fool of a Courtais, who deserved a sound
thrashing and no more. Many wished to include Louis Blanc, who, however,
had pluckily undertaken to defend himself; he had just escaped with
difficulty from the fury of the National Guards at the door, and still
wore his torn clothes, covered with dust and all disordered. This time
he did not send for the stool on which he used to climb in order to
bring his head above the level of the rostrum balustrade (for he was
almost a dwarf); he even forgot the effect he wished to produce, and
thought only of what he had to say. In spite of that, or rather because
of that, he won his case for the moment. I never considered him to
possess talent except on that one day; for I do not call talent the art
of polishing brilliant and hollow phrases, which are like finely chased
dishes containing nothing.

For the rest, I was so fatigued by the excitement of the day that I have
retained but a dull, indistinct remembrance of the night sitting. I
shall therefore say no more, for I wish only to record my personal
impressions: for facts in detail it is the _Moniteur_, not I, that
should be consulted.




CHAPTER VIII

     THE FEAST OF CONCORD AND THE PREPARATIONS FOR THE DAYS OF JUNE.


The revolutionaries of 1848, unwilling or unable to imitate the
bloodthirsty follies of their predecessors, consoled themselves by
imitating their ludicrous follies. They took it into their heads to give
the people a series of grand allegorical festivals.

Despite the terrible condition of the finances, the Provisional
Government had decided that a sum of one or two millions should be spent
upon celebrating the Feast of Concord in the Champ-de-Mars.

According to the programme, which was published in advance and
faithfully followed out, the Champ-de-Mars was to be filled with figures
representing all sorts of persons, virtues, political institutions, and
even public services. France, Germany and Italy, hand in hand; Equality,
Liberty and Fraternity, also hand in hand; Agriculture, Commerce, the
Army, the Navy and, above all, the Republic; the last of colossal
dimensions. A car was to be drawn by sixteen plough-horses: "this car,"
said the programme aforesaid, "will be of a simple and rustic shape, and
will carry three trees, an oak, a laurel, and an olive tree,
symbolizing strength, honour, and plenty; and, moreover, a plough in the
midst of a group of flowers and ears of corn. Ploughmen and young girls
dressed in white will surround the car, singing patriotic hymns." We
were also promised oxen with gilded horns, but did not get them.

The National Assembly had not the smallest desire to see all these
beautiful things; it even feared lest the immense gathering of people
which was sure to be occasioned should produce some dangerous riot.
Accordingly, it put the date as far back as possible; but the
preparations were made, there was no possibility of going back from it,
and the date was fixed for the 21st of May.

On that day I went early to the Assembly, which was to proceed on foot,
in a body, to the Champ-de-Mars. I had put my pistols in my pockets, and
in talking to my colleagues I discovered that most of them were secretly
armed, like myself: one had taken a sword-stick, another a dagger;
nearly all carried some weapon of defence. Edmond de La Fayette showed
me a weapon of a peculiar kind. It was a ball of lead sewn into a short
leathern thong which could easily be fastened to the arm: one might have
called it a portable club. La Fayette declared that this little
instrument was being widely carried by the National Assembly, especially
since the 15th of May. It was thus that we proceeded to this Feast of
Concord.

A sinister rumour ran that some great danger awaited the Assembly when
it should cross through the crowd of the Champ-de-Mars and take up its
place on the stage reserved for it outside the Military College. As a
matter of fact, nothing could have been easier than to make it the
object of an unexpected attack during this progress, which it made on
foot and, so to speak, unguarded. Its real safeguard lay in the
recollection of the 15th of May, and that sufficed. It very rarely
happens, whatever opportunity may present itself, that a body is
affronted the day after its triumph. Moreover, the French never do two
things at a time. Their minds often change their object, but they are
always devoted wholly to that occupying them at the moment, and I
believe there is no precedent of their making an insurrection in the
middle of a fete or even of a ceremony. On this day, therefore, the
people seemed to enter willingly into the fictitious idea of its
happiness, and for a moment to place on one side the recollection of its
miseries and its hatreds. It was animated, without being turbulent. The
programme had stated that a "fraternal confusion" was to prevail. There
was, it is true, extreme confusion, but no disorder; for we are strange
people: we cannot do without the police when we are orderly, and so soon
as we start a revolution, the police seem superfluous. The sight of this
popular joyfulness enraptured the moderate and sincere Republicans, and
made them almost maudlin. Carnot observed to me, with that silliness
which the honest democrat always mingles with his virtue:

"Believe me, my dear colleague, one should always trust the people."

I remember rather brusquely replying, "Ah! why didn't you tell me that
before the 15th?"

The Executive Commission occupied one half of the immense stage that had
been erected along the Military College, and the National Assembly the
other. There first defiled past us the different emblems of all nations,
which took an enormous time, because of the fraternal confusion of which
the programme spoke. Then came the car, and then the young girls dressed
in white. There were at least three hundred of them, who wore their
virginal costume in so virile a fashion that they might have been taken
for boys dressed up as girls. Each had been given a big bouquet to
carry, which they were so gallant as to throw to us as they passed. As
these gossips were the owners of very nervous arms, and were more
accustomed, I should think, to using the laundress's beetle than to
strewing flowers, the bouquets fell down upon us in a very hard and
uncomfortable hail-storm.

One tall girl left her companions and, stopping in front of Lamartine,
recited an ode to his glory. Gradually she grew excited in talking, so
much so that she pulled a terrible face and began to make the most
alarming contortions. Never had enthusiasm seemed to me to come so near
to epilepsy. When she had finished, the people insisted at all costs
that Lamartine should kiss her; she offered him two fat cheeks,
streaming with perspiration, which he touched with the tip of his lips
and with indifferent bad grace.

The only serious portion of the fete was the review. I have never seen
so many armed men in one spot in my life, and I believe that few have
seen more. Apart from the innumerable crowd of sight-seers in the
Champ-de-Mars, one saw an entire people under arms. The _Moniteur_
estimated the number of National Guards and soldiers of the line who
were there at three hundred thousand. This seemed to me to be
exaggerated, but I do not think that the number could be reduced to less
than two hundred thousand.

The spectacle of those two hundred thousand bayonets will never leave my
memory. As the men who carried them were tightly pressed against one
another, so as to be able to keep within the slopes of the
Champ-de-Mars, and as we, from our but slightly raised position, could
only throw an almost horizontal glance upon them, they formed, to our
eyes, a flat and lightly undulating surface, which flashed in the sun
and made the Champ-de-Mars resemble a great lake filled with liquid
steel.

All these men marched past us in succession, and we noticed that this
army numbered many more muskets than uniforms. Only the legions from the
wealthier parts of the town presented a large number of National Guards
clad in military uniform. They were the first to appear, and shouted,
"Long live the National Assembly!" with much enthusiasm. In the legions
from the suburbs, which formed in themselves veritable armies, one saw
little but jackets and blouses, though this did not prevent them from
marching with a very warlike aspect. Most of them, as they passed us,
were content to shout, "Long live the Democratic Republic!" or to sing
the _Marseillaise_ or the song of the _Girondins_. Next came the legions
of the outskirts, composed of peasants, badly equipped, badly armed, and
dressed in blouses like the workmen of the suburbs, but filled with a
very different spirit to that of the latter, as they showed by their
cries and gestures. The battalions of the Garde Mobile uttered various
exclamations, which left us full of doubt and anxiety as to the
intention of these lads, or rather children, who at that time more than
any other held our destinies in their hands.

The regiments of the line, who closed the review, marched past in
silence.

I witnessed this long parade with a heart filled with sadness. Never at
any time had so many arms been placed at once into the hands of the
people. It will be easily believed that I shared neither the simple
confidence nor the stupid happiness of my friend Carnot; I foresaw, on
the contrary, that all the bayonets I saw glittering in the sun would
soon be raised against each other, and I felt that I was at a review of
the two armies of the civil war that was just concluded. In the course
of that day I still heard frequent shouts of "Long live Lamartine!"
although his great popularity was already waning. In fact, one might say
it was over, were it not that in every crowd one meets with a large
number of belated individuals who are stirred with the enthusiasm of
yesterday, like the provincials who begin to adopt the Paris mode on the
day when the Parisians abandon it.

Lamartine hastened to withdraw from this last ray of his sun: he retired
long before the ceremony was finished. He looked weary and care-worn.
Many members of the Assembly, also overcome with fatigue, followed his
example, and the review ended in front of almost empty benches. It had
begun early and ended at night-fall.

The whole time elapsing between the review of the 21st of May and the
days of June was filled with the anxiety caused by the approach of these
latter days. Every day fresh alarms came and called out the army and the
National Guard; the artisans and shopkeepers no longer lived at home,
but in the public places and under arms. Each one fervently desired to
avoid the necessity of a conflict, and all vaguely felt that this
necessity was becoming more inevitable from day to day. The National
Assembly was so constantly possessed by this thought that one might have
said that it read the words "Civil War" written on the four walls of the
House.

On all sides great efforts of prudence and patience were being made to
prevent, or at least delay, the crisis. Members who in their hearts were
most hostile to the revolution were careful to restrain any expressions
of sympathy or antipathy; the old parliamentary orators were silent,
lest the sound of their voices should give umbrage; they left the
rostrum to the new-comers, who themselves but rarely occupied it, for
the great debates had ceased. As is common in all assemblies, that which
most disturbed the members' minds was that of which they spoke least,
though it was proved that each day they thought of it. All sorts of
measures to help the misery of the people were proposed and discussed.
We even entered readily into an examination of the different socialistic
systems, and each strove in all good faith to discover in these
something applicable to, or at least compatible with, the ancient laws
of Society.

During this time, the national workshops continued to fill; their
population already exceeded one hundred thousand men. It was felt that
we could not live if they were kept on, and it was feared that we should
perish if we tried to dismiss them. This burning question of the
national workshops was treated daily, but superficially and timidly; it
was constantly touched upon, but never firmly taken in hand.

On the other hand, it was clear that, outside the Assembly, the
different parties, while dreading the contest, were actively preparing
for it. The wealthy legions of the National Guard offered banquets to
the army and to the Garde Mobile, in which they mutually urged each
other to unite for the common defence.

The workmen of the suburbs, on their side, were secretly amassing that
great number of cartridges which enabled them later to sustain so long a
contest. As to the muskets, the Provisional Government had taken care
that these should be supplied in profusion; one could safely say that
there was not a workman who did not possess at least one, and sometimes
several.

The danger was perceived afar off as well as near at hand. The provinces
grew indignant and irritated with Paris; for the first time for sixty
years they ventured to entertain the idea of resisting it; the people
armed themselves and encouraged each other to come to the assistance of
the Assembly; they sent it thousands of addresses congratulating it on
its victory of the 15th of May. The ruin of commerce, universal war, the
dread of Socialism made the Republic more and more hateful in the eyes
of the provinces. This hatred manifested itself especially beneath the
secrecy of the ballot. The electors were called upon to re-elect in
twenty-one departments; and in general they elected the men who in their
eyes represented the Monarchy in some form or other. M. Mole was elected
at Bordeaux, and M. Thiers at Rouen.

It was then that suddenly, for the first time, the name of Louis
Napoleon came into notice. The Prince was elected at the same time in
Paris and in several departments. Republicans, Legitimists and
demagogues gave him their votes; for the nation at that time was like a
frightened flock of sheep, which runs in all directions without
following any road. I little thought, when I heard that Louis Napoleon
had been nominated, that exactly a year later I should be his minister.
I confess that I beheld the return of the old parliamentary leaders with
considerable apprehension and regret; not that I failed to do justice to
their talent and discretion, but I feared lest their approach should
drive back towards the Mountain the moderate Republicans who were coming
towards us. Moreover, I knew them too well not to see that, so soon as
they had returned to political life, they would wish to lead it, and
that it would not suit them to save the country unless they could govern
it. Now an enterprise of this sort seemed to me both premature and
dangerous. Our duty and theirs was to assist the moderate Republicans to
govern the Republic without seeking to govern it indirectly ourselves,
and especially without appearing to have this in view.

For my part, I never doubted but that we were on the eve of a terrible
struggle; nevertheless, I did not fully understand our danger until
after a conversation that I had about this time with the celebrated
Madame Sand. I met her at an Englishman's of my acquaintance:
Milnes,[10] a member of Parliament, who was then in Paris. Milnes was a
clever fellow who did and, what is rarer, said many foolish things. What
a number of those faces I have seen in my life of which one can say that
the two profiles are not alike: men of sense on one side, fools on the
other. I have always seen Milnes infatuated with something or somebody.
This time he was smitten with Madame Sand, and notwithstanding the
seriousness of events, had insisted on giving her a literary _dejeuner_.
I was present at this repast, and the image of the days of June, which
followed so closely after, far from effacing the remembrance of it from
my mind, recalls it.

     [10: The Right Honble. Monckton Milnes, the late Lord
     Houghton.--A.T. de M.]

The company was anything but homogeneous. Besides Madame Sand, I met a
young English lady, very modest and very agreeable, who must have found
the company invited to meet her somewhat singular; some more or less
obscure writers; and Merimee. Milnes placed me next to Madame Sand. I
had never spoken to her, and I doubt whether I had ever seen her (I had
lived little in the world of literary adventurers which she frequented).
One of my friends asked her one day what she thought of my book on
America, and she answered, "Monsieur, I am only accustomed to read the
books which are presented to me by their authors." I was strongly
prejudiced against Madame Sand, for I loathe women who write,
especially those who systematically disguise the weaknesses of their
sex, instead of interesting us by displaying them in their true
character. Nevertheless, she pleased me. I thought her features rather
massive, but her expression admirable: all her mind seemed to have taken
refuge in her eyes, abandoning the rest of her face to matter; and I was
particularly struck at meeting in her with something of the naturalness
of behaviour of great minds. She had a real simplicity of manner and
language, which she mingled, perhaps, with some little affectation of
simplicity in her dress. I confess that, more adorned, she would have
appeared still more simple. We talked for a whole hour of public
affairs; it was impossible to talk of anything else in those days.
Besides, Madame Sand at that time was a sort of politician, and what she
said on the subject struck me greatly; it was the first time that I had
entered into direct and familiar communication with a person able and
willing to tell me what was happening in the camp of our adversaries.
Political parties never know each other: they approach, touch, seize,
but never see one another. Madame Sand depicted to me, in great detail
and with singular vivacity, the condition of the Paris workmen, their
organization, their numbers, their arms, their preparations, their
thoughts, their passions, their terrible resolves. I thought the picture
overloaded, but it was not, as subsequent events clearly proved. She
seemed to be alarmed for herself at the popular triumph, and to take
the greatest pity upon the fate that awaited us.

"Try to persuade your friends, monsieur," she said, "not to force the
people into the streets by alarming or irritating them. I also wish that
I could instil patience into my own friends; for if it comes to a fight,
believe me, you will all be killed."

With these consoling words we parted, and I have never seen her since.




CHAPTER IX

     THE DAYS OF JUNE.


I come at last to the insurrection of June, the most extensive and the
most singular that has occurred in our history, and perhaps in any
other: the most extensive, because, during four days, more than a
hundred thousand men were engaged in it; the most singular, because the
insurgents fought without a war-cry, without leaders, without flags, and
yet with a marvellous harmony and an amount of military experience that
astonished the oldest officers.

What distinguished it also, among all the events of this kind which have
succeeded one another in France for sixty years, is that it did not aim
at changing the form of government, but at altering the order of
society. It was not, strictly speaking, a political struggle, in the
sense which until then we had given to the word, but a combat of class
against class, a sort of Servile War. It represented the facts of the
Revolution of February in the same manner as the theories of Socialism
represented its ideas; or rather it issued naturally from these ideas,
as a son does from his mother. We behold in it nothing more than a blind
and rude, but powerful, effort on the part of the workmen to escape from
the necessities of their condition, which had been depicted to them as
one of unlawful oppression, and to open up by main force a road towards
that imaginary comfort with which they had been deluded. It was this
mixture of greed and false theory which first gave birth to the
insurrection and then made it so formidable. These poor people had been
told that the wealth of the rich was in some way the produce of a theft
practised upon themselves. They had been assured that the inequality of
fortunes was as opposed to morality and the welfare of society as it was
to nature. Prompted by their needs and their passions, many had believed
this obscure and erroneous notion of right, which, mingled with brute
force, imparted to the latter an energy, a tenacity and a power which it
would never have possessed unaided.

It must also be observed that this formidable insurrection was not the
enterprise of a certain number of conspirators, but the revolt of one
whole section of the population against another. Women took part in it
as well as men. While the latter fought, the former prepared and carried
ammunition; and when at last the time had come to surrender, the women
were the last to yield. These women went to battle with, as it were, a
housewifely ardour: they looked to victory for the comfort of their
husbands and the education of their children. They took pleasure in this
war as they might have taken pleasure in a lottery.

As to the strategic science displayed by this multitude, the warlike
nature of the French, their long experience of insurrections, and
particularly the military education which the majority of the men of the
people in turn receive, suffice to explain it. Half of the Paris workmen
have served in our armies, and they are always glad to take up arms
again. Generally speaking, old soldiers abound in our riots. On the 24th
of February, when Lamoriciere was surrounded by his foes, he twice owed
his life to insurgents who had fought under him in Africa, men in whom
the recollection of their military life had been stronger than the fury
of civil war.

As we know, it was the closing of the national workshops that occasioned
the rising. Dreading to disband this formidable soldiery at one stroke,
the Government had tried to disperse it by sending part of the workmen
into the country. They refused to leave. On the 22nd of June, they
marched through Paris in troops, singing in cadence, in a monotonous
chant, "We won't be sent away, we won't be sent away...." Their
delegates waited upon the members of the Committee of the Executive
Power with a series of arrogant demands, and on meeting with a refusal,
withdrew with the announcement that next day they would have recourse to
arms. Everything, indeed, tended to show that the long-expected crisis
had come.

When this news reached the Assembly it caused the greatest alarm.
Nevertheless, the Assembly did not interrupt its order of the day; it
continued the discussion of a commercial act, and even listened to it,
despite its excited condition; true, it was a very important question
and a very eminent orator was speaking. The Government had proposed to
acquire all the railways by purchase. Montalembert opposed it; his case
was good, but his speech was excellent; I do not think I ever heard him
speak so well before or since. As a matter of fact, I thought as he did,
this time; but I believe that, even in the eyes of his adversaries, he
surpassed himself. He made a vigorous attack without being as peevish
and outrageous as usual. A certain fear tempered his natural insolence,
and set a limit to his paradoxical and querulous humour; for, like so
many other men of words, he had more temerity of language than stoutness
of heart.

The sitting concluded without any question as to what was occurring
outside, and the Assembly adjourned.

On the 23rd, on going to the Assembly, I saw a large number of omnibuses
grouped round the Madeleine. This told me that they were beginning to
erect barricades in the streets; which was confirmed on my arrival at
the Palace. Nevertheless, a doubt was expressed whether it was seriously
contemplated to resort to arms. I resolved to go and assure myself of
the real state of things, and, with Corcelles, repaired to the
neighbourhood of the Hotel de Ville. In all the little streets
surrounding that building, I found the people engaged in making
barricades; they proceeded in their work with the cunning and regularity
of an engineer, not unpaving more stones than were necessary to lay the
foundations of a very thick, solid and even neatly-built wall, in which
they generally left a small opening by the side of the houses to permit
of ingress and egress. Eager for quicker information as to the state of
the town, Corcelles and I agreed to separate. He went one way and I the
other; and his excursion very nearly turned out badly. He told me
afterwards that, after crossing several half-built barricades without
impediment, he was stopped at the last one. The men of the lower orders
who were building it, seeing a fine gentleman, in black clothes and very
white linen, quietly trotting through the dirty streets round the Hotel
de Ville and stopping before them with a placid and inquisitive air,
thought they would make use of this suspicious onlooker. They called
upon him, in the name of the brotherhood, to assist them in their work.
Corcelles was as brave as Caesar, but he rightly judged that, under these
circumstances, there was nothing better to be done than to give way
quietly. See him therefore lifting paving-stones and placing them as
neatly as possible one atop the other. His natural awkwardness and his
absent-mindedness fortunately came to his aid; and he was soon sent
about his business as a useless workman.

To me no such adventure happened. I passed through the streets of the
Saint-Martin and Saint-Denis quarters without coming across any
barricades to speak of; but the excitement was extraordinary. On my
return I met, in the Rue des Jeuneurs, a National Guard covered with
blood and fragments of brain. He was very pale and was going home. I
asked him what was happening; he told me that his battalion had just
received the full force of a very murderous discharge of musketry at the
Porte Saint-Denis. One of his comrades, whose name he mentioned to me,
had been killed by his side, and he was covered with the blood and
brains of this unhappy man.

I returned to the Assembly, astonished at not having met a single
soldier in the whole distance which I had traversed. It was not till I
came in front of the Palais-Bourbon that I at last perceived great
columns of infantry, marching, followed by cannon.

Lamoriciere, in full uniform and on horseback, was at their head. I have
never seen a figure more resplendent with aggressive passion and almost
with joy; and whatever may have been the natural impetuosity of his
humour, I doubt whether it was that alone which urged him at that
moment, and whether there was not mingled with it an eagerness to avenge
himself for the dangers and outrages he had undergone.

"What are you doing?" I asked him. "They have already been fighting at
the Porte Saint-Denis, and barricades are being built all round the
Hotel de Ville."

"Patience," he replied, "we are going there. Do you think we are such
fools as to scatter our soldiers on such a day as this over the small
streets of the suburbs? No, no! we shall let the insurgents concentrate
in the quarters which we can't keep them out of, and then we will go and
destroy them. They sha'n't escape us this time."

As I reached the Assembly, a terrible storm broke, which flooded the
town. I entertained a slight hope that this bad weather would get us out
of our difficulties for the day, and it would, indeed, have been enough
to put a stop to an ordinary riot; for the people of Paris need fine
weather to fight in, and are more afraid of rain than of grape-shot. But
I soon lost this hope: each moment the news became more distressing. The
Assembly found difficulty in resuming its ordinary work. Agitated,
though not overcome, by the excitement outside, it suspended the order
of the day, returned to it, and finally suspended it for good, giving
itself over to the preoccupations of the civil war. Different members
came and described from the rostrum what they had seen in Paris. Others
suggested various courses of action. Falloux, in the name of the
Committee of Public Assistance, proposed a decree dissolving the
national workshops, and received applause. Time was wasted with empty
conversations, empty speeches. Nothing was known for certain; they kept
on calling for the attendance of the Executive Commission, to inform
them of the state of Paris, but the latter did not appear. There is
nothing more pitiful than the spectacle of an assembly in a moment of
crisis, when the Government itself fails it; it resembles a man still
full of will and passion, but impotent, and tossing childishly amid the
helplessness of his limbs. At last appeared two members of the Executive
Commission; they announced that affairs were in a perilous condition,
but that, nevertheless, it was hoped to crush the insurrection before
night. The Assembly declared its sitting permanent, and adjourned till
the evening.

When the sitting was resumed, we learnt that Lamartine had been received
with shots at all the barricades he attempted to approach. Two of our
colleagues, Bixio and Dornes, had been mortally wounded when trying to
address the insurgents. Bedeau had been shot through the thigh at the
entrance to the Faubourg Saint-Jacques, and a number of officers of
distinction were already killed or dangerously wounded. One of our
members, Victor Considerant, spoke of making concessions to the workmen.
The Assembly, which was tumultuous and disturbed, but not weak, revolted
at these words: "Order, order!" they cried on every side, with a sort of
rage, "it will be time to talk of that after the victory!" The rest of
the evening and a portion of the night were spent in vaguely talking,
listening, and waiting. About midnight, Cavaignac appeared. The
Executive Commission had since that afternoon placed the whole military
power in his hands. In a hoarse and jerky voice, and in simple and
precise words, Cavaignac detailed the principal incidents of the day. He
stated that he had given orders to all the regiments posted along the
railways to converge upon Paris, and that all the National Guards of the
outskirts had been called out; he concluded by telling us that the
insurgents had been beaten back to the barriers, and that he hoped soon
to have mastered the city. The Assembly, exhausted with fatigue, left
its officials sitting in permanence, and adjourned until eight o'clock
the next morning.

When, on quitting this turbulent scene, I found myself at one in the
morning on the Pont Royal, and from there beheld Paris wrapped in
darkness, and calm as a city asleep, it was with difficulty that I
persuaded myself that all that I had seen and heard since the morning
had existed in reality and was not a pure creation of my brain. The
streets and squares which I crossed were absolutely deserted; not a
sound, not a cry; one would have said that an industrious population,
fatigued with its day's work, was resting before resuming the peaceful
labours of the morrow. The serenity of the night ended by over-mastering
me; I brought myself to believe that we had triumphed already, and on
reaching home I went straight to sleep.

I woke very early in the morning. The sun had risen some time before,
for we were in the midst of the longest days of the year. On opening my
eyes, I heard a sharp, metallic sound, which shook the window-panes and
immediately died out amid the silence of Paris.

"What is that?" I asked.

My wife replied, "It is the cannon; I have heard it for over an hour,
but would not wake you, for I knew you would want your strength during
the day."

I dressed hurriedly and went out. The drums were beating to arms on
every side: the day of the great battle had come at last. The National
Guards left their homes under arms; all those I met seemed full of
energy, for the sound of cannon, which brought the brave ones out, kept
the others at home. But they were in bad humour: they thought themselves
either badly commanded or betrayed by the Executive Power, against which
they uttered terrible imprecations. This extreme distrust of its leaders
on the part of the armed force seemed to me an alarming symptom.
Continuing on my way, at the entrance to the Rue Saint-Honore, I met a
crowd of workmen anxiously listening to the cannon. These men were all
in blouses, which, as we know, constitute their fighting as well as
their working clothes; nevertheless, they had no arms, but one could see
by their looks that they were quite ready to take them up. They
remarked, with a hardly restrained joy, that the sound of the firing
seemed to come nearer, which showed that the insurrection was gaining
ground. I had augured before this that the whole of the working class
was engaged, either in fact or in spirit, in the struggle; and this
confirmed my suspicions. The spirit of insurrection circulated from one
end to the other of this immense class, and in each of its parts, as the
blood does in the body; it filled the quarters where there was no
fighting, as well as those which served as the scene of battle; it had
penetrated into our houses, around, above, below us. The very places in
which we thought ourselves the masters swarmed with domestic enemies;
one might say that an atmosphere of civil war enveloped the whole of
Paris, amid which, to whatever part we withdrew, we had to live; and in
this connection I shall violate the law I had imposed upon myself never
to speak upon the word of another, and will relate a fact which I learnt
a few days later from my colleague Blanqui.[11] Although very trivial, I
consider it very characteristic of the physiognomy of the time. Blanqui
had brought up from the country and taken into his house, as a servant,
the son of a poor man, whose wretchedness had touched him. On the
evening of the day on which the insurrection began, he heard this lad
say, as he was clearing the table after dinner, "Next Sunday [it was
Thursday then] _we_ shall be eating the wings of the chicken;" to which
a little girl who worked in the house replied, "And _we_ shall be
wearing fine silk dresses." Could anything give a better idea of the
general state of minds than this childish scene? And to complete it,
Blanqui was very careful not to seem to hear these little monkeys: they
really frightened him. It was not until after the victory that he
ventured to send back the ambitious pair to their hovels.

     [11: Of the Institute, a brother of Blanqui of the 15th of May.]

At last I reached the Assembly. The representatives were gathered in
crowds, although the time appointed for the sitting was not yet come.
The sound of the cannon had attracted them. The Palace had the
appearance of a fortified town: battalions were encamped around, and
guns were levelled at all the approaches leading to it.

I found the Assembly very determined, but very ill at ease; and it must
be confessed there was enough to make it so. It was easy to perceive
through the multitude of contradictory reports that we had to do with
the most universal, the best armed, and the most furious insurrection
ever known in Paris. The national workshops and various revolutionary
bands that had just been disbanded supplied it with trained and
disciplined soldiers and with leaders. It was extending every moment,
and it was difficult to believe that it would not end by being
victorious, when one remembered that all the great insurrections of the
last sixty years had triumphed. To all these enemies we were only able
to oppose the battalions of the _bourgeoisie_, regiments which had been
disarmed in February, and twenty thousand undisciplined lads of the
Garde Mobile, who were all sons, brothers, or near relations of
insurgents, and whose dispositions were doubtful.

But what alarmed us most was our leaders. The members of the Executive
Commission filled us with profound distrust. On this subject I
encountered, in the Assembly, the same feelings which I had observed
among the National Guard. We doubted the good faith of some and the
capacity of others. They were too numerous, besides, and too much
divided to be able to act in complete harmony, and they were too much
men of speech and the pen to be able to act to good purpose under such
circumstances, even if they had agreed among themselves.

Nevertheless, we succeeded in triumphing over this so formidable
insurrection; nay more, it was just that which rendered it so terrible
which saved us. One might well apply in this case the famous phrase of
the Prince de Conde, during the wars of religion: "We should have been
destroyed, had we not been so near destruction." Had the revolt borne a
less radical character and a less ferocious aspect, it is probable that
the greater part of the middle class would have stayed at home; France
would not have come to our aid; the National Assembly itself would
perhaps have yielded, or at least a minority of its members would have
advised it; and the energy of the whole body would have been greatly
unnerved. But the insurrection was of such a nature that any commerce
with it became at once impossible, and from the first it left us no
alternative but to defeat it or to be destroyed ourselves.

The same reason prevented any man of consideration from placing himself
at its head. In general, insurrections--I mean even those which
succeed--begin without a leader; but they always end by securing one.
This insurrection finished without having found one; it embraced every
class of the populace, but never passed those limits. Even the
Montagnards in the Assembly did not dare pronounce in its favour.
Several pronounced against it. They did not even yet despair of
attaining their ends by other means; they feared, moreover, that the
triumph of the workmen would soon prove fatal to them. The greedy, blind
and vulgar passions which induced the populace to take up arms alarmed
them; for these passions are as dangerous to those who sympathize with
them, without utterly abandoning themselves to them, as to those who
reprove and combat them. The only men who could have placed themselves
at the head of the insurgents had allowed themselves to be prematurely
taken, like fools, on the 15th of May; and they only heard the sound of
the conflict through the walls of the dungeon of Vincennes.

Preoccupied though I was with public affairs, I continued to be
distressed with the uneasiness which my young nephews once more caused
me. They had been sent back to the Little Seminary, and I feared
that the insurrection must come pretty near, if it had not already
reached, the place where they lived. As their parents were not in
Paris, I decided to go and fetch them, and I accordingly again traversed
the long distance separating the Palais-Bourbon from the Rue
Notre-Dame-des-Champs. I came across a few barricades erected during the
night by the forlorn hope of the insurrection; but these had been either
abandoned or captured at daybreak.

All these quarters resounded with a devilish music, a mixture of drums
and trumpets, whose rough, discordant, savage notes were new to me. In
fact, I heard for the first time--and I have never heard it since--the
rally, which it had been decided should never be beaten except in
extreme cases and to call the whole population at once to arms.
Everywhere National Guards were issuing from the houses; everywhere
stood groups of workmen in blouses, listening with a sinister air to the
rally and the cannon. The fighting had not yet reached so far as the Rue
Notre-Dame-des-Champs, although it was very near it. I took my nephews
with me, and returned to the Chamber.

As I approached, and when I was already in the midst of the troops which
guarded it, an old woman, pushing a barrow full of vegetables,
obstinately barred my progress. I ended by telling her pretty curtly to
make way. Instead of doing so, she left her barrow and flew at me in
such a frenzy that I had great difficulty in protecting myself. I was
horrified at the hideous and frightful expression of her face, on which
were depicted all the fury of demagogic passion and the rage of civil
war. I mention this little fact because I beheld in it, and with good
cause, an important symptom. In violently critical times, even actions
which have nothing to do with politics assume a singular character of
anger and disorder, which does not escape the attentive eye, and which
is an unfailing index of the general state of mind. These great public
excitements form a sort of glowing atmosphere in which all private
passions seethe and bubble.

I found the Assembly agitated by a thousand sinister reports. The
insurrection was gaining ground in every direction. Its head-quarters,
or, so to speak, its trunk, was behind the Hotel de Ville, whence it
stretched its long arms further and further to right and left into the
suburbs, and threatened soon to hug even us. The cannon was drawing
appreciably nearer. And to this correct news were added a thousand lying
rumours. Some said that our troops were running short of ammunition;
others, that a number of them had laid down their arms or gone over to
the insurgents.

M. Thiers asked Barrot, Dufaure, Remusat, Lanjuinais and myself to
follow him to a private room. There he said:

"I know something of insurrections, and I tell you this is the worst I
have ever seen. The insurgents may be here within an hour, and we shall
be butchered one and all. Do you not think that it would be well for us
to agree to propose to the Assembly, so soon as we think necessary and
before it becomes too late, that it should call back the troops around
it, in order that, placed in their midst, we may all leave Paris
together and remove the seat of the Republic to a place where we could
summon the army and all the National Guards in France to our
assistance?"

He said this in very eager tones and with a greater display of
excitement than is, perhaps, advisable in the presence of great danger.
I saw that he was pursued by the ghost of February. Dufaure, who had a
less vivid imagination, and who, moreover, never readily made up his
mind to associate himself with people he did not care about, even to
save himself, phlegmatically and somewhat sarcastically explained that
the time had not yet come to discuss a plan of this kind; that we could
always talk of it later on; that our chances did not seem to him so
desperate as to oblige us to entertain so extreme a remedy; that to
entertain it was to weaken ourselves. He was undoubtedly right, and his
words broke up the consultation. I at once wrote a few lines to my wife,
telling her that the danger was hourly increasing, that Paris would
perhaps end by falling entirely into the power of the revolt, and that,
in that case, we should be obliged to leave it in order to carry on the
civil war elsewhere. I charged her to go at once to Saint-Germain by
the railroad, which was still free, and there to await my news; told my
nephews to take the letter; and returned to the Assembly. I found them
discussing a decree to proclaim Paris in a state of siege, to abolish
the powers of the Executive Commission, and to replace it by a military
dictatorship under General Cavaignac.

The Assembly knew precisely that this was what it wanted. The thing was
easily done: it was urgent, and yet it was not done. Each moment some
little incident, some trivial motion interrupted and turned aside the
current of the general wish; for assemblies are very liable to that sort
of nightmare in which an unknown and invisible force seems always at the
last moment to interpose between the will and the deed and to prevent
the one from influencing the other. Who would have thought that it was
Bastide who should eventually induce the Assembly to make up its mind?
Yet he it was.

I had heard him say--and it was very true--speaking of himself, that he
was never able to remember more than the first fifteen words of a
speech. But I have sometimes observed that men who do not know how to
speak produce a greater impression, under certain circumstances, than
the finest orators. They bring forward but a single idea, that of the
moment, clothed in a single phrase, and somehow they lay it down in the
rostrum like an inscription written in big letters, which everybody
perceives, and in which each instantly recognizes his own particular
thought. Bastide, then, displayed his long, honest, melancholy face in
the tribune, and said, with a mournful air:

"Citizens, in the name of the country, I beseech you to vote as quickly
as possible. We are told that perhaps within an hour the Hotel de Ville
will be taken."

These few words put an end to debate, and the decree was voted in the
twinkling of an eye.

I protested against the clause proclaiming Paris in a state of siege; I
did so by instinct rather than reflection. I have such a contempt and so
great a natural horror for military despotism that these feelings came
rising tumultuously in my breast when I heard a state of siege
suggested, and even dominated those prompted by our peril. In this I
made a mistake in which I fortunately found few to imitate me.

The friends of the Executive Commission have asserted in very bitter
terms that their adversaries and the partisans of General Cavaignac
spread ominous rumours on purpose to precipitate the vote. If the latter
did really resort to this trick, I gladly pardon them, for the measures
they caused to be taken were indispensable to the safety of the country.

Before adopting the decree of which I have spoken, the Assembly
unanimously voted another, which declared that the families of those who
should fall in the struggle should receive a pension from the Treasury
and their children be adopted by the Republic.

It was decided that sixty members of the Chamber, appointed by the
committees, should spread themselves over Paris, inform the National
Guards of the different decrees issued by the Assembly, and re-establish
their confidence, which was said to be uncertain and discouraged. In the
committee to which I belonged, instead of immediately appointing
commissioners, they began an endless discussion on the uselessness and
danger of the resolution adopted. In this manner a great deal of time
was lost. I ended by stopping this ludicrous chatter with a word.
"Gentlemen," I said, "the Assembly may have been mistaken; but permit me
to observe that, having passed a two-fold resolution, it would be a
disgrace for it to draw back, and a disgrace for us not to submit."

They voted on the spot; and I was unanimously elected a commissioner, as
I expected. My colleagues were Cormenin and Cremieux, to whom they added
Goudchaux. The latter was then not so well known, although in his own
way he was the most original of them all. He was at once a Radical and a
banker, a rare combination; and by dint of his business occupations, he
had succeeded by covering with a few reasonable ideas the foundation of
his mind, which was filled with mad theories that always ended by making
their way to the top. It was impossible to be vainer, more irascible,
more quarrelsome, petulant or excitable than he. He was unable to
discuss the difficulties of the Budget without shedding tears; and yet
he was one of the valiantest little men it was possible to meet.

Thanks to the stormy discussion in our committee, the other deputations
had already left, and with them the guides and the escort who were to
have accompanied us. Nevertheless, we set out, after putting on our
scarves, and turned our steps alone and a little at hazard towards the
interior of Paris, along the right bank of the Seine. By that time the
insurrection had made such progress that one could see the cannon drawn
up in line and firing between the Pont des Arts and the Pont Neuf. The
National Guards, who saw us from the top of the embankment, looked at us
with anxiety; they respectfully took off their hats, and said in an
undertone, and with grief-stricken accents, "Long live the National
Assembly!" No noisy cheers uttered at the sight of a king ever came more
visibly from the heart, or pointed to a more unfeigned sympathy. When we
had passed through the gates and were on the Carrousel, I saw that
Cormenin and Cremieux were imperceptibly making for the Tuileries, and I
heard one of them, I forget which, say:

"Where can we go? And what can we do of any use without guides? Is it
not best to content ourselves with going through the Tuileries gardens?
There are several battalions of the reserve stationed there; we will
inform them of the decrees of the Assembly."

"Certainly," replied the other; "I even think we shall be executing the
Assembly's instructions better than our colleagues; for what can one say
to people already engaged in action? It is the reserves that we should
prepare to fall into line in their turn."

I have always thought it rather interesting to follow the involuntary
movements of fear in clever people. Fools coarsely display their
cowardice in all its nakedness; but the others are able to cover it with
a veil so delicate, so daintily woven with small, plausible lies, that
there is some pleasure to be found in contemplating this ingenious work
of the brain.

As may be supposed, I was in no humour for a stroll in the Tuileries
gardens. I had set out in none too good a temper; but it was no good
crying over spilt milk. I therefore pointed out to Goudchaux the road
our colleagues had taken.

"I know," he said, angrily; "I shall leave them and I will make public
the decrees of the Assembly without them."

Together we made for the gate opposite. Cormenin and Cremieux soon
rejoined us, a little ashamed of their attempt. Thus we reached the Rue
Saint-Honore, the appearance of which was perhaps what struck me most
during the days of June. This noisy, populous street was at this moment
more deserted than I had ever seen it at four o'clock on a winter
morning. As far as the eye could reach, we perceived not a living soul;
the shops, doors and windows were hermetically closed. Nothing was
visible, nothing stirred; we heard no sound of a wheel, no clatter of a
horse, no human footstep, but only the voice of the cannon, which seemed
to resound through an abandoned city. Yet the houses were not empty; for
as we walked on, we could catch glimpses at the windows of women and
children who, with their faces glued to the panes, watched us go by with
an affrighted air.

At last, near the Palais-Royal, we met some large bodies of National
Guards, and our mission commenced. When Cremieux saw that it was only a
question of talking, he became all ardour; he told them of what had
happened at the National Assembly, and held forth to them in a little
_bravura_ speech which was heartily applauded. We found an escort there,
and passed on. We wandered a long time through the little streets of
that district, until we came in front of the great barricade of the Rue
Rambuteau, which was not yet taken and which stopped our further
progress. From there we came back again through all those little
streets, which were covered with blood from the recent combats: they
were still fighting from time to time. For it was a war of ambuscades,
whose scene was not fixed but every moment changed. When one least
expected it, one was shot at through a garret window; and on breaking
into the house, one found the gun but not the marksman: the latter
escaped by a back-door while the front-door was being battered in. For
this reason the National Guards had orders to have all the shutters
opened, and to fire on all those who showed themselves at the windows;
and they obeyed these orders so literally that they narrowly escaped
killing several merely inquisitive people whom the sight of our scarves
tempted to put their noses outside.

During this walk of two or three hours, we had to make at least thirty
speeches; I refer to Cremieux and myself, for Goudchaux was only able to
speak on finance, and as to Cormenin, he was always as dumb as a fish.
To tell the truth, almost all the burden of the day fell upon Cremieux.
He filled me, I will not say with admiration, but with surprise. Janvier
has said of Cremieux that he was "an eloquent louse." If only he could
have seen him that day, jaded, with uncovered breast, dripping with
perspiration and dirty with dust, wrapped in a long scarf twisted
several times in every direction round his little body, but constantly
hitting upon new ideas, or rather new words and phrases, now expressing
in gestures what he had just expressed in words, then in words what he
had just expressed in gestures: always eloquent, always ardent! I do not
believe that anyone has ever seen, and I doubt whether anyone has ever
imagined, a man who was uglier or more fluent.

I observed that when the National Guards were told that Paris was in a
state of siege, they were pleased, and when one added that the Executive
Commission was overthrown, they cheered. Never were people so delighted
to be relieved of their liberty and their government. And yet this was
what Lamartine's popularity had come to in less than two months.

When we had done speaking, the men surrounded us; they asked us if we
were quite sure that the Executive Commission had ceased to act; we had
to show them the decree to satisfy them.

Particularly remarkable was the firm attitude of these men. We had come
to encourage them, and it was rather they who encouraged us. "Hold on at
the National Assembly," they cried, "and we'll hold on here. Courage! no
transactions with the insurgents! We'll put an end to the revolt: all
will end well." I had never seen the National Guard so resolute before,
nor do I think that we could rely upon finding it so again; for its
courage was prompted by necessity and despair, and proceeded from
circumstances which are not likely to recur.

Paris on that day reminded me of a city of antiquity whose citizens
defended the walls like heroes, because they knew that if the city were
taken they themselves would be dragged into slavery. As we turned our
steps back towards the Assembly, Goudchaux left us. "Now that we have
done our errand," said he, clenching his teeth, and in an accent half
Gascon and half Alsatian, "I want to go and fight a bit." He said this
with such a martial air, so little in harmony with his pacific
appearance, that I could not help smiling.

He did, in fact, go and fight, as I heard the next day, and so well that
he might have had his little paunch pierced in two or three places, had
fate so willed it. I returned from my round convinced that we should
come out victorious; and what I saw on nearing the Assembly confirmed my
opinion.

Thousands of men were hastening to our aid from every part of France,
and entering the city by all the roads not commanded by the insurgents.
Thanks to the railroads, some had already come from fifty leagues'
distance, although the fighting had only begun the night before. On the
next and the subsequent days, they came from distances of a hundred and
two hundred leagues. These men belonged indiscriminately to every class
of society; among them were many peasants, many shopkeepers, many
landlords and nobles, all mingled together in the same ranks. They were
armed in an irregular and insufficient manner, but they rushed into
Paris with unequalled ardour: a spectacle as strange and unprecedented
in our revolutionary annals as that offered by the insurrection itself.
It was evident from that moment that we should end by gaining the day,
for the insurgents received no reinforcements, whereas we had all France
for reserves.

On the Place Louis XV., I met, surrounded by the armed inhabitants of
his canton, my kinsman Lepelletier d'Aunay, who was Vice-President of
the Chamber of Deputies during the last days of the Monarchy. He wore
neither uniform nor musket, but only a little silver-hilted sword which
he had slung at his side over his coat by a narrow white linen
bandolier. I was touched to tears on seeing this venerable white-haired
man thus accoutred.

"Won't you come and dine with us this evening?"

"No, no," he replied; "what would these good folk who are with me, and
who know that I have more to lose than they by the victory of the
insurrection--what would they say if they saw me leaving them to take it
easy? No, I will share their repast and sleep here at their bivouac. The
only thing I would beg you is, if possible, to hurry the despatch of the
provision of bread promised us, for we have had no food since morning."

I returned to the Assembly, I believe at about three, and did not go out
again. The remainder of the day was taken up by accounts of the
fighting: each moment produced its event and its piece of news. The
arrival of volunteers from one of the departments was announced; they
were bringing in prisoners; flags captured on the barricades were
brought in. Deeds of bravery were described, heroic words repeated; each
moment we learnt of some person of note being wounded or killed. As to
the final issue of the day, nothing had yet occurred to enable us to
form an opinion.

The President only called the Assembly together at infrequent intervals
and for short periods; and he was right, for assemblies are like
children, and idleness always makes them say or do a number of foolish
things. Each time the sitting was resumed, he himself told us all that
had been learnt for certain during the adjournment. This President, as
we know, was Senard, a well-known Rouen advocate and a man of courage;
but in his youth he had contracted so deep-seated a theatrical habit in
the daily comedy played at the bar that he had lost the faculty of
truthfully giving his true impressions of a thing, when by accident he
happened to have any. It seemed always necessary that he should add some
turgidity or other of his own to the feats of courage he described, and
that he should express the emotion, which I believe he really felt, in
hollow tones, a trembling voice, and a sort of tragic hiccough which
reminded one of an actor on the stage. Never were the sublime and the
ridiculous brought so close together: for the facts were sublime and the
narrator ridiculous.

We did not adjourn till late at night to take a little rest. The
fighting had stopped, to be resumed on the morrow. The insurrection,
although everywhere held in check, had as yet been stifled nowhere.




CHAPTER X

     THE DAYS OF JUNE--(_continued_).


The porter of the house in which we lived in the Rue de la Madeleine was
a man of very bad reputation in the neighbourhood, an old soldier, not
quite in his right mind, a drunkard, and a great good-for-nothing, who
spent at the wine-shop all the time which he did not employ in beating
his wife. This man might be said to be a Socialist by birth, or rather
by temperament.

The early successes of the insurrection had brought him to a state of
exaltation, and on the morning of the day of which I speak he visited
all the wine-shops around, and among other mischievous remarks of which
he delivered himself, he said that he would kill me when I came home in
the evening, if I came in at all. He even displayed a large knife which
he intended to use for the purpose. A poor woman who heard him ran in
great alarm to tell Madame de Tocqueville; and she, before leaving
Paris, sent me a note in which, after telling me of the facts, she
begged me not to come in that night, but to go to my father's house,
which was close by, he being away. This I determined to do; but when I
left the Assembly at midnight, I had not the energy to carry out my
intention. I was worn out with fatigue, and I did not know whether I
should find a bed prepared if I slept out. Besides, I had little faith
in the performance of murders proclaimed beforehand; and also I was
under the influence of the sort of listlessness that follows upon any
prolonged excitement. I accordingly went and knocked at my door, only
taking the precaution to load the pistols which, in those unhappy days,
it was common to carry. My man opened the door, I entered, and while he
was carefully pushing the bolts behind me, I asked him if all the
tenants had come home. He replied drily that they had all left Paris
that morning, and that we two were alone in the house. I should have
preferred another kind of _tete-a-tete_, but it was too late to go back;
I therefore looked him straight in the eyes and told him to walk in
front and show a light.

He stopped at a gate that led to the court-yard, and told me that he
heard a curious noise in the stables which alarmed him, begging me to go
with him to see what it was. As he spoke, he turned towards the stables.
All this began to seem very suspicious to me, but I thought that, as I
had gone so far, it was better to go on. I accordingly followed him,
carefully watching his movements, and making up my mind to kill him like
a dog at the first sign of treachery. As a matter of fact, we did hear a
very strange noise. It resembled the dull running of water or the
distant rumble of a carriage, although it obviously came from somewhere
quite near. I never learnt what it was; though it was true I did not
spend much time in trying to discover. I soon returned to the house and
made my companion bring me to my threshold, keeping my eyes on him the
whole time. I told him to open my door, and so soon as he had done so, I
took the candle from his hand and went in. It was not until I was almost
out of his sight that he brought himself to take off his hat and bow to
me. Had the man really intended to kill me, and seeing me on my guard,
with both hands in my pockets, did he reflect that I was better armed
than he, and that he would be well advised to abandon his design? I
thought at the time that the latter had never been very seriously
intended, and I think so still. In times of revolution, people boast
almost as much about the imaginary crimes they propose to commit as in
ordinary times they do of the good intentions they pretend to entertain.
I have always believed that this wretch would only have become dangerous
if the fortunes of the fight had seemed to turn against us; but they
leant, on the contrary, to our side, although they were still undecided;
and this was sufficient to assure my safety.

At dawn I heard some one in my room, and woke with a start: it was my
man-servant, who had let himself in with a private key of the apartment,
which he carried. The brave lad had just left the bivouac (I had
supplied him at his request with a National Guard's uniform and a good
gun), and he came to know if I had come home and if his services were
required. This one was certainly not a Socialist, either in theory or
temperament. He was not even tainted in the slightest degree with the
most general malady of the age, restlessness of mind, and even in other
times than ours it would have been difficult to find a man more
contented with his position and less sullen at his lot. Always very much
satisfied with himself, and tolerably satisfied with others, he
generally desired only that which was within his reach, and he generally
attained, or thought he attained, all that he desired; thus unwittingly
following the precepts which philosophers teach and never observe, and
enjoying by the gift of Nature that happy equilibrium between faculty
and desire which alone gives the happiness which philosophy promises us.

"Well, Eugene," I said, when I saw him, "how are affairs going on?"

"Very well, sir, perfectly well!"

"What do you mean by very well? I can still hear the sound of cannon!"

"Yes, they are still fighting," he replied, "but every one says it will
end all right."

With that he took off his uniform, cleaned my boots, brushed my clothes,
and putting on his uniform again:

"If you don't require me any more, sir," said he, "and if you will
permit me, I will go back to the fighting."

He pursued this two-fold calling during four days and four nights, as
simply as I am writing it down; and I experienced a sort of reposeful
feeling, during these days filled with turmoil and hate, when I looked
at the young man's peaceful and contented face.

Before going to the Assembly, where I did not think there would be any
important measures to take, I resolved to make my way to the places
where the fighting was still going on, and where I heard the sound of
cannon. It was not that I was longing "to go and fight a bit," like
Goudchaux, but I wanted to judge for myself as to the state of things;
for, in my complete ignorance of war, I could not understand what made
the struggle last so long. Besides, shall I confess it, a keen curiosity
was piercing through all the feelings that filled my mind, and from time
to time dominated them. I went along a great portion of the boulevard
without seeing any traces of the battle, but there were plenty just
beyond the Porte Saint-Martin; one stumbled over the _debris_ left
behind by the retreating insurrection: broken windows, doors smashed in,
houses spotted by bullets or pierced by cannon-balls, trees cut down,
heaped-up paving-stones, straw mixed with blood and mud. Such were these
melancholy vestiges.

I thus reached the Chateau-d'Eau, around which were massed a number of
troops of different sorts. At the foot of the fountain was a piece of
cannon which was being discharged down the Rue Samson. I thought at
first that the insurgents were replying with cannon on their side, but I
ended by seeing that I was deceived by an echo which repeated with a
terrible crash the sound of our own gun. I have never heard anything
like it; one might have thought one's self in the midst of a great
battle. As a matter of fact, the insurgents were only replying with an
infrequent but deadly musketry fire.

It was a strange combat. The Rue Samson, as we know, is not a very long
one; at the end runs the Canal Saint-Martin, and behind the canal is a
large house facing the street. The street was absolutely deserted; there
was no barricade in sight, and the gun seemed to be firing at a target;
only from time to time a whiff of smoke issued from a few windows, and
proclaimed the presence of an invisible enemy. Our sharp-shooters,
posted along the walls, aimed at the windows from which they saw the
shots fired. Lamoriciere, mounted on a tall horse in full view of the
enemy, gave his commands amid the whirl of bullets. I thought he was
more excited and talkative than I had imagined a general ought to be in
such a juncture; he talked, shouted in a hoarse voice, gesticulated in a
sort of rage. It was easy to see by the clearness of his thoughts and
expressions that amid this apparent disorder he lost none of his
presence of mind; but his manner of commanding might have caused others
to lose theirs, and I confess I should have admired his courage more if
he had kept more quiet.

This conflict, in which one saw nobody before him, this firing, which
seemed to be aimed only at the walls, surprised me strangely. I should
never have pictured war to myself under this aspect. As the boulevard
seemed clear beyond the Chateau-d'Eau, I was unable to understand why
our columns did not pass further, nor why, if we wanted first to seize
the large house facing the street, we did not capture it at a run,
instead of remaining so long exposed to the deadly fire issuing from it.
Yet nothing was more easily explained: the boulevard, which I thought
clear from the Chateau-d'Eau onwards, was not so; beyond the bend which
it makes at this place, it was bristling with barricades, all the way to
the Bastille. Before attacking the barricades, we wanted to become
masters of the streets we left behind us, and especially to capture the
house facing the street, which, commanding the boulevard as it did,
would have impeded our communications. Finally, we did not take the
house by assault, because we were separated from it by the canal, which
I could not see from the boulevard. We confined ourselves, therefore, to
efforts to destroy it by cannon-shots, or at least to render it
untenable. This took a long time to accomplish, and after being
astonished in the morning that the fighting had not finished, I now
asked myself how at this rate it could ever finish. For what I was
witnessing at the Chateau-d'Eau was at the same time being repeated in
other forms in a hundred different parts of Paris.

As the insurgents had no artillery, the conflict did not possess the
horrible aspect which it must have when the battle-field is ploughed by
cannon balls. The men who were struck down before me seemed transfixed
by an invisible shaft: they staggered and fell without one's seeing at
first anything but a little hole made in their clothes. In the cases of
this kind which I witnessed, I was struck less by the sight of physical
pain than by the picture of moral anguish. It was indeed a strange and
frightful thing to see the sudden change of features, the quick
extinction of the light in the eyes in the terror of death.

After a certain period, I saw Lamoriciere's horse sink to the ground,
shot by a bullet; it was the third horse the General had had killed
under him since the day before yesterday. He sprang lightly to the
ground, and continued bellowing his raging instructions.

I noticed that on our side the least eager were the soldiers of the
Line. They were weakened and, as it were, dulled by the remembrance of
February, and did not yet seem quite certain that they would not be told
the next day that they had done wrong. The liveliest were undoubtedly
the Gardes Mobiles of whom we had felt so uncertain; and, in spite of
the event, I maintain that we were right, at the time; for it wanted but
little for them to decide against us instead of taking our side. Until
the end, they plainly showed that it was the fighting they loved rather
than the cause for which they fought.

All these troops were raw and very subject to panic: I myself was a
judge and almost a victim of this. At a street corner close to the
Chateau-d'Eau was a large house in process of building. Some insurgents,
who doubtless entered from behind across the court-yards, had taken up
their position there, unknown to us; suddenly they appeared on the roof,
and fired a great volley at the troops who filled the boulevard, and who
did not expect to find the enemy posted so close at hand. The sound of
their muskets reverberating with a great crash against the opposite
houses gave reason to dread that a surprise of the same kind was taking
place on that side. Immediately the most incredible confusion prevailed
in our column: artillery, cavalry, and infantry were mingled in a
moment, the soldiers fired in every direction, without knowing what they
were doing, and tumultuously fell back sixty paces. This retreat was so
disorderly and so impetuous that I was thrown against the wall of the
houses facing the Rue du Faubourg-du-Temple, knocked down by the
cavalry, and so hard pressed that I left my hat on the field, and very
nearly left my body there. It was certainly the most serious danger I
ran during the days of June. This made me think that it is not all
heroism in the game of war. I have no doubt but that accidents of this
kind often happen to the very best troops; no one boasts about them, and
they are not mentioned in the despatches.

It was now that Lamoriciere became sublime. He had till then kept his
sword in the scabbard: he now drew it, and ran up to his soldiers, his
features distorted with the most magnificent rage; he stopped them with
his voice, seized them with his hands, even struck them with the pummel
of his sword, turned them, brought them back, and, placing himself at
their head, forced them to pass at the trot through the fire in the Rue
du Faubourg-du-Temple in order to take the house from which the firing
had come. This was done in a moment, and without striking a blow: the
enemy had disappeared.

The combat resumed its dull aspect and lasted some time longer, until
the enemy's fire was at length extinguished, and the street occupied.
Before commencing the next operation, there was a moment's pause:
Lamoriciere went to his head-quarters, a wine-shop on the boulevard near
the Porte Saint-Martin, and I was at last able to consult him on the
state of affairs.

"How long do you think," I asked, "that all this will last?"

"Why, how can I tell?" he replied. "That depends on the enemy, not on
us."

He then showed me on the map all the streets we had already captured and
were occupying, and all those we had still to take, adding, "If the
insurgents choose to defend themselves on the ground they still hold as
they have done on that which we have won from them, we may still have a
week's fighting before us, and our loss will be enormous, for we lose
more than they do: the first side to lose its moral courage will be the
first to be beaten."

I next reproached him with exposing himself so rashly, and, as I
thought, so uselessly.

"What will you have me do?" said he. "Tell Cavaignac to send generals
able and willing to second me, and I will keep more in the background;
but you always have to expose yourself when you have only yourself to
rely on."

M. Thiers then came up, threw himself on Lamoriciere's neck, and told
him he was a hero. I could not help smiling at this effusion, for there
was no love lost between them: but a great danger is like wine, it makes
men affectionate.

I left Lamoriciere in M. Thiers' arms, and returned to the Assembly: it
was growing late, and besides, I know no greater fool than the man who
gets his head broken in battle out of curiosity.

The rest of the day was spent as the day before: the same anxiety in the
Assembly, the same feverish inaction, the same firmness. Volunteers
continued to enter Paris; every moment we were told of some tragic event
or illustrious death. These pieces of news saddened, but animated and
fortified, the Assembly. Any member who ventured to propose to enter
into negociations with the insurgents was met with yells of rage.

In the evening I decided to go myself to the Hotel de Ville, in order
there to obtain more certain news of the results of the day. The
insurrection, after alarming me by its extreme violence, now alarmed me
by its long duration. For who could foresee the effect which the sight
of so long and uncertain a conflict might produce in some parts of
France, and especially in the great manufacturing towns, such as Lyons?
As I went along the Quai de la Ferraille, I met some National Guards
from my neighbourhood, carrying on litters several of their comrades and
two of their officers wounded. I observed, in talking with them, with
what terrible rapidity, even in so civilized a century as our own, the
most peaceful minds enter, as it were, into the spirit of civil war, and
how quick they are, in these unhappy times, to acquire a taste for
violence and a contempt for human life. The men with whom I was talking
were peaceful, sober artisans, whose gentle and somewhat sluggish
natures were still further removed from cruelty than from heroism. Yet
they dreamt of nothing but massacre and destruction. They complained
that they were not allowed to use bombs, or to sap and mine the streets
held by the insurgents, and they were determined to show no more
quarter; already that morning I had almost seen a poor devil shot before
my eyes on the boulevards, who had been arrested without arms in his
hands, but whose mouth and hands were blackened by a substance which
they supposed to be, and which no doubt was, powder. I did all I could
to calm these rabid sheep. I promised them that we should take terrible
measures the next day. Lamoriciere, in fact, had told me that morning
that he had sent for shells to hurl behind the barricades; and I knew
that a regiment of sappers was expected from Douai, to pierce the walls
and blow up the besieged houses with petards. I added that they must not
shoot any of their prisoners, but that they should kill then and there
anyone who made as though to defend himself. I left my men a little more
contented, and, continuing my road, I could not help examining myself
and feeling surprised at the nature of the arguments I had used, and the
promptness with which, in two days, I had become familiarized with those
ideas of inexorable destruction which were naturally so foreign to my
character.

As I passed in front of the little streets at the entrance to which, two
days before, I had seen such neat and solid barricades being built, I
noticed that the cannon had considerably upset those fine works,
although some traces remained.

I was received by Marrast, the Mayor of Paris. He told me that the Hotel
de Ville was clear for the present, but that the insurgents might try in
the night to recapture the streets from which we had driven them. I
found him less tranquil than his bulletins. He took me to a room in
which they had laid Bedeau, who was dangerously wounded on the first
day. This post at the Hotel de Ville was a very fatal one for the
generals who commanded there. Bedeau almost lost his life. Duvivier and
Negrier, who succeeded him, were killed. Bedeau believed he was but
slightly hurt, and thought only of the situation of affairs:
nevertheless, his activity of mind struck me as ill-omened, and alarmed
me.

The night was well advanced when I left the Hotel de Ville to go to the
Assembly. I was offered an escort, which I refused, not thinking I
should require it; but I regretted it more than once on the road. In
order to prevent the insurgent districts from receiving reinforcements,
provisions, or communications from the other parts of the town, in which
there were so many men prepared to embrace the same cause, it had very
properly been resolved absolutely to prohibit circulation in any of the
streets. Everyone was stopped who left his house without a pass or an
escort. I was constantly stopped on my way and made to show my medal. I
was aimed at more than ten times by those inexperienced sentries, who
spoke every imaginable brogue; for Paris was filled with provincials,
who had come from every part of the country, many of them for the first
time.

When I arrived, the sitting was over, but the Palace was still in a
great state of excitement. A rumour had got abroad that the workmen of
the Gros-Caillou were about to take advantage of the darkness to seize
upon the Palace itself. Thus the Assembly, which, after three days'
fighting, had carried the conflict into the heart of the districts
occupied by its enemies, was trembling for its own quarters. The rumour
was void of foundation; but nothing could better show the character of
this war, in which the enemy might always be one's own neighbour, and
in which one was never certain of not having his house sacked while
gaining a victory at a distance. In order to secure the Palace against
all surprise, barricades were hurriedly erected at the entrance to all
the streets leading up to it. When I saw that there was only a question
of a false rumour, I went home to bed.

I shall say no more of the June combats. The recollections of the two
last days merge into and are lost in those of the first. As is known,
the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, the last citadel of the civil war, did not
lay down its arms until the Monday--that is to say, on the fourth day
after the commencement of the conflict; and it was not until the morning
of that day that the volunteers from la Manche were able to reach Paris.
They had hurried as fast as possible, but they had come more than eighty
leagues across a country in which there were no railways. They were
fifteen hundred in number. I was touched at recognizing among them many
landlords, lawyers, doctors and farmers who were my friends and
neighbours. Almost all the old nobility of the country had taken up arms
on this occasion and formed part of the column. It was the same over
almost the whole of France. From the petty squire squatting in his den
in the country to the useless, elegant sons of the great houses--all had
at that moment remembered that they had once formed part of a warlike
and governing class, and on every side they gave the example of vigour
and resolution: so great is the vitality of those old bodies of
aristocracy. They retain traces of themselves even when they appear to
be reduced to dust, and spring up time after time from the shades of
death before sinking back for ever.

It was in the midst of the days of June that the death occurred of a man
who perhaps of all men in our day best preserved the spirit of the old
races: M. de Chateaubriand, with whom I was connected by so many family
ties and childish recollections. He had long since fallen into a sort of
speechless stupor, which made one sometimes believe that his
intelligence was extinguished. Nevertheless, while in this condition, he
heard a rumour of the Revolution of February, and desired to be told
what was happening. They informed him that Louis-Philippe's government
had been overthrown. He said, "Well done!" and nothing more. Four months
later, the din of the days of June reached his ears, and again he asked
what that noise was. They answered that people were fighting in Paris,
and that it was the sound of cannon. Thereupon he made vain efforts to
rise, saying, "I want to go to it," and was then silent, this time for
ever; for he died the next day.

Such were the days of June, necessary and disastrous days. They did not
extinguish revolutionary ardour in France, but they put a stop, at least
for a time, to what may be called the work appertaining to the
Revolution of February. They delivered the nation from the tyranny of
the Paris workmen and restored it to possession of itself.

Socialistic theories continued to penetrate into the minds of the people
in the shape of envious and greedy desires, and to sow the seed of
future revolutions; but the socialist party itself was beaten and
powerless. The Montagnards, who did not belong to it, felt that they
were irrevocably affected by the blow that had struck it. The moderate
Republicans themselves did not fail to be alarmed lest this victory had
led them to a slope which might precipitate them from the Republic, and
they made an immediate effort to stop their descent, but in vain.
Personally I detested the Mountain, and was indifferent to the Republic;
but I adored Liberty, and I conceived great apprehensions for it
immediately after these days. I at once looked upon the June fighting as
a necessary crisis, after which, however, the temper of the nation would
undergo a certain change. The love of independence was to be followed by
a dread of, and perhaps a distaste for, free institutions; after such an
abuse of liberty a return of this sort was inevitable. This retrograde
movement began, in fact, on the 27th of June. At first very slow and
invisible, as it were, to the naked eye, it grew swifter, impetuous,
irresistible. Where will it stop? I do not know. I believe we shall have
great difficulty in not rolling far beyond the point we had reached
before February, and I foresee that all of us, Socialists, Montagnards
and Liberal Republicans, will fall into common discredit until the
private recollections of the Revolution of 1848 are removed and effaced,
and the general spirit of the times shall resume its empire.




CHAPTER XI[12]

     THE COMMITTEE FOR THE CONSTITUTION.

     [12: There is a great hiatus in this chapter, due to my not
     mentioning the discussions and resolutions relating to _general
     principles_. Many of the discussions were fairly thorough, and most
     of the resolutions were tolerably wise and even courageous. Most of
     the revolutionary and socialistic raptures of the time were
     combated in them. We were prepared and on our guard on these
     general questions.]


I now change my subject, and am glad to leave the scenes of the civil
war and to return to the recollections of my parliamentary life. I wish
to speak of what happened in the Committee for the Constitution, of
which I was a member. This will oblige us to retrace our steps a little,
for the appointment and work of this committee date back to before the
days of June; but I did not mention it earlier, because I did not wish
to interrupt the course of events which was leading us swiftly and
directly to those days. The nomination of the Committee for the
Constitution was commenced on the 17th of May; it was a long
performance, because it had been decided that the members of the
committee should be chosen by the whole Assembly and by an absolute
majority of votes. I was elected at the first time of voting[13]
together with Cormenin, Marrast, Lamennais, Vivien, and Dufaure. I do
not know how often the voting had to be repeated in order to complete
the list, which was to consist of eighteen members.

     [13: I received 496 votes.]

Although the committee had been nominated before the victory of June,
almost all its members belonged to the different moderate sections of
the Assembly. The Mountain had only two representatives on it: Lamennais
and Considerant; and even these were little worse than chimerical
visionaries, especially Considerant, who would have deserved to be sent
to a lunatic asylum had he been sincere--but I fear he deserved more
than that.

Taking the Committee as a whole, it was easy to see that no very
remarkable result was to be expected from it. Some of its members had
spent their lives in conducting or controlling the administration during
the last government. They had never seen, studied, or understood
anything except the Monarchy; and even then they had, for the most part,
applied rather than studied its principles. They had raised themselves
but little above the practice of business. Now that they were called
upon to realize the theories which they had always slighted or opposed,
and which had defeated without convincing them, they found it difficult
to apply any but monarchical ideas to their work; or, if they adopted
republican ideas, they did so now timidly, now rashly, always a little
at hap-hazard, like novices.

As for the Republicans proper on the Committee, they had few ideas of
any sort, except those which they had gathered in reading or writing for
the newspapers; for there were many journalists among them. Marrast had
edited the _National_ for ten years; Dornes was at that time its
editor-in-chief; Vaulabelle, a man of serious but coarse and even
cynical cast of mind, habitually wrote for its columns. He was the man
who, a month later, was himself vastly astonished at becoming Minister
of Public Worship and Instruction.

All this bore very little resemblance to the men, so certain of their
objects and so well acquainted with the measures necessary to attain
them, who sixty years before, under Washington's presidency so
successfully drew up the American Constitution.

For that matter, even if the Committee had been capable of doing its
work well, the want of time and the preoccupation of outside events
would have prevented it.

There is no nation which attaches itself less to those who govern it
than the French Nation, nor which is less able to dispense with
government. So soon as it finds itself obliged to walk alone, it
undergoes a sort of vertigo, which makes it dread an abyss at every
step. At the time I speak of, it had a sort of frenzied desire for the
work of framing the Constitution to be completed, and for the powers in
command to be, if not solidly, at least permanently and regularly
established. The Assembly shared this eagerness, and never ceased urging
us on, although we required but little urging. The recollection of the
15th of May, the apprehensions entertained of the days of June and the
sight of the divided, enervated and incapable government at the head of
affairs were sufficient inducement to us to hasten our labours. But what
especially deprived the Committee of its freedom of thought was, it must
be confessed, the fear of outside matters and the excitement of the
moment. It would be difficult to imagine the effect produced by this
forcing of revolutionary ideas upon minds so little disposed to adopt
them, and how the latter were being incessantly, and even almost
unconsciously, impelled much further than they wished to go, when they
were not pushed altogether out of the direction they desired to take.
Certainly, if the Committee had met on the 27th of June instead of the
16th of May, its work would have been very different.

The discussion opened on the 22nd of May. The first question was to
decide on which side we should tackle this immense work. Lamennais
proposed to commence by regulating the state of the communes. He had
proceeded in this way himself in a proposal for a Constitution which he
had just published, so as to make certain of the first fruits of his
discoveries. Then he passed from the question of sequence to that of the
main point: he began to talk of administrative centralization, for his
thoughts were incapable of sub-dividing themselves; his mind was always
wholly occupied by a single system, and all the ideas contained in it
adhered so closely together that, so soon as one was uttered, the others
seemed necessarily to follow. He therefore explained that a Republic
whose citizens are not clever and experienced enough to govern
themselves was a monster not fit to live.

Thereupon the Committee took fire: Barrot, who, amid the clouds of his
mind, always pretty clearly perceived the necessity for local liberty,
eagerly supported Lamennais. I did the same; Marrast and Vivien opposed
us. Vivien was quite consistent in defending centralization, for the
movement of administrative affairs was his profession, and moreover he
was quite naturally drawn towards it. He had all the qualities of a
clever legist and an excellent commentator, and none of those necessary
to a legislator or statesman. The danger in which he beheld the
institutions so dear to him inflamed him; he grew so excited that he
began to hold that the Republic, far from restraining centralization,
ought even to increase it. One would have said that this was the side on
which the Revolution of February pleased him.

Marrast belonged to the ordinary type of French revolutionaries, who
have always understood the liberty of the people to mean despotism
exercised in the name of the people. This sudden harmony between Vivien
and Marrast did not, therefore, surprise me. I was used to the
phenomenon, and I had long remarked that the only way to bring a
Conservative and a Radical together was to attack the power of the
central government, not in application, but in principle. One was then
sure of throwing them into each other's arms.

When, therefore, people assert that nothing is safe from revolutions, I
tell them they are wrong, and that centralization is one of those
things. In France there is only one thing we can't set up: that is, a
free government; and only one institution we can't destroy: that is,
centralization. How could it ever perish? The enemies of government love
it, and those who govern cherish it. The latter perceive, it is true,
from time to time, that it exposes them to sudden and irremediable
disasters; but this does not disgust them with it. The pleasure it
procures them of interfering with every one and holding everything in
their hands atones to them for its dangers. They prefer this agreeable
life to a more certain and longer existence, and say, "_Courte et
bonne_" like the _roues_ of the Regency: "A short life and a merry one."

The question could not be decided that day; but it was settled in
advance by the determination arrived at that we should not first occupy
ourselves with the communal system.

Next day, Lamennais resigned. Under the circumstances, an occurrence of
this sort was annoying. It was bound to increase and rooten the
prejudices already existing against us. We took very pressing and even
somewhat humble steps to induce Lamennais to reconsider his resolve. As
I had shared his opinion, I was deputed to go and see him and press him
to return. I did so, but in vain. He had only been beaten over a formal
question, but he had concluded from this that he would not be the
master. That was enough to decide him to be nothing at all. He was
inflexible, in spite of all I could say in the interest of the very
ideas which we held in common.

One should especially consider an unfrocked priest if one wishes to
acquire a correct idea of the indestructible and, so to speak, infinite
power which the clerical habit and method of thought wield over those
who have once contracted them. It was useless for Lamennais to sport
white stockings, a yellow waistcoat, a striped necktie, and a green
coat: he remained a priest in character, and even in appearance. He
walked with short, hurried and discreet steps, never turning his head or
looking at anybody, and glided through the crowd with an awkward, modest
air, as though he were leaving the sacristy. Add to this a pride great
enough to walk over the heads of kings and bid defiance to God.

When it was found that Lamennais' obstinacy was not to be overcome, we
proceeded with other business; and so that no more time might be lost in
premature discussions, a sub-committee was appointed to draw up rules
for the regulation of our labours, and to propose them to the Committee.
Unfortunately, this sub-committee was so constituted that Cormenin, our
chairman, was its master and, in reality, substituted himself for it.
The permanent power of initiative which he thus possessed, coupled with
the conduct of the debates which belonged to him as chairman, had the
most baneful influence upon our deliberations, and I am not sure if the
faults in our work should not be mainly attributed to him.

Like Lamennais, Cormenin had drawn up and published a Constitution after
his own idea, and again, like the former, he expected us to adopt it.
But he did not quite know how to put it to us. As a rule, extreme vanity
makes the timidest very bold in speaking. Cormenin's did not permit him
to open his mouth so soon as he had three listeners. He would have liked
to do as one of my neighbours in Normandy did, a great lover of
polemics, to whom Providence had refused the capacity of disputing _viva
voce_. Whenever I opposed any of his opinions, he would hurry home and
write to me all that he ought to have told me. Cormenin accordingly
despaired of convincing us, but hoped to surprise us. He flattered
himself that he would make us accept his system gradually and, so to
speak, unknown to ourselves, by presenting a morsel to us every day. He
managed so cleverly that a general discussion could never be held upon
the Constitution as a whole, and that even in each case it was almost
impossible to trace back and find the primitive idea. He brought us
every day five or six clauses ready drawn up, and patiently, little by
little, drew back to this little plot of ground all those who wished to
escape from it. We resisted sometimes; but in the end, from sheer
weariness, we yielded to this gentle, continuous restraint. The
influence of a chairman upon the work of a committee is immense; any one
who has closely observed these little assemblies will understand what I
mean. Nevertheless, it must be admitted that if several of us had
desired to withdraw ourselves from this tyranny, we should have ended by
coming to an understanding and succeeding. But we had no time and no
inclination for long discussions. The vastness and complexity of the
subject alarmed and wearied the minds of the Committee beforehand: the
majority had not even attempted to study it, or had only collected some
very confused ideas; and those who had formed clearer ones were ill at
ease at having to expound them. They were afraid, besides, lest they
should enter into violent, interminable disputes if they endeavoured to
get to the bottom of things; and they preferred to appear to be in
harmony by keeping to the surface. In this way we ambled along to the
end, adopting great principles explicitly for reasons of petty detail,
and little by little building up the whole machinery of government
without properly taking into account the relative strength of the
various wheels and the manner in which they would work together.

In the moments of repose which interrupted this fine work, Marrast, who
was a Republican of the Barras type, and who had always preferred the
pleasures of luxury, the table and women to democracy in rags, told us
little stories of gallantry, while Vaulabelle made broad jests. I hope,
for the honour of the Committee, that no one will ever publish the
minutes (very badly done, for that matter) which the secretary drew up
of our sittings. The sterility of the discussions amid the exuberant
fecundity of the subject-matter would assuredly provoke surprise. As for
myself, I declare that I never witnessed a more wretched display in any
committee on which I ever sat.

Nevertheless, there was one serious discussion. It referred to the
system of a single Chamber. As a matter of fact, the two parties into
which the Committee was silently divided only came to an issue on this
one occasion. It was even less a question of the two Chambers than of
the general character to be given to the new government: Were we to
persevere in the learned and somewhat complicated system of
counterpoises, and place powers held in check, and consequently prudent
and moderate, at the head of the Republic? Or were we to adopt the
contrary course and accept the simpler theory, according to which
affairs are placed in the hands of a single power, homogeneous in all
its parts, uncontrolled, and consequently impetuous in its measures, and
irresistible? This was the subject-matter of the debate. This general
question might have cropped up as the result of a number of other
clauses; but it was better contained than elsewhere in the special
question of the two Chambers.

The struggle was a long one and lasted for two sittings. The result was
not for a moment in doubt; for public opinion had pronounced strongly in
favour of a single Chamber, not only in Paris but in nearly every
department. Barrot was the first to speak in favour of the two Chambers;
he took up my thesis and developed it with great talent, but
intemperately; for during the Revolution of February, his mind had lost
its equilibrium and had never since been able to recover its
self-possession. I supported Barrot and returned time after time to the
charge. I was a little surprised to hear Dufaure pronouncing against us
and doing so with a certain eagerness. Lawyers are rarely able to escape
from one of two habits: they accustom themselves either to plead what
they do not believe or to persuade themselves very easily of what they
wish to plead. Dufaure came under the latter category. The drift of
public opinion, of his own passions or interest, would never have led
him to embrace a cause which he thought a bad one; but it prompted him
with a desire to think it a good one, and that was often sufficient. His
naturally vacillating, ingenious and subtle mind turned gradually
towards it; and he sometimes ended by adopting it, not only with
conviction but with transport. How often have I not been amazed to see
him vehemently defending theories which I had seen him adopt with
infinite hesitation!

His principal reason for voting this time in favour of a single Chamber
in the Legislative Body (and it was the best, I think, that could be
found) was that, with us, the Executive Power wielded by one man
elected by the people would most certainly become preponderant if there
were placed beside him only a legislative body weakened by being divided
into two branches. I remember that I replied that that might be the
case, but that one thing was quite certain, and that was, that two great
powers naturally jealous of one another, and placed in an eternal
_tete-a-tete_ (that was the expression I used), without ever having
recourse to the arbitrament of a third power, would at once be on bad
terms or at war with one another, and would constantly remain so until
one had destroyed the other. I added that, if it was true that a
President elected by the people, and possessing the immense prerogatives
which in France belong to the chief of the public administration, was
sometimes able to curb a divided legislative body, a President who
should feel himself to possess this origin and these rights would always
refuse to become a simple agent and to submit to the capricious and
tyrannical will of a single assembly.

We were both in the right. The problem, thus propounded, was insolvable;
but the nation propounded it thus. To allow the President the same power
that the King had enjoyed, and to have him elected by the people, would
make the Republic impossible. As I said later, one must either
infinitely narrow the sphere of his power, or else have him elected by
the Assembly; but the nation would hear of neither one nor the other.

Dupin completed our defeat: he defended the single Chamber with
surprising vigour. One would have thought that he had never held another
opinion. I expected as much. I knew him to possess a heart that was
habitually self-interested and cowardly, though subject at times to
sudden leaps of courage and honesty. I had seen him for ten years
prowling round every party without joining any, and attacking all the
vanquished: half ape and half jackal, constantly biting, grimacing,
gambolling, and always ready to fall upon the wretch who slipped. He
showed himself in his true colours on the Committee of the Constitution,
or rather he surpassed himself. I perceived in him none of those sudden
leaps of which I have just spoken: he was uniformly commonplace from
beginning to end. He usually remained silent while the majority were
making up their minds; but as soon as he saw them pronounce in favour of
democratic opinions, he rushed to place himself at their head, and often
went far beyond them. Once, he perceived, when he had gone half-way,
that the majority were not going in the direction he had thought;
whereupon he immediately stopped short with a prompt and nimble effort
of the intelligence, turned round, and hurried back at the same run
towards the opinion from which he had been departing.

Almost all the old members of Parliament pronounced in this way against
the dual Chamber. Most of them sought for more or less plausible
pretexts for their votes. Some pretended that a Council of State would
provide the counterpoise of which they acknowledged the necessity;
others purposed to subject the single assembly to forms whose slowness
would safeguard it against its own impulses and against surprise; but in
the end the true reason was always given. On the committee was a
minister of the Gospel, M. Coquerel, who, seeing that his colleagues of
the Catholic clergy were entering the Assembly, wanted to appear there
too, and he was wrong: from the much-admired preacher that he was, he
suddenly transformed himself into a very ridiculous political orator. He
could hardly open his mouth without uttering some pompous absurdity. On
this occasion he was so naive as to inform us that he continued to
favour the dual Chamber, but that he would vote for the single Chamber
because public opinion was pushing him on, and he did not wish, to use
his own words, to fight against the current. This candour greatly
annoyed those who were acting as he did, and mightily delighted Barrot
and myself; but this was the only satisfaction we received, for, when it
came to voting, there were only three on our side.

This signal defeat disinclined me a little to continue the struggle, and
threw Barrot quite out of humour. He no longer appeared except at rare
intervals, and in order to utter signs of impatience or disdain rather
than opinions.

We passed on to the Executive Power. In spite of all that I have said
of the circumstances of the time and the disposition of the Committee,
it will still be believed with difficulty that so vast, so perplexing,
so novel a subject did not furnish the material for a single general
debate, nor for any very profound discussion.

All were unanimous in the opinion that the Executive Power should be
entrusted to one man alone. But what prerogatives and what agents should
he be given, what responsibilities laid upon him? Clearly, none of these
questions could be treated in an arbitrary fashion; each of them was
necessarily in connection with all the others, and could, above all, be
only decided by taking into special account the habits and customs of
the country. These were old problems, no doubt; but they were made young
again by the novelty of the circumstances.

Cormenin, according to his custom, opened the discussion by proposing a
little clause all ready drawn up, which provided that the head of the
Executive Power, or the President, as he was thenceforward called,
should be elected directly by the people by a relative majority, the
minimum of votes necessary to carry his election being fixed at two
millions. I believe Marrast was the only one to oppose it; he proposed
that the head of the Executive Power should be elected by the Assembly:
he was at that time intoxicated with his own fortune, and flattered
himself, strange though this may seem to-day, that the choice of the
Assembly would fall upon himself. Nevertheless, the clause proposed by
Cormenin was adopted without any difficulty, so far as I can remember;
and yet it must be confessed that the expediency of having the President
elected by the people was not a self-evident truth, and that the
disposition to have him elected directly was as new as it was dangerous.
In a country with no monarchical tradition, in which the Executive Power
has always been feeble and continues to be very limited, nothing is
wiser than to charge the nation with the choice of its representative. A
President who had not the strength which he could draw from that origin
would then become the plaything of the Assemblies; but with us the
conditions of the problem were very different. We were emerging from the
Monarchy, and the habits of the Republicans themselves were still
monarchical. Moreover, our system of centralization made our position an
unique one: according to its principles, the whole administration of the
country, in matters of the greatest and of the smallest moment, belonged
to the President; the thousands of officials who held the whole country
in their hands were dependent upon him alone; this was so according to
the laws, and even the ideas, which the 24th of February had allowed to
continue in force; for we had retained the spirit of the Monarchy, while
losing the taste for it. Under these conditions, what could a President
elected by the people be other than a pretender to the Crown? The office
could only suit those who hoped to make use of it in order to assist in
transforming the Presidential into Royal powers; it seemed clear to me
then, and it seems evident to me now, that if it was desired that the
President should be elected by the people without danger to the
Republic, it was necessary to limit prodigiously the circle of his
prerogatives; and even then, I am not sure that this would have
sufficed, for his sphere, although thus confined in point of law, would,
in habit and remembrance, have preserved its former extent. If, on the
other hand, the President was allowed to retain his power, he should not
be elected by the people. These truths were not put forward; I doubt
whether they were even perceived in the heart of the Committee. However,
Cormenin's clause, although adopted at first, was later made the object
of a very lively attack; but it was attacked for reasons different to
those I have just given. It was on the day after the 4th of June. Prince
Louis Napoleon, of whom no one had thought a few days before, had just
been elected to the Assembly by Paris and three departments. They began
to fear that he would be placed at the head of the Republic if the
choice were left to the people. The various pretenders and their friends
grew excited, the question was raised afresh in the Committee, and the
majority persisted in its original vote.

I remember that, during all the time that the Committee was occupied in
this way, my mind was labouring to divine to which side the balance of
power would most generally lean in a Republic of the kind which I saw
they were going to make. Sometimes I thought that it would be on the
side of the Assembly, and then again on that of the elected President;
and this uncertainty made me very uneasy. The fact is, that it was
impossible to tell beforehand. The victory of one or other of these two
great rivals must necessarily depend upon circumstances and the humours
of the moment. There were only two things certain: the war which they
would wage together, and the eventual ruin of the Republic.

Of all the ideas which I have expounded, not one was sifted by the
Committee; I might even say that not one was discussed. Barrot one day
touched upon them in passing, but did not linger over them. His mind
(which was sleepy rather than feeble, and which was even able to see far
ahead when it took the trouble to look) caught a glimpse of them, as it
were, between sleeping and waking, and thought no more of them.

I myself only pointed them out with a certain hesitation and reserve. My
rebuff in the matter of the dual Chamber left me little heart for the
fight. Moreover, I confess, I was more anxious to reach a quick
decision, and place a powerful leader at the head of the Republic, than
to organize a perfect republican Constitution. We were then under the
divided and uncertain government of the Executive Committee, Socialism
was at our gates, and we were approaching the days of June, as we must
not forget. Later, after these days, I vigorously supported in the
Assembly the system of electing the President by the people, and in a
certain measure contributed to its acceptance. The principal reason
which I gave was that, after announcing to the nation that we would
grant it that right, which it had always ardently desired, it was no
longer possible to withhold it. This was true. Nevertheless, I regret
having spoken on this occasion.

To return to the Committee: unable and even unwilling to oppose the
adoption of the principle, I endeavoured at least to make its
application less dangerous. I first proposed to limit in various
directions the sphere of the Executive Power; but I soon saw that it was
useless to attempt anything serious on that side. I then fell back upon
the method of election itself, and raised a discussion on that portion
of Cormenin's clause which treated of it.

The clause, as I said above, laid down that the President should be
elected directly, by a relative majority, the minimum of this majority
being fixed at two million votes. This method had several very serious
drawbacks.

Since the President was to be elected directly by the citizens, the
enthusiasm and infatuation of the people was very much to be feared; and
moreover, the prestige and moral power which the newly elected would
possess would be much greater. Since a relative majority was to be
sufficient to make the election valid, it might be possible that the
President should only represent the wishes of a minority of the nation.
I asked that the President might not be elected directly by the
citizens, but that this should be entrusted to delegates whom the people
would elect. In the second place, I proposed to substitute an actual for
a relative majority; if an absolute majority was not obtained at the
first vote, it would fall to the Assembly to make a choice. These ideas
were, I think, sound, but they were not new; I had borrowed them from
the American Constitution. I doubt whether anyone would have suspected
this, had I not said so; so little was the Committee prepared to play
its great part.

The first part of my amendment was rejected. I expected this: our great
men were of opinion that this system was not sufficiently simple, and
they considered it tainted with a touch of aristocracy. The second was
accepted, and is part of the actual Constitution.

Beaumont proposed that the President should not be re-eligible; I
supported him vigorously, and the proposal was carried. On this occasion
we both fell into a great mistake which will, I fear, lead to very sad
results. We had always been greatly struck with the dangers threatening
liberty and public morality at the hands of a re-eligible president, who
in order to secure his re-election would infallibly employ beforehand
the immense resources of constraint and corruption which our laws and
customs allow to the head of the Executive Power. Our minds were not
supple or prompt enough to turn in time or to see that, so soon as it
was decided that the citizens themselves should directly choose the
President, the evil was irreparable, and that it would be only
increasing it rashly to undertake to hinder the people in their choice.
This vote, and the great influence I brought to bear upon it, is my most
unpleasant memory of that period.

Each moment we came up against centralization, and instead of removing
the obstacle, we stumbled over it. It was of the essence of the Republic
that the head of the Executive Power should be responsible; but
responsible for what, and to what extent? Could he be made responsible
for the thousand details of administration with which our administrative
legislation is overcharged, and over which it would be impossible, and
moreover dangerous, for him to watch in person? That would have been
unjust and ridiculous; and if he was not to be responsible for the
administration proper, who would be? It was decided that the
responsibility of the President should be shared by the ministers, and
that their counter-signature should be necessary, as in the days of the
Monarchy. Thus the President was responsible, and yet he was not
entirely free in his own actions, and he was not able to protect his
agents in agents.

We passed to the constitution of the Council of State. Cormenin and
Vivien took charge of this; it may be said that they set to work like
people who are building up a house for themselves. They did their utmost
to make the Council of State a third power, but without success. It
became something more than an administrative council, but infinitely
less than a legislative assembly.

The only part of our work which was at all well thought out, and
arranged, as I think, with wisdom, was that which related to justice.
Here the committee felt at home, most of its members being, or having
been, barristers. Thanks to these, we were able to save the principle of
the irremovability of the judges; as in 1830, it held good against the
current which swept away all the rest. Those who had been Republicans
from the commencement attacked it nevertheless, and very stupidly, in my
opinion; for this principle is much more in favour of the independence
of one's fellow-citizens than of the power of those who govern. The
Court of Appeal and, especially, the tribunal charged with judging
political crimes were constituted at once just as they are to-day
(1851). Beaumont drew up most of the articles which refer to these two
great courts. What we did in these matters is far in advance of all that
had been attempted in the same direction during sixty years. It is
probably the only part of the Constitution of 1848 which will survive.

It was decided at the instance of Vivien that the Constitution could
only be revised by a Constituent Assembly, which was right; but they
added that this revision could only take place if the National Assembly
demanded it by an express vote, given three times consecutively by a
majority of four-fifths, which rendered any regular revision almost
impossible. I took no part in this vote. I had long been of opinion
that, instead of aiming to make our governments eternal, we should tend
to make it possible to change them in an easy and regular manner. Taken
all round, I thought this less dangerous than the opposite course; and I
thought it best to treat the French people like those madmen whom one
should be careful not to bind lest they become infuriated by the
restraint.

I noticed casually a number of curious opinions that were emitted.
Martin (of Strasburg), who, not content with being a Republican of
yesterday, one day declared so absurdly in the tribune that he was a
Republican by birth, nevertheless proposed to give the President the
right to dissolve the Assembly, and failed to see that a right of this
kind would easily make him master of the Republic; Marrast wanted a
section to be added to the Council of State charged to elaborate "new
ideas," to be called a section of progress; Barrot proposed to leave to
a jury the decision of all civil suits, as though a judiciary revolution
of this sort could possibly be improvised. And Dufaure proposed to
prohibit substitution in the conscription, and to compel everyone
personally to perform his military service, a measure which would have
destroyed all liberal education unless the time of service had been
greatly reduced, or have disorganized the army if this reduction had
been effected.

In this way, pressed by time and ill prepared to treat such important
subjects, we approached the time appointed for the end of our labours.
What was said was: Let us adopt, in the meantime, the articles proposed
to us; we can afterwards retrace our steps; we can judge from this
sketch how to fix the definitive features and to adjust the portions
among themselves. But we did not retrace our steps, and the sketch
remained the picture.

We appointed Marrast our secretary. The way in which he acquitted
himself of this important office soon exposed the mixture of idleness,
giddiness and impudence which formed the basis of his character. He was
first several days without doing anything, though the Assembly was
constantly asking to know the result of our deliberations, and all
France was anxiously awaiting to learn it. Then he hurriedly wrote his
report in one night immediately preceding the day on which he was to
communicate it to the Assembly. In the morning, he spoke of it to one or
two of his colleagues whom he met by chance, and then boldly appeared in
the tribune and read, in the name of the Committee, a report of which
hardly one of its members had heard a single word. This reading took
place on the 19th of June. The draft of the Constitution contained one
hundred and thirty-nine articles; it had been drawn up in less than a
month. We could not have been quicker, but we might have done better. We
had adopted many of the little articles which Cormenin had brought us in
turns; but we had rejected a yet greater number, which caused their
author an irritation, which was so much the greater in that he had never
had an opportunity of giving vent to it. He turned to the public for
consolation. He published, or caused to be published, I forget which it
was, in all the newspapers an article in which he related what had
passed in the Committee, attributing all the good it had done to M. de
Cormenin, and all the harm to his adversaries. A publication of this
sort displeased us greatly, as may be imagined; and it was decided to
acquaint Cormenin with the feeling inspired by his procedure. But no one
cared to be the spokesman of the company.

We had among us a workman (for in those days they put workmen into
everything) called Corbon, a tolerably right-minded man of firm
character. He readily undertook the task. On the next morning,
therefore, so soon as the sitting of the Committee had opened, Corbon
stood up and, with cruel simplicity and conciseness, gave Cormenin to
understand what we thought. Cormenin grew confused, and cast his eyes
round the table to see if anybody would come to his aid. Nobody moved.
He then said, in a hesitating voice, "Am I to conclude from what has
just happened that the Committee wishes me to leave it?" We made no
reply. He took his hat and went, without anyone interfering. Never was
so great an outrage swallowed with less effort or grimace. I believe
that, although enormously vain, he was not very sensitive to insults in
secret; and as long as his self-love was well tickled in public, he
would not have made many bones about receiving a few cuffs in private.

Many have believed that Cormenin, who from a viscount had suddenly
become a Radical, while remaining a devout Catholic, never ceased to
play a part and to betray his opinions. I would not venture to say that
this was the case, although I have often observed strange
inconsistencies between the things he said when talking and those he
wrote; and to tell the truth, he always seemed to me to be more sincere
in the dread he entertained of revolutions than in the opinions he had
borrowed from them. What always especially struck me in him was the
shortcomings of his mind. No writer ever to a greater extent preserved
in public business the habits and peculiarities of that calling. When he
had established a certain agreement between the different clauses of a
law and drawn it up in a certain ingenious and striking manner, he
thought he had done all that was necessary: he was absorbed in questions
of form, of symmetry, and cohesion.

But what he especially sought for was novelty. Institutions which had
already been tried elsewhere or elsewhen seemed to him as hateful as
commonplaces, and the first merit of a law in his eyes was to resemble
in no way that which had preceded it. It is known that the law laying
down the Constitution was his work. At the time of the General Election
I met him and he said, with a certain complacency, "Has anything in the
world ever been seen like what is seen to-day? Where is the country that
has gone so far as to give votes to servants, paupers and soldiers?
Confess that no one ever thought of it before." And rubbing his hands,
he added, "It will be very curious to see the result." He spoke of it as
though it were an experiment in chemistry.




PART THE THIRD




_MY TERM OF OFFICE_

     _This part was commenced at Versailles on the 16th of September
     1851, during the prorogation of the National Assembly._

     _To come at once to this part of my recollections, I pass over the
     previous period, which extends from the end of the days of June
     1848 to the 3rd of June 1849. I return to it later if I have time.
     I have thought it more important, while my recollections are still
     fresh in my mind, to recall the five months during which I was a
     member of the Government._




CHAPTER I

     MY RETURN TO FRANCE--FORMATION OF THE CABINET.


While I was thus occupied in witnessing upon the private stage of
Germany one act of the great drama of the European Revolution, my
attention was suddenly drawn towards France and fixed upon our affairs
by unexpected and alarming news. I heard of the almost incredible check
received by our army beneath the walls of Rome, the violent debates
which followed in the Constituent Assembly, the excitement produced
throughout the country by these two causes, and lastly, the General
Election, whose result deceived the expectations of both parties and
brought over one hundred and fifty Montagnards into the new Assembly.
However, the demagogic wind which had suddenly blown over a part of
France had not prevailed in the Department of la Manche. All the former
members for the department who had separated from the Conservative Party
in the Assembly had gone under in the _scrutin_. Of thirteen
representatives only four had survived; as for me, I had received more
votes than all the others, although I was absent and silent, and
although I had openly voted for Cavaignac in the previous month of
December. Nevertheless, I was almost unanimously elected, less because
of my opinions than of the great personal consideration which I enjoyed
outside politics, an honourable position no doubt, but difficult to
retain in the midst of parties, and destined to become very precarious
on the day when the latter should themselves become exclusive as they
became violent.

I set out as soon as I received this news. At Bonn a sudden
indisposition obliged Madame de Tocqueville to stop. She herself urged
me to leave her and to continue my journey, and I did so, although with
regret; for I was leaving her alone in a country still agitated by civil
war; and moreover, it is in moments of difficulty or peril that her
courage and her great sense are so helpful to me.

I arrived in Paris, if I am not mistaken, on the 25th of May 1849, four
days before the meeting of the Legislative, and during the last
convulsions of the Constituent Assembly. A few weeks had sufficed to
make the aspect of the political world entirely unrecognizable, owing
less to the changes which had taken place in outside facts, than to the
prodigious revolution which had in a few days taken place in men's
minds.

The party which was in power at my departure was so still, and the
material result of the elections should, I thought, have strengthened
its hands. This party, composed of so many different parties, and
wishing either to stop or drive back the Revolution, had obtained an
enormous majority in the electoral colleges, and would command more than
two-thirds of the new Assembly. Nevertheless, I found it seized with so
profound a terror that I can only compare it with that which followed
February: so true is it that in politics one must argue as in war, and
never forget that the effect of events should be measured less by what
they are in themselves than by the impressions they give.

The Conservatives, who for six months had seen all the bye-elections
invariably turning to their advantage, who filled and dominated almost
all the local councils, had placed an almost unlimited confidence in the
system of universal suffrage, after professing unbounded distrust of it.
In the General Election which was just decided, they had expected not
only to conquer but to annihilate, so to speak, their adversaries, and
they were as much cast down at not attaining the absolute triumph which
they had dreamt of as though they had really been beaten. On the other
hand, the Montagnards, who had thought themselves lost, were as
intoxicated with joy and mad audacity as though the elections had
assured them a majority in the new Assembly. Why had the event thus at
the same time deceived the hopes and fears of both parties? It is
difficult to say for certain, for great masses of men move by virtue of
causes almost as unknown to humanity itself as those which rule the
movements of the sea. In both cases the reasons of the phenomenon are
concealed and, in a sense, lost in the midst of its immensity.

We are, at any rate, entitled to believe that the Conservatives owed
their rebuff mainly to the faults which they themselves committed. Their
intolerance, when they thought their triumph assured, of those who,
without sharing their ideas, had assisted them in fighting the
Montagnards; the violent administration of the new Minister of the
Interior, M. Faucher; and more than all, the poor success of the Roman
expedition prejudiced against them a portion of the people who were
naturally disposed to follow them, and threw these into the arms of the
agitators.

One hundred and fifty Montagnards, as I said, had been elected. A part
of the peasantry and the majority of the army had voted for them: it was
the two anchors of mercy which had snapped in the midst of the tempest.
Terror was universal: it taught anew to the various monarchical parties
the tolerance and modesty which they had practised immediately after
February, but which they had to a great extent forgotten during the past
six months. It was recognized on every hand that there could no longer
be any question, for the present, of emerging from the Republic, and
that all that remained to be done was to oppose the moderate Republicans
to the Montagnards.

The same ministers whom they had created and instigated they now
accused, and a modification of the Cabinet was loudly demanded. The
Cabinet itself saw that it was insufficient, and implored to be
replaced. At the time of my departure I had seen the committee of the
Rue de Poitiers refuse to admit the name of M. Dufaure to its lists; I
now saw every glance directed towards M. Dufaure and his friends, who
were called upon in the most pathetic manner to take office and save
society.

On the night of my arrival, I heard that some of my friends were dining
together at a little restaurant in the Champs-Elysees. I hastened to
join them, and found Dufaure, Lanjuinais, Beaumont, Corcelles, Vivien,
Lamoriciere, Bedeau, and one or two more whose names are not so well
known. I was informed in a few words of the position of affairs. Barrot,
who had been invited by the President to form a cabinet, had for some
days been exhausting himself in vain efforts to do so. M. Thiers, M.
Mole and the more important of their friends had refused to undertake
the government. They had made up their minds, nevertheless, as will be
seen, to remain its masters, but without becoming ministers. The
uncertainty of the future, the general instability, the difficulties and
perhaps the dangers of the moment kept them aloof. They were eager
enough for power, but not for responsibility. Barrot, repulsed on that
side, had come to us. He asked us, or rather he besought us, to become
his colleagues. But which among us to choose? What ministries to allot
to us? What colleagues to give us? What general policy to adopt? From
all these questions had arisen difficulties in execution which, till
then, seemed insurmountable. Already, more than once, Barrot had
returned towards the natural chiefs of the majority; and repelled by
them, had fallen back upon us.

Time passed amid these sterile labours; the dangers and difficulties
increased; the news became each day more alarming, and the Ministry were
liable at any moment to be impeached by the dying but furious Assembly.

I returned home greatly preoccupied, as will be believed, by what I had
heard. I was convinced that it only depended upon the wishes of myself
and my friends to become ministers. We were the necessary and obvious
men. I knew the leaders of the majority well enough to be sure that they
would never commit themselves to taking charge of affairs under a
government which seemed to them so ephemeral, and that, even if they had
the disinterestedness, they would not have the courage to do so. Their
pride and their timidity assured me of their abstention. It was enough
for us, therefore, to stand firm on our ground to compel them to come
and fetch us. But ought we to wish to become ministers? I asked myself
this very seriously. I think I may do myself the justice to say that I
did not indulge in the smallest illusion respecting the true
difficulties of the enterprise, and that I looked upon the future with
a clearness of view which we rarely possess except when we consider the
past.

Everybody expected to see fighting in the streets. I myself regarded it
as imminent; the furious audacity which the result of the elections had
imparted to the Mountain and the opportunity afforded to it by the Rome
affair seemed to make an event of this kind inevitable. I was not,
however, very anxious about the issue. I was convinced that, although
the majority of the soldiers had voted for the Mountain, the army would
fight against it without hesitation. The soldier who individually votes
for a candidate at an election and the soldier acting under pressure of
_esprit de corps_ and military discipline are two different men. The
thoughts of the one do not regulate the actions of the other. The Paris
garrison was very numerous, well commanded, experienced in street
warfare, and still filled with the memory of the passions and examples
which had been left to it by the days of June. I therefore felt certain
of victory. But I was very anxious as to the eventual results of this
victory: what seemed to others the end of the difficulties I regarded as
their commencement. I considered them almost insurmountable, as I
believe they really were.

In whichever direction I looked, I saw no solid or lasting stand-point
for us.

Public opinion looked to us, but it would have been unsafe to rely upon
it for support; fear drove the country in our direction, but its
memories, its secret instincts, its passions could scarcely fail soon to
withdraw it from us, so soon as the fear should have vanished. Our
object was, if possible, to found the Republic, or at least to maintain
it for some time, by governing it in a regular, moderate, conservative,
and absolutely constitutional way; and this could not allow us to remain
popular for long, since everybody wanted to evade the Constitution. The
Mountain wanted more, the Monarchists much less.

In the Assembly it was much worse still. The same general causes were
aggravated by a thousand accidents arising from the interests and
vanities of the party leaders. The latter were quite content to allow us
to assume the government, but we must not expect them to allow us to
govern. So soon as the crisis was passed, we might expect every sort of
ambush on their part.

As to the President, I did not know him yet, but it was evident that we
could not rely upon him to support us in his Council, except where the
jealousy and hatred were concerned with which our common adversaries
inspired him. His sympathies must always lie in an opposite direction;
for our views were not only different, but naturally opposed to one
another. We wanted to make the Republic live: he longed for its
inheritance. We only supplied him with ministers where he wanted
accomplices.

To these difficulties, which were in a sense inherent to the situation
and consequently permanent, were added passing ones which it was not at
all easy to surmount: the revolutionary agitation revived in part of the
country; the spirit and habits of exclusion spread and already rooted in
the public administration; the Roman expedition, so badly conceived and
so badly conducted that it was now as difficult to bring it to an end as
to get out of it; in fact, the whole legacy of mistakes committed by our
predecessors.

There were reasons enough for hesitation; and yet I did not hesitate.
The idea of taking a post from which fear kept so many people off, and
of relieving society from the bad pass in which it had been involved,
flattered at the same time my sense of honour and my pride. I was quite
aware that I should only be passing through power, and that I should not
stay there; but I hoped to stay long enough to be able to render some
signal service to my country and to raise myself. This was enough to
attract me.

I at once took three resolutions:

First, not to refuse office if an opportunity offered;

Second, only to enter the Government together with my principal friends,
directing the principal offices, so that we might always remain the
masters of the Cabinet;

Third and last, to behave every day when in office as though I was to be
out of it the next day, that is to say, without ever subordinating to
the necessity of maintaining my position that of remaining true to
myself.

The next five or six days were wholly taken up in fruitless endeavours
to form a ministry. The attempts made were so numerous, so overlapping,
so full of small incidents--great events of one day forgotten the
next--that I find it difficult to retrace them in my memory, in spite of
the prominent part which I myself played in some of them. The problem
was undoubtedly a difficult one to solve under its given conditions. The
President was willing enough to change the appearance of his ministry,
but he was determined to retain in it the men whom he considered his
principal friends. The leaders of the Monarchical parties refused
themselves to take the responsibility of government; but they were not
willing either that it should be entrusted entirely to men over whom
they had no hold. If they consented to admit us, it was only in a very
small number and in second-rate offices. We were looked upon as a
necessary but disagreeable remedy, which it was preferable only to
administer in very small doses.

Dufaure was first asked to join alone, and to be satisfied with the
Public Works. He refused, demanded the Interior, and two other offices
for his friends. After much difficulty they agreed to give him the
Interior, but they refused the rest. I have reason to believe that he
was at one time on the point of accepting this proposal and of again
leaving me in the lurch, as he had done six months ago. Not that he was
treacherous or indifferent in his friendships; but the sight of this
important office almost within reach, which he could honestly accept,
possessed a strange attraction for him. It did not precisely cause him
to abandon his friends, but it distracted his thoughts from them, and
made him ready to forget them. He was firm, however, this time; and not
being able to get him by himself, they offered to take me with him. I
was most in view at that time, because the new Legislative Assembly had
just elected me one of its vice-presidents.[14] But what office to give
me? I only thought myself fit to fill the Ministry of Public
Instruction. Unfortunately that was in the hands of M. de Falloux, an
indispensable man, whom it was equally important to the Legitimists to
retain, of whom he was one of the leaders; to the religious party, who
saw in him a protector; and finally to the President, of whom he had
become the friend. I was offered Agriculture, and refused it. At last,
in despair, Barrot came and asked me to accept the Foreign Office. I
myself had made great efforts to persuade M. de Remusat to accept this
office, and what happened on this occasion between him and me is so
characteristic that it is worthy of being retold. I was very anxious
that M. de Remusat should join the ministry with us. He was at once a
friend of M. Thiers and a man of honour, a rather unusual combination;
he alone was able to assure us, if not the support, at least the
neutrality of that statesman, without infesting us with his spirit.
Overcome by the insistency of Barrot and the rest of us, Remusat one
evening yielded. He had pledged us his word, but the next morning he
came to withdraw it. I knew for certain that he had seen M. Thiers in
the interval, and he confessed to me himself that M. Thiers, who was
then loudly proclaiming the necessity of our accepting office, had
dissuaded him from joining us. "I fully saw," he said, "that to become
your colleague would not be to give you his assistance, but only to
expose myself to be quarrelling with him before long." Those were the
sort of men we had to deal with.

     [14: 1 June 1849, by 336 votes to 261.]

I had never thought of the Foreign Office, and my first impulse was to
refuse it. I thought myself unsuited to fill an office for which nothing
had prepared me. Among my papers I have found a trace of these
hesitations, in the notes of a conversation which took place at a dinner
which some of my friends and I had at that time....

I decided at last, however, to accept the Foreign Office, but I made it
a condition that Lanjuinais should enter the Council at the same time as
myself. I had many very strong reasons for acting as I did. In the first
place, I thought that three ministers were indispensable to us in order
to acquire the preponderance in the Cabinet which we needed in order to
do any good. I thought, moreover, that Lanjuinais would be very useful
to keep Dufaure himself within the lines I wished to follow. I did not
consider myself to have enough hold over him. Above all, I wanted to
have near me a friend with whom I could talk openly of all things: a
great advantage at any time, but especially in such times of suspicion
and variableness as ours, and for a work as hazardous as that which I
was undertaking.

From all these different points of view Lanjuinais suited me admirably,
although we were of very dissimilar natures. His humour was as calm and
placid as mine was restless and anxious. He was methodical, slow,
indolent, prudent, and even over-scrupulous, and he was very backward to
enter upon any undertaking; but having once entered upon it he never
drew back, and showed himself until the end as resolved and stubborn as
a Breton of the true stamp. He was very slow in giving his opinion, and
very explicit, and even candid to the verge of rudeness, when he did
give it. One could not expect from his friendship either enthusiasm,
ardour, or _abandon_; on the other hand, one need not dread either
faint-heartedness, treachery, or after-thoughts. In short, he was a very
safe associate, and taken all round, the most honourable man I ever met
in public life. Of all of us, it was he who seemed to me least to mix
his private or interested views with his love of the public good.

No one objected to the name of Lanjuinais; but the difficulty was to
find him a portfolio. I asked for him that of Commerce and Agriculture,
which had been held since the 20th of December by Buffel, a friend of
Falloux. The latter refused to let his colleague go; I insisted; and the
new Cabinet, which was almost complete, remained for twenty-four hours
as though dissolved. To conquer my resolution, Falloux attempted a
direct measure: he came to my house, where I lay confined to my bed,
urged me, begged me to give up Lanjuinais and to leave his friend Buffel
at the Ministry of Agriculture. I had made up my mind, and I closed my
ears. Falloux was vexed, but retained his self-control and rose to go. I
thought everything had gone wrong: on the contrary, everything had gone
right.

"You are determined," he said, with that aristocratic good grace with
which he was able to cover all his feelings, even the bitterest; "you
are determined, and so I must yield. It shall not be said that a private
consideration has, at so difficult and critical a period, made me break
off so necessary a combination. I shall remain alone in the midst of
you. But I hope you will not forget that I shall be not only your
colleague but your prisoner!"

One hour later the Cabinet was formed,[15] and Dufaure, who told me of
it, invited me to take immediate possession of the Foreign Office.

     [15: The Presidential decree is dated 2 June 1849.]

Thus was born this Ministry which was so painfully and slowly formed and
which was destined to have so short an existence. During the long
childbirth that preceded it, the man who was at the greatest trouble in
France was certainly Barrot: his sincere love for the public weal
inclined him to desire a change of cabinet, and his ambition, which was
more intimately and narrowly bound up with his honesty than might have
been believed, made him long with unequalled ardour to remain at the
head of the new Cabinet. He therefore went incessantly to and fro from
one to the other, addressing very pathetic and sometimes very eloquent
objurations to every one, now turning to the leaders of the majority,
now to us, now again to the new Republicans, whom he regarded as more
moderate than the others. And for that matter, he was equally inclined
to carry either one or the other with him; for in politics he was
incapable of either hatred or friendship. His heart is an evaporating
vase, in which nothing remains.




CHAPTER II

     ASPECT OF THE CABINET--ITS FIRST ACTS UNTIL AFTER THE
     INSURRECTIONARY ATTEMPTS OF THE 13TH OF JUNE.


The ministry was composed as follows:

     Minister of Justice and }
     President of the Council}     Barrot.
     Finance                       Passy.
     War                           Rulhiere.
     Navy                          Tracy.
     Public Works                  Lacrosse.
     Public Instruction            Falloux.
     Interior                      Dufaure.
     Agriculture                   Lanjuinais.
     Foreign Affairs               Tocqueville.

Dufaure, Lanjuinais and I were the only new ministers; all the others
had belonged to the previous Cabinet.

Passy was a man of real merit, but not of a very attractive merit. His
mind was narrow, maladroit, provoking, disparaging and ingenious rather
than just. Nevertheless, he was more inclined to be just when it was
really necessary to act than when it was only a question of talking; for
he was more fond of paradox than liable to put it into practice. I never
knew a greater talker, nor one who so easily consoled himself for
troublesome events by explaining the causes which had produced them and
the consequences likely to ensue. When he had finished drawing the most
sombre picture of the state of affairs, he concluded with a smiling and
placid air, saying, "So that there is practically no means of saving
ourselves, and we have only to look forward to the total overthrow of
Society." In other respects he was a cultured and experienced minister;
his courage and honesty were proof against everything; and he was as
incapable of vacillation as of treachery. His ideas, his feelings, his
former intimacy with Dufaure and, above all, his eager animosity against
Thiers made us certain of him.

Rulhiere would have belonged to the monarchic and ultra-conservative
party if he had belonged to any, and especially if Changarnier had not
been in the world; but he was a soldier who only thought of remaining
Minister for War. We perceived at the first glance his extreme jealousy
of the Commander-in-Chief of the Army in Paris; and the intimacy between
the latter and the leaders of the majority, and his influence over the
President, obliged Rulhiere to throw himself into our arms, and forcibly
drove him to depend upon us.

Tracy had by nature a weak character, which was, as it were, enclosed
and confined in the very precise and systematic theories which he owed
to the ideological education he had received from his father.[16] But,
in the end, contact with every-day events and the shock of revolutions
had worn out this rigid envelope, and all that remained was a wavering
intelligence and a sluggish, but always honest and kindly, heart.

     [16: Antoine Louis Claude Destutt de Tracy, 1754-1836, the
     celebrated ideologist, Condillac's disciple.--A.T. de M.]

Lacrosse was a poor devil whose private affairs were more or less
involved. The chances of the Revolution had driven him into office from
an obscure corner of the Opposition, and he never grew weary of the
delight of being a minister. He gladly leant upon us, but he endeavoured
at the same time to make sure of the good-will of the President of the
Republic by rendering him all sorts of little services and small
compliments. To tell the truth, it would have been difficult for him to
recommend himself in any other way, for he was a rare nonentity, and
understood nothing about anything. We were reproached for taking office
in company with such incapable ministers as Tracy and Lacrosse, and not
without justice, for it was a great cause of ruin: not only because they
did their work badly, but because their notorious insufficiency kept
their succession always open, so to speak, and created a sort of
permanent ministerial crisis.

As to Barrot, he adhered naturally to us from feeling and ideas. His old
liberal associations, his republican tastes, his Opposition memories
attached him to us. Had he been differently connected, he might have
become, however regretfully, our adversary; but, having him once among
us, we were sure of him.

Of all the Ministry, therefore, only Falloux was a stranger to us by his
starting-point, his engagements, and his inclinations. He alone
represented the leaders of the majority on the Council, or rather he
seemed to represent them, for in reality, as I will explain later, he
represented, besides himself, nothing but the Church. This isolated
position, together with the secret aims of his policy, drove him to seek
support beyond us; he strove to establish it in the Assembly and with
the President, but discreetly and cleverly, as he did everything.

Thus constituted, the Cabinet had one great weakness: it was about to
govern with the aid of a composite majority, without itself being a
coalition ministry. But, on the other hand, it possessed the very great
strength which ministers derive from uniform origin, identical
instincts, old bonds of friendship, mutual confidence, and common ends.

I shall doubtless be asked what these ends were, where we were going,
what we wanted. We live in times so uncertain and so obscure that I
should hesitate to reply to that question in the name of my colleagues;
but I will readily reply for myself. I did not believe then, any more
than I do now, that the republican form of government is the best suited
to the needs of France. What I mean when I say the republican form of
government, is the elective Executive Power. With a people among whom
habit, tradition, custom have assured so great a place to the Executive
Power, its instability will always be, in periods of excitement, a
cause of revolution, and in peaceful times, a cause of great uneasiness.
Moreover, I have always considered the Republic an ill-balanced form of
government, which always promised more, but gave less, liberty than the
Constitutional Monarchy. And yet I sincerely wished to maintain the
Republic; and although there were, so to speak, no Republicans in
France, I did not look upon the maintenance of it as absolutely
impossible.

I wished to maintain it because I saw nothing ready or fit to set in its
place. The old Dynasty was profoundly antipathetic to the majority of
the country. Amid this flagging of all political passion, which was the
result of the fatigue of the revolutions and their vain promises, one
genuine passion remained alive in France: hatred of the Ancien Regime
and mistrust of the old privileged classes who represented it in the
eyes of the people. This sentiment passes through revolutions without
dissolving in them, like the water of those marvellous fountains which,
according to the ancients, passed across the waves of the sea without
mixing with or disappearing in them. As to the Orleans Dynasty, the
experience the people had had of it did not particularly incline them to
return to it so soon. It was bound once more to throw into Opposition
all the upper classes and the clergy, and to separate itself from the
people, as it had done before, leaving the cares and profits of
government to those same middle classes whom I had already seen during
eighteen years so inadequate for the good government of France.
Moreover, nothing was ready for its triumph.

Louis Napoleon alone was ready to take the place of the Republic,
because he already held the power in his hands. But what could come of
his success, except a bastard Monarchy, despised by the enlightened
classes, hostile to liberty, governed by intriguers, adventurers, and
valets?

The Republic was doubtless difficult to maintain; for those who favoured
it were, for the most part, incapable or unworthy of governing it, while
those who were fit to conduct it detested it. But it was also rather
difficult to pull down. The hatred borne for it was an easy-going
hatred, as were all the passions which the country then entertained.
Besides, the Government was found fault with, but no other was loved in
its place. Three parties, mutually irreconcilable, more hostile to one
another than either of them was to the Republic, contended with each
other for the future. As to a majority, there was no such thing.

I thought, therefore, that the Government of the Republic, having
existence in its favour, and having no adversaries except minorities
difficult to coalesce, would be able to maintain its position amid the
inertia of the masses, if it was conducted with moderation and wisdom.
For this reason, I was resolved not to lend myself to any steps that
might be taken against it, but rather to defend it. Almost all the
members of the Council thought as I did. Dufaure believed more than I
did in the soundness of republican institutions and in their future.
Barrot was less inclined than I to keep them always respected; but we
all wished at the present time firmly to maintain them. This common
resolution was our political bond and standard.

So soon as the Ministry was formed, it repaired to the President of the
Republic to hold a Council. It was the first time I had come into
contact with him. I had only seen him at a distance at the time of the
Constituent Assembly. He received us with politeness. It was all we
could expect from him, for Dufaure had acted vigorously against him, and
had spoken almost outrageously of his candidature no longer than six
months ago, while both Lanjuinais and myself had openly voted for his
opponent.

Louis Napoleon plays so great a part in the rest of my narrative that he
seems to me to deserve a special portrait amid the host of
contemporaries of whom I have been content to sketch the features. Of
all his ministers, and perhaps of all the men who refused to take part
in his conspiracy against the Republic, I was the one who was most
advanced in his good graces, who saw him closest, and who was best able
to judge him.

He was vastly superior to what his preceding career and his mad
enterprises might very properly have led one to believe of him. This was
my first impression on conversing with him. In this respect he deceived
his adversaries, and perhaps still more his friends, if this term can be
applied to the politicians who patronized his candidature. The greater
part of these, in fact, elected him, not because of his merits, but
because of his presumed mediocrity. They expected to find in him an
instrument which they could handle as they pleased, and which it would
always be lawful for them to break when they wished to. In this they
were greatly deceived.

As a private individual, Louis Napoleon possessed certain attractive
qualities: an easy and kindly humour, a mind which was gentle, and even
tender, without being delicate, great confidence in his intercourse,
perfect simplicity, a certain personal modesty amidst the immense pride
derived from his origin. He was capable of showing affection, and able
to inspire it in those who approached him. His conversation was brief
and unsuggestive. He had not the art of drawing others out or of
establishing intimate relations with them; nor any facility in
expressing his views. He had the writer's habit, and a certain amount of
the author's self-love. His dissimulation, which was the deep
dissimulation of a man who has spent his life in plots, was assisted in
a remarkable way by the immobility of his features and his want of
expression: for his eyes were dull and opaque, like the thick glass used
to light the cabins of ships, which admits the light but cannot be seen
through. Careless of danger, he possessed a fine, cool courage in days
of crisis; and at the same time--a common thing enough--he was very
vacillating in his plans. He was often seen to change his direction, to
advance, hesitate, draw back, to his great detriment: for the nation had
chosen him in order to dare all things, and what it expected from him
was audacity and not prudence. It was said that he had always been
greatly addicted to pleasures, and not very dainty in his choice of
them. This passion for vulgar enjoyment and this taste for luxury had
increased still more with the facilities offered by his position. Each
day he wore out his energy in indulgence, and deadened and degraded even
his ambition. His intelligence was incoherent, confused, filled with
great but ill-assorted thoughts, which he borrowed now from the examples
of Napoleon, now from socialistic theories, sometimes from recollections
of England, where he had lived: very different, and often very contrary,
sources. These he had laboriously collected in his solitary meditations,
far removed from the contact of men and facts, for he was naturally a
dreamer and a visionary. But when he was forced to emerge from these
vague, vast regions in order to confine his mind to the limits of a
piece of business, it showed itself to be capable of justice, sometimes
of subtlety and compass, and even of a certain depth, but never sure,
and always prepared to place a grotesque idea by the side of a correct
one.

Generally, it was difficult to come into long and very close contact
with him without discovering a little vein of madness running through
his better sense, the sight of which always recalled the escapades of
his youth, and served to explain them.

It may be admitted, for that matter, that it was his madness rather than
his reason which, thanks to circumstances, caused his success and his
force: for the world is a strange theatre. There are moments in it when
the worst plays are those which succeed best. If Louis Napoleon had been
a wise man, or a man of genius, he would never have become President of
the Republic.

He trusted in his star; he firmly believed himself to be the instrument
of destiny and the necessary man. I have always believed that he was
really convinced of his right, and I doubt whether Charles X. was ever
more infatuated with his legitimism than he with his. Moreover, he was
quite as incapable of alleging a reason for his faith; for, although he
had a sort of abstract adoration for the people, he had very little
taste for liberty. The characteristic and fundamental feature of his
mind in political matters was his hatred of and contempt for assemblies.
The rule of the Constitutional Monarchy seemed to him even more
insupportable than that of the Republic. His unlimited pride in the name
he bore, which willingly bowed before the nation, revolted at the idea
of yielding to the influence of a parliament.

Before attaining power he had had time to strengthen his natural taste
for the footman class, which is always displayed by mediocre princes, by
the habits of twenty years of conspiracy spent amid low-class
adventurers, men of ruined fortunes or blemished reputations, and young
debauchees, the only persons who, during all this time, could have
consented to serve him as go-betweens or accomplices. He himself, in
spite of his good manners, allowed a glimpse to pierce through of the
adventurer and the prince of fortune. He continued to take pleasure in
this inferior company after he was no longer obliged to live in it. I
believe that his difficulty in expressing his thoughts otherwise than in
writing attached him to people who had long been familiar with his
current of thought and with his dreamings, and that his inferiority in
conversation rendered him generally averse to contact with clever men.
Moreover, he desired above all things to meet with devotion to his
person and his cause, as though his person and his cause were such as to
be able to arouse devotion: merit annoyed him when it displayed ever so
little independence. He wanted believers in his star, and vulgar
worshippers of his fortune.

This was the man whom the need of a chief and the power of a memory had
placed at the head of France, and with whom we would have to govern.

It would be difficult to imagine a more critical moment in which to
assume the direction of affairs. The Constituent Assembly, before ending
its turbulent existence, had passed a resolution, on the 7th of June
1849, prohibiting the Government from attacking Rome. The first thing I
learnt on entering the Cabinet was that the order to attack Rome had
been sent to the army three days before. This flagrant disobedience of
the injunctions of a sovereign Assembly, this war undertaken against a
people in revolution, because of its revolution, and in defiance of the
terms of the Constitution which commanded us to respect all foreign
nationalities, made inevitable and brought nearer the conflict which we
dreaded. What would be the issue of this new struggle? All the letters
from prefects of departments that were laid before us, all the police
reports that reached us were calculated to throw us into great alarm. I
had seen, at the end of the Cavaignac Administration, how a government
can be supported in its visionary hopes by the self-interested
complaisance of its agents. This time I saw, and much more closely, how
these same agents can work to increase the terror of those who employ
them: contrary effects produced by the same cause. Each one of them,
judging that we were uneasy, wished to signalize himself by the
discovery of new plots, and in his turn to supply us with some fresh
indication of the conspiracy which threatened us. The more they believed
in our success, the more readily they talked to us of our danger. For it
is one of the dangerous characteristics of this sort of information,
that it becomes rarer and less explicit in the measure that the peril
increases and the need for information becomes greater. The agents in
that case, doubting the duration of the government which employs them,
and already fearing its successor, either scarcely speak at all or keep
absolute silence. But now they made a great noise. To listen to them, it
was impossible not to think that we were on the edge of an abyss, and
yet I did not believe a word of it. I was quite convinced then, as I
have been ever since, that official correspondence and police reports,
which may be useful for purposes of consultation when there is question
of discovering a particular plot, only serve to give exaggerated and
incomplete and invariably false notions when one wishes to judge or
foresee great movements of parties. In a matter of this kind, it is the
aspect of the whole country, the knowledge of its needs, its passions
and its ideas, that can instruct us, general _data_ which one can
procure for one's self, and which are never supplied by even the best
placed and best accredited agents.

The sight of these general facts had led me to believe that at this
moment no armed revolution was to be feared: but a combat was; and the
expectation of civil war is always cruel, especially when it comes in
time to join its fury to that of pestilence. Paris was at that time
ravaged by cholera. Death struck at all ranks. Already a large number of
members of the Constituent Assembly had succumbed; and Bugeaud, whom
Africa had spared, was dying.

Had I entertained a moment's doubt as to the imminence of the crisis,
the aspect alone of the new Assembly would have clearly announced it to
me. It is not too much to say that one breathed the atmosphere of civil
war in its midst. The speeches were short, the gestures violent, the
words extravagant, the insults outrageous and direct. We met for the
present in the old Chamber of Deputies. This room, built for 460
members, had difficulty in containing 750. The members, therefore, sat
touching, while detesting, each other; they pressed one against the
other in spite of the hatred which divided them; the discomfort
increased their anger. It was a duel in a barrel. How would the
Montagnards be able to restrain themselves? They saw that they were
sufficiently numerous to entitle them to believe themselves very strong
in the country and in the army. Yet they remained too weak in Parliament
to hope to prevail or even to count there. They were offered a fine
occasion of resorting to force. All Europe, which was still in
commotion, might with one great blow, struck in Paris, be thrown into
revolution anew. This was more than was necessary for men of such savage
temper.

It was easy to foresee that the movement would burst forth at the moment
when it should become known that the order had been given to attack Rome
and that the attack had taken place. And this was what in fact occurred.

The order given had remained secret. But on the 10th of June, the
report of the first combat became current.

On the 11th, the Mountain burst into furious speech. Ledru-Rollin made
an appeal from the tribune for civil war, saying that the Constitution
had been violated and that he and his friends were ready to defend it by
every method, including that of arms. The indictment was demanded of the
President of the Republic and of the preceding Cabinet.

On the 12th, the Committee of the Assembly, instructed to examine the
question raised the day before, rejected the impeachment and called upon
the Assembly to pronounce, where it sat, upon the fate of the President
and Ministers. The Mountain opposed this immediate discussion and
demanded that documents should be laid before it. What was its object in
thus postponing the debate? It was difficult to say. Did it hope that
this delay would complete the general irritation, or did it in its heart
of hearts wish to give it time to calm down? One thing is certain, that
its principal leaders, those who were more accustomed to speaking than
to fighting, and who were passionate rather than resolute, displayed
that day, amid all the intemperance of their language, a sort of
hesitation of which they had given no sign the day before. After half
drawing the sword from the scabbard, they appeared to wish to replace
it; but it was too late, the signal had been observed by their friends
outside, and thenceforward they no longer led, but were led in their
turn.

During these two days, my position was most cruel. As I have already
stated, I disapproved entirely of the manner in which the Roman
expedition had been undertaken and conducted. Before joining the
Cabinet, I had solemnly declared to Barrot that I declined to take any
responsibility except for the future, and that he must himself be
prepared to defend what had up to that time been done in Italy. I had
only accepted office on this condition. I therefore kept silent during
the discussion on the 11th, and allowed Barrot to bear the brunt of the
battle alone. But when, on the 12th, I saw my colleagues threatened with
an impeachment, I considered that I could no longer abstain. The demand
for fresh documents gave me an opportunity to intervene, without having
to express an opinion upon the original question. I did so vigorously,
although in very few words.

On reading over this little speech in the _Moniteur_, I cannot but think
it very insignificant and badly turned. Nevertheless, I was applauded to
the echo by the majority, because in moments of crisis, when one is in
danger of civil war, it is the movement of thought and the accent of
one's words which make an impression, rather than their value. I
directly attacked Ledru-Rollin. I accused him with violence of only
wanting troubles and of spreading lies in order to create them. The
feeling which impelled me to speak was an energetic one, the tone was
determined and aggressive, and although I spoke very badly, being as
yet unaccustomed to my new part, I met with much favour.

Ledru replied to me, and told the majority that they were on the side of
the Cossacks. They answered that he was on the side of the plunderers
and the incendiaries. Thiers, commenting on this thought, said that
there was an intimate relation between the man they had just listened to
and the insurgents of June. The Assembly rejected the demand for an
impeachment by a large majority, and broke up.

Although the leaders of the Mountain continued to be outrageous, they
had not shown any great firmness, so that we were able to flatter
ourselves that the decisive moment for the struggle had not yet arrived.
But this was a mistake. The reports which we received during the night
told us that the people were preparing to take up arms.

On the next day, in fact, the language of the demagogic papers
proclaimed that the editors no longer relied upon justice, but upon a
revolution, to acquit them. All of them called either directly or
indirectly for civil war. The National Guard, the schools, the entire
population was summoned by them to repair, unarmed, to a certain
locality, in order to go and present themselves in mass before the doors
of the Assembly. It was a 23rd of June which they wished to commence
with a 15th of May; and, in fact, seven or eight thousand people did
meet at about eleven o'clock at the Chateau-d'Eau. We on our side held
a Council under the President of the Republic. The latter was already in
uniform, and prepared to go out on horseback so soon as he should be
told that the fighting had commenced. For the rest, he had changed
nothing except his clothes. He was exactly the same man as on the day
before: the same rather dejected air, his speech no less slow and no
less embarrassed, his eye no less dull. He showed none of that sort of
warlike excitement and of rather feverish gaiety which the approach of
danger so often gives: an attitude which is perhaps, after all, no more
than the sign of a mind disturbed.

We sent for Changarnier, who explained his preparations to us, and
guaranteed a victory. Dufaure communicated to us the reports he had
received, all of which told of a formidable insurrection. He then left
for the Ministry of the Interior, which was the centre of action, and at
about mid-day I repaired to the Assembly.

The House was some time before it met, because the President, without
consulting us, had declared, when arranging the Order of the Day on the
evening before, that there would be no public sitting on the next day, a
strange blunder which would have looked like treachery in anyone else.
While messengers were being despatched to inform the members at their
own houses, I went to see the President of the Assembly in his private
room: most of the leaders of the majority were there before me. Every
face bore traces of excitement and anxiety; the contest was both feared
and demanded. They began by vehemently accusing the Ministry of
slackness. Thiers, lying back in a big arm-chair, with his legs crossed
one over the other, sat rubbing his stomach (for he felt certain
symptoms of the prevailing epidemic), loudly and angrily exclaiming, in
his shrillest _falsetto_, that it was very strange that no one seemed to
think of declaring Paris in a state of siege. I replied gently that we
had thought of it, but that the moment had not yet come to do so, since
the Assembly had not yet met.

The members arrived from every side, attracted less by the messages
despatched to them, which most of them had not even received, than by
the rumours prevalent in the town. The sitting was opened at two
o'clock. The benches of the majority were well filled, but the top of
the Mountain was deserted. The gloomy silence which reigned in this part
of the House was more alarming than the shouts which came from that
quarter as a rule. It was a proof that discussion had ceased, and that
the civil war was about to commence.

At three o'clock, Dufaure came and asked that the state of siege should
be proclaimed in Paris. Cavaignac seconded him in one of those short
addresses which he sometimes delivered, and in which his mind, which was
naturally middling and confused reached the level of his soul and
approached the sublime. Under these circumstances he became, for a
moment, the man of the most genuine eloquence that I have ever heard
speak in our Assemblies: he left all the mere orators far behind him.

"You have just said," he exclaimed, addressing the Montagnard[17] who
was leaving the tribune, "that I have fallen from power. That is not
true: I retired voluntarily. The national will does not overthrow; it
commands, and we obey. I add--and I want the republican party always to
be able to say so with justice: I retired voluntarily, and, in so doing,
my conduct did honour to my republican convictions. You said that we
lived in terror: history is observing us, and will pronounce when the
time comes. But what I say to you myself is this, that although you have
not succeeded in inspiring me with a feeling of terror, you have
inspired me with a feeling of profound sorrow. Shall I tell you one
thing more? You are Republicans of long standing; whereas I have not
worked for the Republic before its foundation, I have not suffered for
it, and I regret that this is so; but I have served it faithfully, and I
have done more: I have governed it. I shall serve nothing else,
understand me well! Write it down, take it down in shorthand, so that it
may remain engraved upon the annals of our deliberations: _I shall serve
nothing else_! Between you and me, I take it, it is a question as to
which of us will serve the Republic best. Well then, my regret is, that
you have served it very badly. I hope, for the sake of my country, that
it is not destined to fall; but if we should be condemned to undergo so
great a blow, remember--remember distinctly--that we shall accuse your
exaggerations and your fury as being the cause of it."

     [17: Pierre Leroux.]

Shortly after the state of siege had been proclaimed, we learnt that the
insurrection had been extinguished. Changarnier and the President,
charging at the head of the cavalry, had cut in two and dispersed the
column which was making its way towards the Assembly. A few
newly-erected barricades had been destroyed, without striking a blow.
The Montagnards, surrounded in the Conservatoire of Arts and Crafts,
which they had turned into their head-quarters, had either been arrested
or taken to flight. We were the masters of Paris.

The same movement took place in several of the large towns, with more
vigour but no less success. At Lyons, the fighting lasted stubbornly for
five hours, and the victory was for a moment in doubt. But for that
matter, when we were once victorious in Paris, we distressed ourselves
very little about the provinces; for we knew that in France, in matters
both of order and of disorder, Paris lays down the law.

Thus ended the second Insurrection of June, very different to the first
by the extent of its violence and its duration, but similar in the
causes which led to its failure. At the time of the first, the people,
carried away less by their opinions than by their appetites, had fought
alone, without being able to attract their representatives to their
head. This time the representatives had been unable to induce the people
to follow them into battle. In June 1848, the army had no leaders; in
June 1849, the leaders had no army.

They were singular personages, those Montagnards: their quarrelsome
nature and their self-conceit were displayed even in measures which
least allowed of it. Among those who, in their newspapers and in their
own persons, had spoken most violently in favour of civil war, and who
had done the most to cover us with insults, was Considerant, the pupil
and successor of Fourier, and the author of so many socialistic dreams
which would only have been ridiculous at any other time, but which were
dangerous in ours. Considerant succeeded in escaping with Ledru-Rollin
from the Conservatoire, and in reaching the Belgian frontier. I had
formerly had social relations with him, and when he arrived in Brussels,
he wrote to me:

     "My dear Tocqueville,

     (Here followed a request for a service which he asked me to do for
     him, and then he went on):

     "Rely upon me at all times for any personal service. You are good
     for two or three months perhaps, and the pure Whites who will
     follow you are good for six months at the longest. You will both
     of you, it is true, have well deserved what is infallibly bound to
     happen to you a little sooner or a little later. But let us talk no
     more politics and respect the very legal, very loyal, and very
     Odilon Barrotesque state of siege."

To this I replied:

     "My dear Considerant,

     "I have done what you ask. I do not wish to take advantage of so
     small a service, but I am very pleased to ascertain, by the way,
     that those odious oppressors of liberty, the Ministers, inspire
     their adversaries with so much confidence that the latter, after
     outlawing them, do not hesitate to apply to them to obtain what is
     just. This proves that there is some good left in us, whatever may
     be said of us. Are you quite sure that if the position had been
     inverted, I should have been able to act in the same way, I will
     not say towards yourself, but towards such and such of your
     political friends whom I might mention? I think the contrary, and I
     solemnly declare to you that if ever they become the masters, I
     shall consider myself quite satisfied if they only leave my head
     upon my shoulders, and ready to declare that their virtue has
     surpassed my greatest expectations."




CHAPTER III

     OUR DOMESTIC POLICY--INTERNAL QUARRELS IN THE CABINET--ITS
     DIFFICULTIES IN ITS RELATIONS WITH THE MAJORITY AND THE PRESIDENT.


We were victorious, but our real difficulties were only about to
commence, and I expected them. I have always held as a maxim, moreover,
that it is after a great success that one generally comes across the
most dangerous chances of ruin: so long as the peril lasts, one has only
his adversaries to deal with, and he triumphs; but after the victory,
one begins to have to reckon with himself, his slackness, his pride, the
imprudent security inspired by victory, and he succumbs.

I was not exposed to this last danger, for I never imagined that we had
surmounted our principal obstacles. I knew that these lay with the very
men with whom we would have to govern the country, and that the rapid
and signal defeat of the Montagnards, instead of guaranteeing us against
the ill-will of the former, would expose us to it without delay. We
should have been much stronger if we had not succeeded so well.

The majority consisted in the main, at that time, of three parties (the
President's party in Parliament was as yet too few in number and of too
evil repute to count). Sixty to eighty members at the utmost were
sincerely with us in our endeavours to found a Moderate Republic, and
these formed the only body we could rely upon in that huge Assembly. The
remainder of the majority consisted of Legitimists, to the number of
some one hundred and sixty, and of old friends or supporters of the
Monarchy of July, for the most part representing those middle classes
who had governed, and above all exploited, France during eighteen years.
I felt at once that of these two parties, that of which we could most
easily make use in our plans was the Legitimist party. The Legitimists
had been excluded from power under the last government; they therefore
had no places and no salaries to regret. Moreover, being for the most
part considerable land-owners, they had not the same need of public
functions as the middle class; or, at least, custom had not taught them
the sweetness of place. Although in principles more irreconcilable to
the Republic than the others, they were better able than most to accept
its duration, for it had destroyed their destroyer, and had opened up to
them a prospect of power; it had served at once their ambition and their
desire for revenge; and it only aroused against itself their fear, which
was, in truth, very great. The old Conservatives, who formed the bulk of
the majority, were much more eager to do away with the Republic; but as
the furious hatred which they bore it was strongly held in check by the
fear of the risk they would run in endeavouring prematurely to abolish
it, and as, moreover, they had long been accustomed to follow in the
wake of power, it would have been easy for us to lead them had we been
able to obtain the support, or even the mere neutrality of their
leaders, of whom the principal were then, as is known, M. Thiers and M.
Mole.

Appreciating this position of affairs, I understood that it was
necessary to subordinate all secondary objects to the principal end in
view, which was to prevent the overthrow of the Republic and especially
to hinder the establishment of the bastard monarchy of Louis Napoleon.
This was at the time the nearest threatening danger.

I thought first of guaranteeing myself against the mistakes of my
friends, for I have always considered as profoundly sensible the old
Norman proverb which says, "Lord, preserve me from my friends: I will
preserve myself from mine enemies."

At the head of our adherents in the National Assembly was General
Lamoriciere, and I greatly dreaded his petulancy, his imprudent
observations, and especially his idleness. I endeavoured to appoint him
to an important and distant embassy. Russia had spontaneously recognized
the new Republic; it was proper that we should resume the diplomatic
relations with her which had been almost interrupted under the last
Government. I cast my eyes upon Lamoriciere in order to entrust him with
this extraordinary and distant mission. He was, besides, a man cut out
for a post of this kind, in which few but generals, and celebrated
generals, succeed. I had some difficulty in persuading him, but the most
difficult thing was to persuade the President of the Republic. He at
first resisted, and told me on that occasion, with a sort of simplicity
which pointed less to candour than to his difficulty in finding words in
which to express himself (these very rarely gave utterance to his
thoughts, but sometimes permitted them to glimmer through), that he
wished to be represented at the principal Courts by ambassadors devoted
to himself. This was not my view of the matter; for I, who was called
upon to instruct the ambassadors, was quite determined to devote myself
only to France. I therefore insisted, but I should have failed if I had
not summoned M. de Falloux to my aid. Falloux was the only man in the
Ministry in whom the President at that time had confidence. He persuaded
him with arguments, of which I do not know the purport, and Lamoriciere
left for Russia. I shall say later what he did.

His departure reassured me as to the conduct of our friends, and I
thought of winning or retaining the necessary allies. Here the task was
more difficult on all points; for, outside my own department, I was
unable to do anything without the consent of the Cabinet, which
contained a number of the most honest minds that one could meet, but so
inflexible and narrow in matters of politics, that I have sometimes
gone so far as to regret not having rather had to do with intelligent
rascals.

As to the Legitimists, my opinion was that they should be allowed to
retain great influence in the direction of Public Instruction. This
proposal had its drawbacks, but it was the only one which could satisfy
them, and which could ensure us their support in return, when it should
become a question of restraining the President and preventing him from
upsetting the Constitution. This plan was followed. Falloux was given a
free hand in his own department, and the Council allowed him to bring
before the Assembly the plan of Public Instruction, which since became
law on the 15th of March 1850. I also advised my colleagues to all the
extent of my power to keep up good relations individually with the
principal members of the Legitimist party, and I followed this line of
conduct myself. I soon became and remained, of all the members of the
Cabinet, the one who lived in the best understanding with them. I even
ended by becoming the sole intermediary between them and ourselves.

It is true that my birth and the society in which I had been brought up
gave me great facilities for this which the others did not possess; for,
although the French nobility have ceased to be a class, they have yet
remained a sort of freemasonry, of which all the members continue to
recognize one another through certain invisible signs, whatever may be
the opinions which make them strangers to one another, or even
adversaries.

It so happened, therefore, that after annoying Falloux more than anyone
else had done before entering the Cabinet, I had no sooner joined it
than I easily became his friend. For that matter, he was a man worth
taking the trouble of coaxing. I do not think that during my whole
political career I ever met anyone of a rarer nature. He possessed the
two essentials necessary for good leadership: an ardent conviction,
which constantly drove him towards his aim without allowing itself to be
turned aside by mortifications or dangers, and a mind which was both
firm and supple, and which applied a great multiplicity and prodigious
variety of means to the execution of a single plan. He was sincere in
this sense, that he only considered, as he declared, his cause and not
his private interest; but otherwise very sly, with a very uncommon and
very effective slyness, for he succeeded, for the time being, in
mingling truth and falsehood in his own belief, before serving up the
mixture to the minds of others. This is the great secret which gives
falsehood all the advantages of sincerity, and which permits its
exponent to persuade to the error which he considers beneficial those
whom he works upon or directs.

In spite of all my efforts, I was never able to bring about, I will not
say a good understanding, but even a polite understanding between
Falloux and Dufaure. It must be admitted that these two men had
precisely the opposite qualities and defects. Dufaure, who in the bottom
of his heart had remained a good west-country bourgeois, hostile to the
nobles and the priests, was unable to put up with either Falloux's
principles or his charming, refined manners, however agreeable they
might seem to me. I succeeded, however, with great difficulty, in
persuading him that he must not interfere with him in his own
department; but as to allowing him to exercise the smallest influence
upon what went on at the Ministry of the Interior (even within the
limits where this was permissible and necessary), he would never hear
speak of it. Falloux had in Anjou, where he came from, a prefect with
whom he had reason to find fault. He did not ask that he should be
dismissed, or even refused promotion; all he wanted was that he should
be transferred, as he thought his own position compromised so long as no
change took place, a change which was, moreover, demanded by the
majority of the deputies for Maine-et-Loire. Unfortunately, this prefect
was a declared friend to the Republic; and this was enough to fill
Dufaure with distrust, and to persuade him that Falloux's only object
was to compromise him by making use of him to strike at those of the
Republicans whom he had not been able to reach till then. He refused,
therefore; the other insisted; Dufaure grew still more obstinate. It was
very amusing to watch Falloux spinning round Dufaure, pirouetting
cleverly and gracefully, without finding a single opening by which to
penetrate into his mind.

Dufaure let him have his say, and then confined himself to laconically
replying, without looking at him, or only turning a dull, wry glance in
his direction:

"I should like to know why you did not take advantage of your friend M.
Faucher's period at the Home Office to rid yourself of your prefect."

Falloux contained himself, although he was naturally, I believe, of a
very hasty temper; he came and told me his troubles, and I saw the
bitterest spleen trickling through the honey of his speech. I thereupon
intervened, and tried to make Dufaure understand that this was one of
those demands which one cannot refuse a colleague unless one wishes to
quarrel with him. I spent a month in this way, acting as a daily
intermediary between the two, and expending more effort and diplomacy
than I had employed, during the same period, in treating the great
affairs of Europe. The Cabinet was more than once on the verge of
breaking up over this puny incident. Dufaure gave way at last, but with
such bad grace that it was impossible to thank him for it; so that he
gave up his prefect without getting Falloux in exchange.

But the most difficult portion of our role was the conduct which we had
to display towards the old Conservatives, who formed the bulk of the
majority, as I have already said.

These had at one and the same time general opinions which they wished to
force through and a number of private passions which they desired to
satisfy. They wanted us to re-establish order energetically: in this we
were their men; we wanted it as much as they did, and we did it as well
as they could wish, and better than they could have done. We had
proclaimed the state of siege in Lyons and several of the neighbouring
departments, and by virtue of the state of siege we had suspended six
Paris revolutionary papers, cashiered the three regiments of the Paris
National Guard which had displayed indecision on the 13th of June,
arrested seven representatives on the spot, and applied for warrants
against thirty others. Analogous measures were taken all over France.
Circulars addressed to all the agents showed them that they had to do
with a Government which knew how to make itself obeyed, and which was
determined that everything should give way before the law. Whenever
Dufaure was attacked on account of these different acts by the
Montagnards remaining in the Assembly, he replied with that masculine,
nervous, and sharp-edged eloquence of which he was so great a master,
and in the tone of a man who fights after burning his boats.

The Conservatives not only wanted us to administrate with vigour; they
wished us to take advantage of our victory to pass preventive and
repressive laws. We ourselves felt the necessity of moving in this
direction, although we were not willing to go as far as they.

For my part, I was convinced that it was both wise and necessary to make
great concessions in this respect to the fears and the legitimate
resentment of the nation, and that the only means which remained, after
so violent a revolution, of saving liberty was to restrict it. My
colleagues were of the same opinion: we therefore brought in
successively a law to suspend the clubs; another to suppress, with even
more energy than had been done under the Monarchy, the vagaries of the
press; and a third to regulate the state of siege.

"You are establishing a military dictatorship," they cried.

"Yes," replied Dufaure, "it is a dictatorship, but a parliamentary
dictatorship. There are no individual rights which can prevail against
the inalienable right of Society to protect itself. There are imperious
necessities which are the same for all governments, whether monarchies
or republics; and who has given rise to these necessities? To whom do we
owe the cruel experience which has given us eighteen months of violent
agitations, incessant conspiracies, formidable insurrections? Yes, no
doubt you are quite right when you say that, after so many revolutions
undertaken in the name of liberty, it is deplorable that we should be
once again compelled to veil her statue and to place terrible weapons in
the hands of the public powers. But whose fault is it, if not yours,
and who is it that serves the Republic best, those who favour
insurrections, or those who, like ourselves, apply themselves to
suppressing them?"

These measures, these laws and this language pleased the Conservatives
without satisfying them; and to tell the truth, nothing would have
contented them short of the destruction of the Republic. Their instinct
constantly impelled them in that direction, although their prudence and
their reason restrained them on the road.

But what they desired above all things was to oust their enemies from
place and to instal in their stead their partisans or their private
friends. We were again brought face to face with all the passions which
had brought about the fall of the Monarchy of July. The Revolution had
not destroyed them, but only made them the more greedy; this was our
great and permanent danger. Here again, I considered that we ought to
make concessions. There were still in the public offices a very large
number of those Republicans of indifferent capacity or bad character
whom the chances of the Revolution had driven into power. My advice was
to get rid of these at once, without waiting to be asked for their
dismissal, in such a way as to inspire confidence in our intentions and
to acquire the right to defend all the honest and capable Republicans;
but I could never induce Dufaure to consent to this. He had already held
the Ministry of the Interior under Cavaignac. Many of the public
servants whom it would be necessary to dismiss had been either appointed
or supported by him. His vanity was involved in the question of
maintaining them in their positions, and his mistrust of their
detractors would in any event have sufficed to persuade him to oppose
their representations. He accordingly resisted. It was, therefore, not
long before he himself became the object of all their attacks. No one
dared tackle him in the tribune, for he was too sturdy a swordsman
there; but he was constantly struck at from a distance and in the shade
of the lobbies, and I soon saw a great storm gathering against him.

"What is it we have undertaken to do?" I often asked him. "To save the
Republic with the assistance of the Republicans? No, for the majority of
those who bear that name would assuredly kill us together with it; and
those who deserve to bear the name do not number one hundred in the
Assembly. We have undertaken to save the Republic with the assistance of
parties which do not love it. We can only, therefore, govern with the
aid of concessions; only, we must never yield anything substantial. In
this matter, everything depends upon the degree. The best, and perhaps
the only guarantee which the Republic at this moment possesses lies in
our continuance in power. Every honourable means should therefore be
taken to keep us there."

To this he replied that fighting, as he did every day, with the greatest
energy, against socialism and anarchy, he must satisfy the majority; as
though one could ever satisfy men by thinking only of their general
welfare, without taking into account their vanity and their private
interests. If even, while refusing, he had been able to do so
gracefully: but the form of his refusal was still more disobliging than
the matter of it. I could never conceive how a man who was so much the
master of his words in the tribune, so clever in the art of selecting
his arguments and the words best calculated to please, so certain of
always keeping to the expressions which would compel most agreement with
his thought, could be so embarrassed, so sullen, and so awkward in
conversation. This came, I believe, from his original education. He was
a man of much intelligence, or rather talent--for of intelligence
properly so-called he had hardly any--but of no knowledge of the world.
In his youth he had led a laborious, concentrated, and almost savage
life. His entrance into political life had not to any extent changed his
habits. He had held aloof not only from intrigues, but from the contact
of parties, assiduously occupying himself with affairs, but avoiding
men, detesting the movement of assemblies, and dreading the tribune,
which was his only strength. Nevertheless, he was ambitious after his
fashion, but with a measured and somewhat inferior ambition, which aimed
at the management rather than at the domination of affairs. His manner,
as a minister, of treating people was sometimes very strange. One day,
General Castellane, who was then in great credit, asked for an
audience. He was received, and explained at length his pretensions and
what he called his rights. Dufaure listened to him long and attentively;
and then rose, led the general with many bows to the door, and left him
standing aghast, without having answered a single word. When I
reproached him with this conduct:

"I should only have had to say disagreeable things to him," he replied;
"it was more reasonable to say nothing at all!"

It is easy to believe that one rarely left a man of this kind except in
a very bad temper.

Unfortunately, he had as a sort of double a permanent secretary who was
as uncouth as himself, and very stupid besides; so that when the
solicitants passed from the Minister's office into the secretary's, in
the hope of meeting with a little comfort, they found the same
unpleasantness, minus the intelligence. It was like falling from a
quickset hedge on to a bundle of thorns.

In spite of these disadvantages, Dufaure obtained the support of the
Conservatives; but he was never able to win over their leaders.

The latter, as I had indeed foreseen, would neither undertake the
government themselves nor allow any one else to govern with a free hand.
They were unable to see without jealousy ministers at the head of
affairs who were not their creatures, and who refused to be their
instruments. I do not believe that, between the 13th of June and the
last debates on the Roman question, in other words, during almost the
whole life of the Cabinet, a single day passed without some ambush being
laid for us. They did not fight us in the tribune, I admit; but they
incessantly excited the majority secretly against us, blamed our
decisions, criticized our measures, put unfavourable interpretations
upon our speeches; unable to make up their minds to overthrow us, they
arranged in such a way that, finding us wholly unsupported, they were
always in a position, with the smallest effort, to hurl us from power.
After all, Dufaure's mistrust was not always without grounds. The
leaders of the majority wanted to make use of us in order to take
rigorous measures, and to obtain repressive laws which would make the
task of government easy to our successors, and our Republican opinions
made us fitter for this, at that moment, than the Conservatives. They
did not fail to count on soon bowing us out, and on bringing their
substitutes upon the scene. Not only did they wish us not to impress our
influence upon the Assembly, but they laboured unceasingly to prevent us
from establishing it in the mind of the President. They persisted in the
delusion that Louis Napoleon was still happy in their leading-strings.
They continued to beset him, therefore. We were informed by our agents
that most of them, but especially M. Thiers and M. Mole, were constantly
seeing him in private, and urging him with all their might to overthrow,
in concert with them, and at their common expense and to their common
profit, the Republic. They formed, as it were, a secret ministry at the
side of the responsible Cabinet. Commencing with the 13th of June, I
lived in a state of continuous alarm, fearing every day that they would
take advantage of our victory to drive Louis Napoleon to commit some
violent usurpation, and that one fine morning, as I said to Barrot, the
Empire should slip in between his legs. I have since learnt that my
fears were even better founded than I at that time believed. Since
leaving the ministry, I have learnt from an undoubted source that a plot
was formed towards the month of July 1849 to alter the Constitution by
force by the combined enterprise of the President and the Assembly. The
leaders of the majority and Louis Napoleon had come to an agreement, and
the blow only failed because Berryer, who no doubt feared lest he should
be making a fool's bargain, refused his support and that of his
followers. Nevertheless, the idea was not renounced, but only adjourned;
and when I think that at the time when I am writing these lines, that is
to say, two years only after the period of which I speak, the majority
of these same men are growing indignant at seeing the people violate the
Constitution by doing for Louis Napoleon precisely what they themselves
at that time proposed to him to do, I find it difficult to imagine a
more noteworthy example of the versatility of men and of the vanity of
the great words "Patriotism" and "Right" beneath which petty passions
are apt to cloak themselves.

We were no more certain, as has been seen, of the President than of the
majority. In fact, Louis Napoleon was, for ourselves as well as for the
Republic, the greatest and the most permanent danger.

I was convinced of this; and yet, when I had very attentively studied
him, I did not despair of the possibility of establishing ourselves in
his mind, for a time at least, in a fairly solid fashion. I soon
discovered that, although he never refused to admit the majority leaders
to his presence and to receive their advice, which he sometimes
followed, and although he plotted with them when it suited his purpose,
he nevertheless endured their yoke with great impatience; that he felt
humiliated at seeming to walk in their leading-strings; and that he
secretly burned to be free of them. This gave us a point of contact with
him and a hold upon his mind; for we ourselves were quite resolved to
remain independent of these great wire-pullers, and to uphold the
Executive Power against their attacks.

It did not seem impossible to me, moreover, for us to enter partly into
Louis Napoleon's designs without emerging from our own. What had always
struck me, when I reflected upon the situation of that extraordinary man
(extraordinary, not through his genius, but through the circumstances
which had combined to raise his mediocrity to so high a level), was the
need which existed to feed his mind with hope of some kind if we wished
to keep him quiet. That a man of this stamp could, after governing
France for four years, be dismissed into private life, seemed very
doubtful to me; that he would consent to withdraw into private life,
seemed very chimerical; that he could even be prevented, during the
length of his term of office, from plunging into some dangerous
enterprise seemed very difficult, unless, indeed, one were able to place
before his ambition some point of view which might, if not charm, at
least restrain him. This is to what I, for my part, applied myself from
the beginning.

"I will never serve you," I said to him, "in overthrowing the Republic;
but I will gladly strive to assure you a great position in it, and I
believe that all my friends will end by entering into my plan. The
Constitution can be revised; Article 45, which prohibits re-election,
can be changed. This is an object which we will gladly help you to
attain."

And as the chances of revision were doubtful, I went further, and I
hinted to him as to the future that, if he governed France peacefully,
wisely, modestly, not aiming at more than being the first magistrate of
the nation, and not its corrupter or its master, he might possibly be
re-elected at the end of his term of office, in spite of Article 45, by
an almost unanimous vote, since the Monarchical parties did not see the
ruin of their hopes in the limited prolongation of his power, and the
Republican party itself looked upon a government such as his as the
best means of accustoming the country to the Republic and giving it a
taste for it.

I told him all this in a tone of sincerity, because I was sincere in
saying it. What I advised him seemed to me, in fact, and still seems to
me, the best thing to be done in the interest of the country, and
perhaps in his own. He readily listened to me, without giving a glimpse
of the impression my language made upon him: this was his habit. The
words one addressed to him were like stones thrown down a well; their
sound was heard, but one never knew what became of them. I believe,
however, that they were not entirely lost; for there were two distinct
men in him, as I was not long in discovering. The first was the
ex-conspirator, the fatalistic dreamer, who thought himself called to
govern France, and through it to dominate Europe. The other was the
epicurean, who luxuriously made the most of his new state of well-being
and of the facile pleasures which his present position gave him, and who
did not dream of risking it in order to ascend still higher. In any
case, he seemed to like me better and better. I admit that, in all that
was compatible with the good of the public service, I made great efforts
to please him. Whenever, by chance, he recommended for a diplomatic
appointment a capable and honest man, I showed great alacrity in placing
him. Even when his _protege_ was not very capable, if the post was an
unimportant one, I generally arranged to give it him; but most often
the President honoured with his recommendations a set of gaol-birds, who
had formerly thrown themselves in desperation into his party, not
knowing where else to betake themselves, and to whom he thought himself
to be under obligations; or else he attempted to place at the principal
embassies those whom he called "his own men," which most frequently
meant intriguers and rascals. In that case I went and saw him, I
explained to him the regulations, which were opposed to his wish, and
the political reasons which prevented me from complying with it. I
sometimes even went so far as to let him see that I would rather resign
than retain office by doing as he wished. As he was not able to see any
private reasons for my refusal, nor any systematic desire to oppose him,
he either yielded without complaining or postponed the business.

I did not get off as cheaply with his friends. These were unspeakably
eager in their rush for the spoil. They incessantly assailed me with
their demands, with so much importunity, and often impertinence, that I
frequently felt inclined to have them thrown out of the window. I
strove, nevertheless, to restrain myself. On one occasion, however, when
one of them, a real gallows-bird, haughtily insisted, and said that it
was very strange that the Prince should not have the power of rewarding
those who had suffered for his cause, I replied:

"Sir, the best thing for the President to do is to forget that he was
ever a pretender, and to remember that he is here to attend to the
affairs of France and not to yours."

The Roman affair, in which, as I shall explain later, I firmly supported
his policy, until the moment when it became extravagant and
unreasonable, ended by putting me entirely into his good graces: of this
he one day gave me a great proof. Beaumont, during his short embassy in
England at the end of 1848, had spoken very strongly about Louis
Napoleon, who was at that time a candidate for the Presidency. These
remarks, when repeated to the latter, had caused him extreme irritation.
I had several times endeavoured, since I had become a minister, to
re-establish Beaumont in the President's mind; but I should never have
ventured to propose to employ him, capable as he was, and anxious though
I was to do so. The Vienna embassy was to be vacated in September 1849.
It was at that time one of the most important posts in our diplomatic
service, because of the affairs of Italy and Hungary. The President said
to me of his own accord:

"I suggest that you should give the Vienna embassy to M. de Beaumont.
True, I have had great reason to complain of him; but I know that he is
your best friend, and that is enough to decide me."

I was delighted. No one was better suited than Beaumont for the place
which had to be filled, and nothing could be more agreeable to me than
to offer it him.

All my colleagues did not imitate me in the care which I took to gain
the President's good-will without doing violence to my opinions and my
wishes. Dufaure, however, against every expectation, was always just
what he should be in his relations towards him. I believe the
President's simplicity of manners had half won him over. But Passy
seemed to take pleasure in being disagreeable to him. I believe that he
considered that he had degraded himself by becoming the minister of a
man whom he looked upon as an adventurer, and that he endeavoured to
regain his level by impertinence. He annoyed him every day
unnecessarily, rejecting all his candidates, ill-treating his friends,
and contradicting his opinions with ill-concealed disdain. No wonder
that the President cordially detested him.

Of all the ministers, the one who was most in his confidence was
Falloux. I have always believed that the latter had gained him by means
of something more substantial than that which any of us were able or
willing to offer him. Falloux, who was a Legitimist by birth, by
training, by society, and by taste, if you like, belonged at bottom to
none but the Church. He did not believe in the triumph of the Legitimism
which he served, and he only sought, amid all our revolutions, to find a
road by which he could bring back the Catholic religion to power. He had
only remained in office so that he might watch over its interests, and,
as he said to me on the first day with well-calculated frankness, by the
advice of his confessor. I am convinced that from the beginning Falloux
had suspected the advantages to be gained from Louis Napoleon towards
the accomplishment of this design, and that, familiarizing himself at an
early date with the idea of seeing the President become the heir of the
Republic and the master of France, he had only thought of utilizing this
inevitable event in the interest of the clergy. He had offered the
support of his party without, however, compromising himself.

From the time of our entrance into affairs until the prorogation of the
Assembly, which took place on the 13th of August, we did not cease to
gain ground with the majority, in spite of their leaders. They saw us
every day struggling with their enemies before their eyes; and the
furious attacks which the latter at every moment directed against us
advanced us gradually in their good graces. But, on the other hand,
during all that time we made no progress in the mind of the President,
who used to suffer our presence in his counsels rather than to admit us
to them.

Six weeks later it was just the opposite. The representatives had
returned from the provinces incensed by the clamour of their friends, to
whom we had refused to hand over the control of local affairs; and on
the other hand, the President of the Republic had drawn closer to us; I
shall show later why. One would have said that we had advanced on that
side in the exact proportion to that in which we had gone back on the
other.

Thus placed between two props badly joined together and always
tottering, the Cabinet leant now upon one, now upon the other, and was
always liable to tumble between the two. It was the Roman affair which
brought about the fall.

Such was the state of things when the parliamentary session was resumed
on the 1st of October 1849, and when the Roman affair was handled for
the second and last time.




CHAPTER IV

     FOREIGN AFFAIRS


I did not wish to interrupt the story of our home misfortunes to speak
of the difficulties which we encountered abroad, and of which I had to
bear the brunt more than any other. I shall now retrace my steps and
return to that part of my subject.

When I found myself installed at the Foreign Office, and when the state
of affairs had been placed before my eyes, I was alarmed at the number
and extent of the difficulties which I perceived. But what caused me
more anxiety than anything else was myself.

I possess a great natural distrust of self. The nine years which I had
spent rather wretchedly in the last Assemblies of the Monarchy had
tended greatly to increase this natural infirmity, and although the
manner in which I had just undergone the trial of the Revolution of
February had helped to raise me a little in my own opinion, I
nevertheless accepted this great task, at a time like the present, only
after much hesitation, and I did not enter into it without great fear.

Before long, I was able to make a certain number of observations which
tranquillized if they did not entirely reassure me. I began by
perceiving that affairs did not always increase in difficulty as they
increased in size, as would naturally appear at a cursory glance: the
contrary is rather the truth. Their complications do not grow with their
importance; it even often happens that they assume a simpler aspect in
the measure that their consequences become wider and more serious.
Besides, a man whose will influences the destiny of a whole people
always finds ready to hand more men willing to enlighten him, to assist
him, to relieve him of details, more prepared to encourage, to defend
him, than would be met with in second-rate affairs or inferior
positions. And lastly, the size itself of the object pursued stimulates
all the mental forces to such an extent, that though the task may be a
little harder, the workman becomes much more expert.

I should have felt perplexed, full of care, discouragement and
disordered excitement, in presence of petty responsibilities. I felt a
peace of mind and a singular feeling of calm when brought face to face
with larger ones. The sentiment of importance attached to the things I
then did at once raised me to their level and kept me there. The idea of
a rebuff had until then seemed insupportable to me; the prospect of a
dazzling fall upon one of the greatest stages in the world, on which I
was mounted, did not disconcert me; which showed that my weakness was
not timidity but pride. I also was not long before perceiving that in
politics, as in so many other matters--perhaps in all--the vivacity of
impressions received was not in a ratio with the importance of the fact
which produced it, but with the more or less frequent repetition of the
latter. One who grows troubled and excited about the handling of a
trifling piece of business, the only one which he happens to have taken
in hand, ends by recovering his self-possession among greater ones, if
they are repeated every day. Their frequency renders their effect, as it
were, insensible. I have related how many enemies I used formerly to
make by holding aloof from people who did not attract my attention by
any merit; and as people had often taken for haughtiness the boredom
they caused me, I strongly dreaded this reef in the great journey I was
about to undertake. But I soon observed that, although insolence
increases with certain persons in the exact proportion of the progress
of their fortunes, it was different with me, and that it was much easier
for me to display affability and even cordiality when I felt myself
above, than when I was one of, the common herd. This comes from the fact
that, being a minister, I no longer had the trouble of running after
people, nor to fear lest I should be coldly received by them, men making
it a necessity themselves to approach those who occupy posts of that
sort, and being simple enough to attach great importance to their most
trivial words. It comes also from this that, as a minister, I no longer
had to do only with the ideas of fools, but also with their interests,
which always supply a ready-made and easy subject of conversation.

I saw, therefore, that I was not so ill fitted as I had feared for the
part I had undertaken to play. This discovery encouraged me, not only
for the present, but for the rest of my life; and should I be asked what
I gained in this Ministry, so troubled, so thwarted, and so short that I
was only able to commence affairs in it and to finish none, I would
answer that I gained one great advantage, perhaps the greatest advantage
in the world--confidence in myself.

At home and abroad, our greatest obstacles came less from the difficulty
of business than from those who had to conduct it with us. I saw this
from the first. Most of our agents were creatures of the Monarchy, who,
at the bottom of their hearts, furiously detested the Government they
served; and in the name of democratic and republican France, they
extolled the restoration of the old aristocracies and secretly worked
for the re-establishment of all the absolute monarchies of Europe.
Others, on the contrary, whom the Revolution of February had dragged
from an obscurity in which they should have always remained,
clandestinely supported the demagogic parties which the French
Government was combating. But the chief fault of most of them was
timidity. The greater number of our ambassadors were afraid to attach
themselves to any particular policy in the countries in which they
represented us, and even feared to display to their own Government
opinions which might sooner or later have been counted as a crime
against them. They therefore took care to keep themselves covertly
concealed beneath a heap of little facts with which they crammed their
correspondence (for in diplomacy you must always write, even when you
know nothing and wish to say nothing), and they were very careful not to
show what they thought of the events they chronicled, and still less to
give us any indication as to what we were to conclude from them.

This condition of nullity to which our agents voluntarily reduced
themselves, and which, to tell the truth, was in the case of most of
them no more than an artificial perfectioning of nature, induced me, so
soon as I had realized it, to employ new men at the great Courts.

I should have liked in the same way to be able to get rid of the leaders
of the majority; but not being able to do this, I endeavoured to live on
good terms with them, and I did not even despair of pleasing them, while
at the same time remaining independent of their influence: a difficult
undertaking in which I nevertheless succeeded; for, of all the Cabinet,
I was the minister who most strongly opposed their policy and yet the
only one who retained their good graces. My secret, if I must confess
it, lay in flattering their self-conceit while neglecting their advice.

I had made an observation in small affairs which I deemed very
applicable to greater ones: I had found that the most advantageous
negociations are those conducted with human vanity; for one often
obtains very substantial things from it, while giving very little
substance in return. One never does so well when treating with ambition
or cupidity. At the same time, it is a fact that in order to deal
advantageously with the vanity of others, one must put his own entirely
on one side and think of nothing but the success of his plans, an
essential which will always prove a difficulty in the way of this sort
of commerce. I practised it very happily at this time and to my great
advantage. Three men thought themselves specially entitled to direct our
foreign policy, owing to the position they had formerly occupied: these
were M. de Broglie, M. Mole and M. Thiers. I overwhelmed all three of
them with deference; I often sent for them to see me, and sometimes
called upon them to consult them and to ask them, with a sort of
modesty, for advice which I hardly ever followed. But this did not
prevent these great men from displaying every satisfaction. I pleased
them more by asking their opinion without following it than if I had
followed it without asking it. Especially in the case of M. Thiers, this
manoeuvre of mine succeeded admirably. Remusat, who, although without
any personal pretensions, sincerely wished the Cabinet to last, and who
had become familiarized through an intercourse extending over
twenty-five years with all M. Thiers' weaknesses, said to me one day:

"The world does not know M. Thiers well; he has much more vanity than
ambition; and he prefers consideration to obedience, and the appearance
of power to power itself. Consult him constantly, and then do just as
you please. He will take more notice of your deference to him than of
your actions."

This is what I did, and with great success. In the two principal affairs
that I had to conduct during my time of office, those of Piedmont and
Turkey, I did precisely the opposite to what M. Thiers wished, and,
nevertheless, we remained excellent friends till the end.

As to the President, it was especially in the conduct of foreign affairs
that he showed how badly prepared he still was for the great part to
which blind fortune had called him. I was not slow in perceiving that
this man, whose pride aimed at leading everything, had not yet taken the
smallest steps to inform himself of anything. I proposed to have an
analysis drawn up every day of all the despatches and to submit it to
his inspection. Before this, he knew what happened in the world only by
hearsay, and only knew what the Minister for Foreign Affairs had thought
fit to tell him. The solid basis of facts was always lacking to the
operations of his mind, and this was easily seen in all the dreams with
which the latter was filled. I was sometimes frightened at perceiving
how much there was in his plans that was vast, chimerical, unscrupulous,
and confused; although it is true that, when explaining the real state
of things to him, I easily made him recognize the difficulties which
they presented, for discussion was not his strong point. He was silent,
but never yielded.

One of his myths was an alliance with one of the two great powers of
Germany, of which he proposed to make use to alter the map of Europe and
erase the limits which the treaties of 1815 had traced for France. As he
saw that I did not believe it possible to find either of these powers
inclined for an alliance of this sort, and with such an object, he
undertook himself to sound their ambassadors in Paris. One of them came
to me one day in a state of great excitement to tell me that the
President of the Republic had asked him if, in consideration of an
equivalent, his Court would not consent to allow France to seize Savoy.
On another occasion, he conceived the idea of sending a private agent,
one of his own men,[18] as he called them, to come to a direct
understanding with the German Princes. He chose Persigny, and asked me
to give him his credentials; and I consented, knowing well that nothing
could come of a negociation of this sort. I believe that Persigny had a
two-fold mission: it was a question of facilitating the usurpation at
home and an extension of territory abroad. He went first to Berlin and
then to Vienna; as I expected, he was very well received, handsomely
entertained, and politely bowed out.

     [18: "_Un homme a lui._"--A.T. de M.]

But I have spoken enough of individuals; let us come to politics.

At the time when I took up office, Europe was, as it were, on fire,
although the conflagration was already extinguished in certain
countries. Sicily was conquered and subdued; the Neapolitans had
returned to their obedience and even to their servitude; the battle of
Novara had been fought and lost; the victorious Austrians were
negociating with the son of Charles Albert, who had become King of
Piedmont by his father's abdication; their armies, issuing from the
confines of Lombardy, occupied Parma, a portion of the Papal States,
Placentia, and Tuscany, which they had entered unasked, and in spite of
the fact that the Grand Duke had been restored by his subjects, who have
been but ill rewarded since for their zeal and fidelity. But Venice
still resisted, and Rome, after repelling our first attack, was calling
all the demagogues of Italy to its assistance and exciting all Europe
with its clamour. Never, perhaps, since February, had Germany seemed
more divided or disturbed. Although the dream of German unity had been
dispelled, the reality of the old Teutonic organization had not yet
resumed its place. Reduced to a small number of members, the National
Assembly, which had till then endeavoured to promote this unity, fled
from Frankfort and hawked round the spectacle of its impotence and its
ridiculous fury. But its fall did not restore order; on the contrary, it
left a freer field for anarchy.

The moderate, one may say the innocent, revolutionaries, who had
cherished the belief that they would be able, peacefully, and by means
of arguments and decrees, to persuade the peoples and princes of Germany
to submit to a single government, made way for the violent
revolutionaries, who had always maintained that Germany could only be
brought to a state of unity by the complete ruin of its old systems of
government, and the entire abolition of the existing social order. Riots
therefore followed on every hand upon parliamentary discussion.
Political rivalries turned into a war of classes; the natural hatred and
jealousy entertained by the poor for the rich developed into socialistic
theories in many quarters, but especially in the small states of Central
Germany and in the great Rhine Valley. Wurtemberg was in a state of
agitation; Saxony had just experienced a terrible insurrection, which
had only been crushed with the assistance of Prussia; insurrections had
also occurred in Westphalia; the Palatinate was in open revolt; and
Baden had expelled its Grand Duke, and appointed a Provisional
Government. And yet the final victory of the Princes, which I had
foreseen when travelling through Germany, a month before, was no longer
in doubt; the very violence of the insurrections hastened it. The
larger monarchies had recaptured their capitals and their armies. Their
heads had still difficulties to conquer, but no more dangers; and
themselves masters, or on the point of becoming so, at home, they could
not fail soon to triumph in the second-rate States. By thus violently
disturbing public order, the insurgents gave them the wish, the
opportunity and the right to intervene.

Prussia had already commenced to do so. The Prussians had just
suppressed the Saxon insurrection by force of arms; they now entered the
Rhine Palatinate, offered their intervention to Wurtemberg, and prepared
to invade the Grand-Duchy of Baden, thus occupying almost the whole of
Germany with their soldiers or their influence.

Austria had emerged from the terrible crisis which had threatened its
existence, but it was still in great travail. Its armies, after
conquering in Italy, were being defeated in Hungary. Despairing of
mastering its subjects unaided, it had called Russia to its assistance,
and the Tsar, in a manifesto dated 13 May, had announced to Europe that
he was marching against the Hungarians. The Emperor Nicholas had till
then remained at rest amid his uncontested might. He had viewed the
agitation of the nations from afar in safety, but not with indifference.
Thenceforward, he alone among the great powers of Europe represented the
old state of society and the old traditional principle of authority. He
was not only its representative: he considered himself its champion.
His political theories, his religious belief, his ambition and his
conscience, all urged him to adopt this part. He had, therefore, made
for himself out of the cause of authority throughout the world a second
empire yet vaster than the first. He encouraged with his letters and
rewarded with his honours all those who, in whatever corner of Europe,
gained victories over anarchy and even over liberty, as though they were
his subjects and had contributed to strengthening his own power. He had
thus sent, to the extreme South of Europe, one of his orders to
Filangieri, the conqueror of the Sicilians, and had written that general
an autograph letter to show to him that he was satisfied with his
conduct. From the lofty position which he occupied, and whence he
peacefully watched the various incidents of the struggle which shook
Europe, the Emperor judged freely, and followed with a certain tranquil
disdain, not only the follies of the revolutionaries whom he pursued,
but also the vices and the faults of the parties and princes whom he
assisted. He expressed himself on this subject simply and as the
occasion required, without showing any eagerness to disclose his
thoughts or taking any pains to conceal them.

Lamoriciere wrote to me on the 11th of August 1849, in a secret
despatch:

     "The Tsar said to me this morning, 'You believe, general, that your
     dynastic parties would be capable of uniting with the Radicals to
     overthrow a dynasty which they disliked, in the hope of setting
     their own in its place; and I am certain of it. Your Legitimist
     Party especially would not hesitate to do so. I have long since
     thought that it is the Legitimists who make the Elder Branch of the
     Bourbons impossible. This is one of the reasons why I recognized
     the Republic; and also because I perceive in your nation a certain
     common sense which is wanting in the Germans.'

     "Later, the Emperor also said, 'The King of Prussia, my
     brother-in-law, with whom I was on very close terms of friendship,
     has not taken the slightest heed of my advice. The result is that
     our political relations have become remarkably cool, to such an
     extent that they have affected even our family relations. Look at
     the things he has done: did he not put himself at the head of those
     fools who dream of an United Germany, and now that he has broken
     with the Frankfort Parliament, has he not brought himself to the
     necessity of fighting the troops of the Schleswig-Holstein Duchies,
     which were levied under his patronage! Is it possible to imagine
     anything more disgraceful? And now, who knows how far he will go
     with his constitutional proposals?' He added, 'Do not think that,
     because I intervene in Hungary, I wish to justify the conduct of
     Austria in this affair. She has heaped up, one on the other, the
     most serious faults and the greatest follies; but when all is said
     and done, it had allowed the country to be invaded by subversive
     doctrines, and the government had fallen into the hands of
     disorderly persons. This was not to be endured.'

     "Speaking of the affairs of Italy, 'We others,' he said, 'see
     nothing in those temporal functions fulfilled in Rome by
     ecclesiastics; but it matters little to us how those priests
     arrange things among themselves, provided that something is set up
     which will last and that you constitute the power in such a way
     that it can stand.'"

Hereupon Lamoriciere, wounded by this supercilious tone, which smelt
somewhat of the autocrat and betrayed a sort of rivalry as between pope
and pope, began to defend Catholic institutions.

     "'Very well, very well,' said the Emperor, ending the conversation,
     'let France be as Catholic as she pleases, only let her protect
     herself against the insane theories and passions of innovators.'"

Though hard and austere in the exercise of his power, the Tsar was
simple and almost _bourgeois_ in his habits, keeping only the substance
of sovereign power and rejecting its pomp and worries. On the 17th of
July, the French Ambassador at St Petersburg wrote to me:

     "The Emperor is here; he arrived from Warsaw without suite of any
     kind, in an ordinary post-cart--his carriage had broke down sixty
     leagues from here--so as to be in time for the Empress's
     saint's-day, which has just taken place. He did the journey with
     extraordinary rapidity, in two days and a half, and he leaves again
     to-morrow. Every one here is touched with this contrast of power
     and simplicity, with the sight of this Sovereign who, after hurling
     one hundred and twenty thousand men on to the battle-field, races
     along the roads like a _feld-jaeger_, so as not to miss his wife's
     saint's-day. Nothing is more in keeping with the spirit of the
     Slavs, among whom one might say that the principal element of
     civilization is the spirit of family."

It would, in fact, be a great mistake to think that the Tsar's immense
power was only based upon force. It was founded, above all, on the
wishes and the ardent sympathies of the Russians. For the principle of
the sovereignty of the people lies at the root of all government,
whatever may be said to the contrary, and lurks beneath the least
independent institutions. The Russian nobles had adopted the principles
and still more the vices of Europe; but the people were not in touch
with our West and with the new spirit which animated it. They saw in the
Emperor not only their lawful Prince, but the envoy of God, and almost
God Himself.

In the midst of this Europe which I have depicted, the position of
France was one of weakness and embarrassment. Nowhere had the
Revolution succeeded in establishing a regular and stable system of
liberty. On every side, the old powers were rising up again from amid
the ruins which it had made--not, it is true, the same as when they
fell, but very similar. We could not assist the latter in establishing
themselves nor ensure their victory, for the system which they were
setting up was antipathetic, I will say not only to the institutions
created by the Revolution of February, but, at the root of our ideas, to
all that was most permanent and unconquerable in our new habits. They,
on their side, distrusted us, and rightly. The great part of restorers
of the general order in Europe was therefore forbidden us. This part,
moreover, was already played by another: it belonged by right to Russia,
and only the second remained for us. As to placing France at the head of
the innovators, this was to be still less thought of, for two reasons:
first, that it would have been absolutely impossible to advise these
latter or to hope to lead them, because of their extravagance and their
detestable incapacity; secondly, that it was not possible to support
them abroad without falling beneath their blows at home. The contact of
their passions and doctrines would have put all France in flame,
revolutionary doctrines at that time dominating all others. Thus we were
neither able to unite with the nations, who accused us of urging them on
and then betraying them, nor with the princes, who reproached us with
shaking their thrones. We were reduced to accepting the sterile
good-will of the English: it was the same isolation as before February,
with the Continent more hostile to us and England more lukewarm. It was
therefore necessary, as it had been then, to reduce ourselves to leading
a small life, from day to day; but even this was difficult. The French
Nation, which had made and, in a certain way, still made so great a
figure in the world, kicked against this necessity of the time: it had
remained haughty while it ceased to be preponderant; it feared to act
and tried to talk loudly; and it also expected its Government to be
proud, without, however, permitting it to run the risks which such
conduct entailed.

Never had France been looked upon with more anxiety than at the moment
when the Cabinet had just been formed. The easy and complete victory
which we had won in Paris on the 13th of June had extraordinary rebounds
throughout Europe. A new insurrection in France was generally expected.
The revolutionaries, half destroyed, relied only upon this occurrence to
recover themselves, and they redoubled their efforts in order to be able
to take advantage of it. The governments, half victorious, fearing to be
surprised by this crisis, stopped before striking their final blow. The
day of the 13th of June gave rise to cries of pain and joy from one end
of the Continent to the other. It decided fortune suddenly, and
precipitated it towards the Rhine.

The Prussian army, already master of the Palatinate, at once burst into
the Grand-Duchy of Baden, dispersed the insurgents, and occupied the
whole country, with the exception of Rastadt, which held out for a few
weeks.[19]

     [19: Nothing was ever more despicable than the conduct of those
     revolutionaries. The soldiers who, at the commencement of the
     insurrection, had put to flight or killed their officers, turned
     tail before the Prussians. The ringleaders did nothing but dispute
     among themselves and defame one another instead of defending
     themselves, and took refuge in Switzerland after pillaging the
     public treasury and levying contributions upon their own country.

     While the struggle lasted, we took strong measures to prevent the
     insurgents from receiving any assistance from France. Those among
     them who crossed the Rhine, in great numbers, received asylum from
     us, but were disarmed and placed in confinement. The victors, as it
     was easy to foresee, at once abused their victory. Many prisoners
     were put to death, all liberty was indefinitely suspended, and even
     the government which had been restored was kept in very close
     tutelage. I soon perceived that the French representative in the
     Grand-Duchy of Baden not only did not strive to moderate these
     violences, but thoroughly approved of them. I at once wrote to him
     as follows:

          "Sir,

          "I am informed that a number of military executions have taken
          place, and that many more are announced. I do not understand
          why these facts have not been reported by you, nor why you
          have not sought to prevent them, without even waiting for
          instructions. We have assisted as much as we could, without
          taking up arms, in suppressing the rebellion; all the more
          reason for desiring that the victory to which we have given
          our aid should not be sullied by acts of violence of which
          France disapproves, and which we regard as both odious and
          impolitic. There is another point which causes us much
          anxiety, and which does not seem to excite your solicitude to
          the same degree: I refer to the political institutions of the
          Grand-Duchy. Do not forget that the object of the Government
          of the Republic in that country has been to assist in putting
          down anarchy, but not in destroying liberty. We can in no way
          lend our hand to an anti-liberal restoration. The
          Constitutional Monarchy felt the need to create or maintain
          free States around France. The Republic is still more obliged
          to do so. The Government therefore asks and imperiously
          insists that each of its agents shall faithfully conform to
          these necessities of our situation. See the Grand Duke, and
          give him to understand what are the wishes of France. We shall
          certainly never allow either a Prussian province or an
          absolute government to be established on our frontier in the
          stead of an independent and constitutional monarchy?"

            *       *       *       *       *

     After some time, the executions ceased. The Grand Duke protested
     his attachment to constitutional forms, and his resolution to
     maintain them. This was for the moment all he was able to do, for
     he reigned only in name. The Prussians were the real masters.]

The Baden revolutionaries took refuge in Switzerland. Refugees were then
arriving in that country from Italy, France, and to tell the truth, from
every corner of Europe, for all Europe, with the exception of Russia,
had undergone or was undergoing a revolution. Their number soon amounted
to ten or twelve thousand. It was an army always ready to fall upon the
neighbouring States. All the Cabinets were alarmed at it.

Austria and especially Prussia, which had already had reason to complain
of the Confederation, and even Russia, which was in no way concerned,
spoke of invading Swiss territory with armed forces and acting as a
police in the name of all the governments threatened. This we could not
allow.

I first endeavoured to make the Swiss listen to reason, and to persuade
them not to wait till they were threatened, but themselves to expel from
their territory, as the Law of Nations required them to do, all the
principal ringleaders who openly threatened neighbouring nations.

"If you in this way anticipate what they have the right to ask of you,"
I incessantly repeated to the representative in Paris of the Swiss
Confederation, "you can rely upon France to defend you against any
unjust or exaggerated pretensions put forward by the Courts. We will
rather risk war than permit them to oppress or humiliate you. But if you
refuse to bring reason on your side, you must only rely upon yourselves,
and you will have to defend yourselves against all Europe."

This language had little effect, for there is nothing to equal the pride
and conceit of the Swiss. Not one of those peasants but believes that
his country is able to defy all the princes and all the nations of the
earth. I then set to work in another way, which was more successful.
This was to advise the foreign Governments (who were only too disposed
to agree) to refuse for a certain period all amnesty to such of their
subjects as had taken refuge in Switzerland, and to deny all of them,
whatever their degree of guilt, the right to return to their country. On
our side, we closed our frontiers to all those who, after taking refuge
in Switzerland, wished to cross France in order to go to England or
America, including the inoffensive refugees as well as the ringleaders.
Every outlet being thus closed, Switzerland remained encumbered with
those ten or twelve thousand adventurers, the most turbulent and
disorderly people in all Europe. It was necessary to feed, lodge, and
even pay them, lest they should levy contributions on the country. This
suddenly enlightened the Swiss as to the drawbacks attendant upon the
right of asylum. They could have made arrangements to have kept the
illustrious chiefs for an indefinite period, in spite of the danger with
which these menaced their neighbours; but the revolutionary army was a
great nuisance to them. The more radical cantons were the first to raise
a loud clamour and to ask to be rid of these inconvenient and expensive
visitors. And as it was impossible to persuade the foreign Governments
to open their territory to the crowd of inoffensive refugees who were
able and willing to leave Switzerland, without first driving out the
leaders who would have liked to stay, they ended by expelling these.
After almost bringing all Europe down upon them rather than remove these
men from their territory, the Swiss ended by driving them out of their
own accord in order to avoid a temporary inconvenience and a trifling
expense. No better example was ever given of the nature of democracies,
which, as a rule, have only very confused or very erroneous ideas on
external affairs, and generally solve outside questions only by internal
reasons.

While these things were happening in Switzerland, the general aspect of
affairs in Germany underwent a change. The struggles of the nations
against the Governments were followed by quarrels of the Princes among
themselves. I followed this new phase of the Revolution with a very
attentive gaze and a very perplexed mind.

The Revolution in Germany had not proceeded from a simple cause, as in
the rest of Europe. It was produced at once by the general spirit of the
time and by the unitarian ideas peculiar to the Germans. The democracy
was now beaten, but the idea of German unity was not destroyed; the
needs, the memories, the passions that had inspired it survived. The
King of Prussia had undertaken to appropriate it and make use of it.
This Prince, a man of intelligence but of very little sense, had been
wavering for a year between his fear of the Revolution and his desire to
turn it to account. He struggled as much as he could against the liberal
and democratic spirit of the age; yet he favoured the German unitarian
spirit, a blundering game in which, if he had dared to go to the length
of his desires, he would have risked his Crown and his life. For, in
order to overcome the resistance which existing institutions and the
interests of the Princes were bound to oppose to the establishment of a
central power, he would have had to summon the revolutionary passions of
the peoples to his aid, and of these Frederic William could not have
made use without soon being destroyed by them himself.

So long as the Frankfort Parliament retained its _prestige_ and its
power, the King of Prussia entreated it kindly and strove to get himself
placed by it at the head of the new Empire. When the Parliament fell
into discredit and powerlessness, the King changed his behaviour
without changing his plans. He endeavoured to obtain the legacy of this
assembly and to combat the Revolution by realizing the chimera of German
unity, of which the democrats had made use to shake every throne. With
this intention, he invited all the German Princes to come to an
understanding with him to form a new Confederation, which should be
closer than that of 1815, and to give him the government of it. In
return he undertook to establish and strengthen them in their States.
These Princes, who detested Prussia, but who trembled before the
Revolution, for the most part accepted the usurious bargain proposed to
them. Austria, which the success of this proposal would have driven out
of Germany, protested, being not yet in a position to do more. The two
principal monarchies of the South, Bavaria and Wurtemberg, followed its
example, but all North and Central Germany entered into this ephemeral
Confederation, which was concluded on the 26th of May 1849 and is known
in history by the name of the Union of the Three Kings.[20]

     [20: Of Prussia, Saxony and Hanover.--A.T. de M.]

Prussia then suddenly became the dominating power in a vast stretch of
country, reaching from Memel to Basle, and at one time saw twenty-six or
twenty-seven million Germans marching under its orders. All this was
completed shortly after my arrival in office.

I confess that, at the sight of this singular spectacle, my mind was
crossed with strange ideas, and I was for a moment tempted to believe
that the President was not so mad in his foreign policy as I had at
first thought him. That union of the great Courts of the North, which
had so long weighed heavily upon us, was broken. Two of the great
Continental monarchies, Prussia and Austria, were quarrelling and almost
at war. Had not the moment come for us to contract one of those intimate
and powerful alliances which we have been compelled to forego for sixty
years, and perhaps in a measure to repair our losses of 1815? France, by
platonically assisting Frederic William in his enterprises, which
England did not oppose, could divide Europe and bring on one of those
great crises which entail a redistribution of territory.

The time seemed so well to lend itself to these ideas that they filled
the imagination of many of the German Princes themselves. The more
powerful among them dreamt of nothing but changes of frontier and
accessions of power at the expense of their neighbours. The
revolutionary malady of the nations seemed to have attacked the
governments.

"There is no Confederation possible with eight and thirty States," said
the Bavarian Foreign Minister, Baron von der Pfordten, to our Envoy. "It
will be necessary to mediatize a large number of them. How, for
instance, can we ever hope to re-establish order in a country like
Baden, unless we divide it among sovereigns strong enough to make
themselves obeyed? In that case," he added, "the Neckar Valley would
naturally fall to our share."[21]

     [21: Despatch of the 7th of September 1849.]

For my part, I soon dispelled from my mind, as mere visions, all
thoughts of this kind. I quickly realized that Prussia was neither able
nor willing to give us anything worth having in exchange for our good
offices; that its power over the other German States was very
precarious, and was likely to be ephemeral; that no reliance was to be
placed in its King, who at the first obstacle would have failed us and
failed himself; and, above all, that such extensive and ambitious
designs were not suited to so ill-established a state of society and to
such troubled and dangerous times as ours, nor to transient powers such
as that which chance had placed in my hands.

I put a more serious question to myself, and it was this--I recall it
here because it is bound constantly to crop up again: Is it to the
interest of France that the bonds which hold together the German
Confederation should be strengthened or relaxed? In other words, ought
we to desire that Germany should in a certain sense become a single
nation, or that it should remain an ill-joined conglomeration of
disunited peoples and princes? There is an old tradition in our
diplomacy that we should strive to keep Germany divided among a large
number of independent powers; and this, in fact, was self-evident at the
time when there was nothing behind Germany except Poland and a
semi-savage Russia; but is the case the same in our days? The reply to
this question depends upon the reply to another: What is really the
peril with which in our days Russia threatens the independence of
Europe? For my part, believing as I do that our West is threatened
sooner or later to fall under the yoke, or at least under the direct and
irresistible influence of the Tsars, I think that our first object
should be to favour the union of all the German races in order to oppose
it to that influence. The conditions of the world are new; we must
change our old maxims and not fear to strengthen our neighbours, so that
they may one day be in a condition with us to repel the common enemy.

The Emperor of Russia, on his side, saw how great an obstacle an United
Germany would prove in his way. Lamoriciere, in one of his private
letters, informed me that the Emperor had said to him with his ordinary
candour and arrogance:

"If the unity of Germany, which doubtless you wish for no more than I
do, ever becomes a fact, there will be needed, in order to manage it, a
man capable of what Napoleon himself was not able to do; and if this man
were found, if that armed mass developed into a menace, it would then
become your affair and mine."

But when I put these questions to myself, the time had not come to solve
them nor even to discuss them, for Germany was of its own accord
irresistibly returning to its old constitution and to the old anarchy
of its powers. The Frankfort Parliament's attempt in favour of unity had
fallen through. That made by the King of Prussia was destined to meet
with the same fate.

It was the dread of the Revolution which alone had driven the German
Princes into Frederic William's arms. In the measure that, thanks to the
efforts of the Prussians, the Revolution was on all sides suppressed and
ceased to make itself feared, the allies (one might almost say the new
subjects) of Prussia aimed at recovering their independence. The King of
Prussia's enterprise was of that unfortunate kind in which success
itself interferes with triumph, and to compare large things with
smaller, I would say that his history was not unlike ours, and that,
like ourselves, he was doomed to strike upon a rock so soon as, and for
the reason that, he had re-established order. The princes who had
adhered to what was known as the Prussian hegemony seized the first
opportunity to renounce it. Austria supplied this opportunity, when,
after defeating the Hungarians, she was able to re-appear upon the scene
of German affairs with her material power and that of the memories which
attached to her name. This is what happened in the course of September
1849. When the King of Prussia found himself face to face with that
powerful rival, behind whom he caught sight of Russia, his courage
suddenly failed him, as I expected, and he returned to his old part.
The German Constitution of 1815 resumed its empire, the Diet its
sittings; and soon, of all that great movement of 1848, there remained
but two traces visible in Germany: a greater dependence of the small
States upon the great monarchies, and an irreparable blow struck at all
that remains of feudal institutions: their ruin, consummated by the
nations, was sanctioned by the Princes. From one end of Germany to the
other, the perpetuity of ground-rents, baronial tithes, forced labour,
rights of mutation, of hunting, of justice, which constituted a great
part of the riches of the nobility, remained abolished.[22] The Kings
were restored, but the aristocracies did not recover from the blow that
had been struck them.[23]

     [22: Private letter from Beaumont at Vienna, 10 October
     1849.--Despatch from M. Lefebre at Munich, 23 July 1849.]

     [23: I had foreseen from the commencement that Austria and Prussia
     would soon return to their former sphere and fall back in each case
     within the influence of Russia. I find this provision set forth in
     the instructions which I gave to one of our ambassadors to Germany
     on the 24th of July, before the events which I have described had
     taken place. These instructions are drawn up in my own hand, as
     were all my more important despatches. I read as follows:

          "I know that the malady which is ravaging all the old
          European society is incurable, that in changing its symptoms
          it does not change in character, and that all the old powers
          are, to a greater or lesser extent, threatened with
          modification or destruction. But I am inclined to believe
          that the next event will be the strengthening of authority
          throughout Europe. It would not be impossible that, under the
          pressure of a common instinct of defence or under the common
          influence of recent occurrences, Russia should be willing and
          able to bring about harmony between North and South Germany
          and to reconcile Austria and Prussia, and that all this great
          movement should merely resolve itself into a new alliance of
          principles between the three monarchies at the expense of the
          secondary governments and the liberty of the citizens.
          Consider the situation from this point of view, and give me
          an account of your observations."]

Convinced at an early date that we had no part to play in this internal
crisis in Germany, I only applied myself to living on good terms with
the several contending parties. I especially kept up friendly relations
with Austria, whose concurrence was necessary to us, as I will explain
later, in the Roman business. I first strove to bring to a happy
conclusion the negociations which had long been pending between Austria
and Piedmont; I put the more care into this because I was persuaded
that, so long as no lasting peace was established on that side, Europe
would remain unsettled and liable at any moment to be thrown into great
danger.

Piedmont had been negociating to no purpose since the battle of Novara.
Austria at first tried to lay down unacceptable conditions. Piedmont, on
her side, kept up pretensions which the state of her fortunes did not
authorize. The negociations, several times interrupted, had been resumed
before I took office. We had many very strong reasons to desire that
this peace should be concluded without delay. At any moment, a general
war might break out in this little corner of the Continent. Piedmont,
moreover, was too near to us to permit us to allow that she should lose
either her independence, which separated her from Austria, or her
newly-acquired constitutional institutions, which brought her closer to
us: two advantages which would be seriously jeopardized if recourse were
had to arms.

I therefore interposed very eagerly, in the name of France, between the
two parties, addressing to both of them the language which I thought
most likely to convince them. I observed to Austria how urgent it was
that the general peace of Europe should be assured by this particular
peace, and I exerted myself to point out to her what was excessive in
her demands. To Piedmont I indicated the points on which it seemed to me
that honour and interest would permit her to give way. I applied myself
especially to giving her Government in advance clear and precise ideas
as to what it might expect from us, so that it should have no excuse to
entertain, or to pretend to have entertained, any dangerous
illusions[24]. I will not go into details of the conditions under
discussion, which are without interest to-day; I will content myself
with saying that at the end they seemed prepared to come to an
understanding, and that any further delay was due merely to a question
of money. This was the condition of affairs, and Austria assured us
through her Ambassador in Paris of her conciliatory dispositions; I
already looked upon peace as concluded, when I unexpectedly learned that
the Austrian Plenipotentiary had suddenly changed his attitude and his
language, had delivered on the 19th of July a very serious ultimatum,
couched in exceedingly harsh terms, and had only given four days in
which to reply to it. At the end of these four days the armistice was to
be raised and the war resumed. Already Marshal Radetzky was
concentrating his army and preparing to enter upon a fresh campaign.
This news, so contrary to the pacific assurances which we had received,
was to me a great source of surprise and indignation. Demands so
exorbitant, delivered in such arrogant and violent terms, seemed to
announce that peace was not Austria's only object, but that she aimed
rather at the independence of Piedmont and perhaps at her representative
institutions; for so long as liberty shows itself in the smallest
fraction of Italy, Austria feels ill at ease in all the rest.

     [24: Despatch of the 4th of July 1849 to M. de Boislecomte:

          "The conditions laid down for Piedmont by His Majesty the
          Emperor of Austria are no doubt severe; but, nevertheless,
          they do not affect the integrity of the territory of the
          Kingdom nor her honour. They neither take away the strength
          which she should preserve, nor the just influence which she
          is called upon to exercise over the general policy of Europe
          and in particular over the affairs of Italy. The treaty which
          she is asked to sign is a vexatious one, no doubt; but it is
          not a disastrous one; and, after the fate of arms has been
          decided, it does not exceed what was naturally to be feared.

          "France has not neglected, and will not neglect, any effort to
          obtain a mitigation of this proposal; she will persist in her
          endeavours to obtain from the Austrian Government the
          modifications which she considers in keeping not only with the
          interests of Piedmont but with the easy and lasting
          maintenance of the general peace; and to attain this result,
          she will employ all the means supplied to diplomacy: but she
          will not go beyond this. She does not think that, within the
          limits of the question and the degree to which the interests
          of Piedmont are involved, it would be opportune to do more.
          Holding this firm and deliberate opinion, she does not
          hesitate to give utterance to it. To allow, even by her
          silence, a belief to gain ground in extreme resolutions that
          have not been taken; to suggest hopes that we are not certain
          of wishing to realize; to urge indirectly by words to a line
          of action which we should not think ourselves justified in
          supporting by our acts; in a word, to engage others without
          engaging ourselves, or unconsciously to engage ourselves more
          deeply than we think or than we mean: that would be, on the
          part of either the Government or of private individuals, a
          line of conduct which seems to me neither prudent nor
          honourable.

          "You can rely, Sir, that so long as I occupy the post in which
          the President's confidence has placed me, the Government of
          the Republic shall incur no such reproach; it will announce
          nothing that it will not be prepared to carry out; it will
          make no promises that it is not resolved to keep; and it will
          consider it as much a point of honour to declare beforehand
          what it is not ready to do as to execute promptly and with
          vigour that which it has said it would do.

          "You will be good enough to read this despatch to M.
          d'Azeglio."]

I at once came to the conclusion that we must at no price allow so near
a neighbour to be oppressed, deliver a territory which touched our
frontiers to the Austrian armies, or permit political liberty to be
abolished in the only country in which, since 1848, it had showed itself
moderate. I thought, moreover, that Austria's mode of procedure towards
us showed either an intention to deceive us or else a desire to try how
far our toleration would go, or, as is commonly said, to sound us.

I saw that this was one of those extreme circumstances, which I had
faced beforehand, where it became my duty to risk not only my portfolio
(which, to tell the truth, was not risking much) but the fortunes of
France. I proceeded to the Council and explained the state of affairs.

The President and all my colleagues were unanimous in thinking that I
ought to act. Orders were immediately telegraphed to concentrate the
Army of Lyons at the foot of the Alps, and so soon as I returned home, I
myself wrote (for the flaccid style of diplomacy was not suited to the
circumstances) the following letter:[25]

     "Should the Austrian Government persist in the unreasonable demands
     mentioned in your telegram of yesterday, and, abandoning the limits
     of diplomatic discussion, throw up the armistice and undertake, as
     it says it will, to go and dictate peace at Turin, Piedmont can be
     assured that we should not desert her. The situation would no
     longer be the same as that in which she placed itself before the
     battle of Novara, when she spontaneously resumed her arms and
     renewed the war against our advice. This time it would be Austria
     which would herself take the initiative unprovoked; the nature of
     her demands and the violence of her proceedings would give us
     reason to believe that she is not acting solely with a view to
     peace, but that she is threatening the integrity of Piedmontese
     territory or, at the very least, the independence of the Sardinian
     Government.

     "We will not allow such designs as these to be accomplished at our
     gates. If, under these conditions, Piedmont is attacked, we will
     defend her."

     [25: Letter to M. de Boislecomte, 25 July 1849.]

I moreover thought it my duty to send for the Austrian representative (a
little diplomatist very like a fox in appearance as well as in nature),
and, convinced that, in the attitude we were taking up, hastiness was
identical with prudence, I took advantage of the fact that I could not
as yet be expected to have become familiar with habits of diplomatic
reserve, to express to him our surprise and our dissatisfaction in
terms so rude that he since admitted to me that he had never been so
received in his life.

Before the despatch of which I have quoted a few lines had reached
Turin, the two Powers had come to an agreement. They had come to terms
on the question of money, which was arranged practically on the
conditions that had been previously suggested by ourselves. The Austrian
Government had only desired to precipitate the negociations by
frightening the other side; it made very little difficulty about the
conditions.

Prince Schwarzenberg sent me all sorts of explanations and excuses, and
peace was definitely signed on the 6th of August, a peace hardly hoped
for by Piedmont after so many mistakes and misfortunes, since it assured
her more advantages than she had at first ventured to demand.

This affair threw into great relief the habits of English, and
particularly of Palmerstonian, diplomacy: the feature is worth quoting.
Since the commencement of the negociation, the British Government had
never ceased to show great animosity against Austria, and loudly to
encourage the Piedmontese not to submit to the conditions which she
sought to force upon them. My first care, after taking the resolutions I
have described, was to communicate them to England, and to endeavour to
persuade her to take up the same line of conduct. I therefore sent a
copy of my despatch to Drouyn de Lhuys, who was then Ambassador in
London, and instructed him to show it to Lord Palmerston, and to
discover that minister's intentions. Drouyn de Lhuys replied:[26]

     "While I was informing Lord Palmerston of your resolutions and of
     the instructions you had sent M. de Boislecomte, he listened with
     every sign of eager assent; but when I said, 'You see, my lord, how
     far we wish to go; can you tell me how far you will go yourself?'
     Lord Palmerston at once replied, 'The British Government, whose
     interest in this business is not equal to yours, will not lend the
     Piedmontese Government more than a diplomatic assistance and a
     moral support."

     [26: Despatches of the 25th and 26th of June 1849.]

Is not this characteristic? England, protected against the revolutionary
sickness of nations by the wisdom of her laws and the strength of her
ancient customs, and against the anger of princes by her power and her
isolation in the midst of us, is always pleased to play the part of the
advocate of liberty and justice in the internal affairs of the
Continent. She likes to censure and even to insult the strong, to
justify and encourage the weak; but it seems that she does not care to
go further than to assume virtuous airs and discuss honourable theories.
Should her _proteges_ come to need her, she offers her moral support.

I add, in order to finish the subject, that these tactics succeeded
remarkably well. The Piedmontese remained convinced that England alone
had defended them, and that we had very nearly abandoned them. She
remained very popular in Turin, and France very much suspected. For
nations are like men, they love still more that which flatters their
passions than that which serves their interests.

Hardly had we emerged from this bad pass, before we fell into a worse
one. We had witnessed with fear and regret what was happening in
Hungary. The misfortunes of this unlucky people excited our sympathies.
The intervention of the Russians, which for a time subordinated Austria
to the Tsar, and caused the hand of the latter to be more and more
active in the management of the general affairs of Europe, was not
calculated to please us. But all these events happened beyond our reach,
and we were helpless.

     "I need not tell you," I wrote in the instructions I sent
     Lamoriciere, "with what keen and melancholy interest we follow
     events in Hungary. Unfortunately, for the present, we can only take
     a passive part in this question. The letter and spirit of the
     treaties open out to us no right of intervention. Besides, our
     distance from the seat of war must impose upon us, in the present
     state of our affairs and of those of Europe, a certain reserve.
     Since we are not able to speak or act to good purpose, it is due to
     our dignity not to display, in respect to this question, any
     sterile excitement or impotent good-feeling. Our duty with regard
     to Hungarian events is to limit ourselves to carefully observing
     what happens and seeking to discover what is likely to take place."

Overwhelmed by numbers, the Hungarians were either conquered or
surrendering, and their principal leaders, as well as a certain number
of Polish generals who had joined their cause, crossed the Danube at the
end of August, and threw themselves into the arms of the Turks at
Widdin. From there, the two principal ones, Dembinski and Kossuth, wrote
to our Ambassador in Constantinople.[27] The habits and peculiarities of
mind of these two men were betrayed in their letters. The soldier's was
short and simple; the lawyer-orator's long and ornate. I remember one of
his phrases, among others, in which he said, "As a good Christian, I
have chosen the unspeakable sorrow of exile rather than the peacefulness
of death." Both ended by asking for the protection of France.

     [27: Letters of the 22nd and 24th of August 1849.]

While the outlaws were imploring our aid, the Austrian and Russian
Ambassadors appeared before the Divan and asked that they might be given
up. Austria based her demand upon the treaty of Belgrade, which in no
way established her right; and Russia hers upon the treaty of Kainardji
(10 July 1774), of which the meaning, to say the least of it, was very
obscure. But at bottom they neither of them appealed to an international
right, but to a better known and more practical right, that of the
strongest. This was made clear by their acts and their language. The two
embassies declared from the commencement that it was a question of peace
or war. Without consenting to discuss the matter, they insisted upon a
reply of yes or no, and declared that if this reply was in the negative,
they would at once cease all diplomatic relations with Turkey.

To this exhibition of violence, the Turkish ministers replied, with
gentleness, that Turkey was a neutral country; that the law of nations
forbade them to hand over outlaws who had taken refuge on their
territory; and that the Austrians and Russians had often quoted the same
law against them when Mussulman rebels had sought an asylum in Hungary,
Transylvania or Bessarabia. They modestly submitted that what was
permitted on the left bank of the Danube seemed as though it should also
be permitted on the right bank. They ended by protesting that what they
were asked to do was opposed to their honour and their religion, that
they would gladly undertake to keep the refugees under restraint and
place them where they could do no mischief, but that they could never
consent to deliver them to the executioner.

     "The young Sultan," our ambassador wrote to me, "replied yesterday
     to the Austrian Envoy that, while denouncing what the Hungarian
     rebels had done, he could now only regard them as unhappy men
     seeking to escape death, and that humanity forbade him to surrender
     them. Rechid Pasha, on his part, the Grand Vizier," added our
     Minister, "said to me, 'I shall be proud if I am driven from power
     for this;' and he added, with an air of deep concern, 'In our
     religion, every man who asks for mercy is bound to obtain it.'"

This was talking like civilized people and Christians. The Ambassadors
were content to reply like real Turks, saying that they must give up the
fugitives or undergo the consequences of a rupture which would probably
lead to war. The Mussulman population itself took fire; it approved of
and supported its Government; and the Mufti came to thank our Ambassador
for the support he had given to the cause of humanity and good law.

From the commencement of the discussion, the Divan had addressed itself
to the Ambassadors of France and England. It appealed to public opinion
in the two great countries which they represented, asked their advice,
and besought their help in the event of the Northern Powers executing
their threats. The Ambassadors at once replied that in their opinion
Austria and Russia were exceeding their rights; and they encouraged the
Turkish Government in its resistance.

In the meanwhile, arrived at Constantinople an aide-de-camp of the
Tsar. He brought a letter which that Prince had taken the pains to write
to the Sultan with his own hand, asking for the extradition of the Poles
who had served six months before in the Hungarian war against the
Russian army. This step seems a very strange one when one does not see
through the particular reasons which influenced the Tsar under the
circumstance. The following extract from a letter of Lamoriciere's
describes them with great sagacity, and shows to what extent public
opinion is dreaded at that end of Europe, where one would think that it
was neither an organ nor a power:

     "The Hungarian war, as you know," he wrote,[28] "was embarked upon
     to sustain Austria, who is hated as a people and not respected as a
     government; and it was very unpopular. It brought in nothing, and
     cost eighty-four millions of francs. The Russians hoped to bring
     back Bem, Dembinski, and the other Poles to Poland, as the price of
     the sacrifices of the campaign. Especially in the army, there
     reigned a veritable fury against these men. The people and soldiers
     were mad with longing for this satisfaction of their somewhat
     barbaric national pride. The Emperor, in spite of his omnipotence,
     is obliged to attach great value to the spirit of the masses upon
     whom he leans, and who constitute his real force. It is not simply
     a question of individual self-love: the national sentiment of the
     country and the army is at stake."

     [28: Despatches of the 11th and 25th of October 1849.]

These were, no doubt, the considerations which prompted the Tsar to take
the dangerous step I have mentioned. Prince Radziwill presented his
letter, but obtained nothing. He left forthwith, haughtily refusing a
second audience, which was offered him to take his leave; and the
Russian and Austrian Ambassadors officially declared that all diplomatic
relations had ceased between their masters and the Divan.

The latter acted, in these critical circumstances, with a firmness and
propriety of bearing which would have done honour to the most
experienced cabinets of Europe. At the same time that the Sultan refused
to comply with the demands, or rather the orders, of the two Emperors,
he wrote to the Tsar to tell him that he would not discuss with him the
question of right raised by the interpretation of the treaties, but that
he appealed to his friendship and to his honour, begging him to take it
in good part that the Turkish Government refused to take a measure which
would ruin it in the eyes of the world. He offered, moreover, once more,
himself to place the refugees in a position in which they should be
harmless. Abdul Medjid sent one of the wisest and cleverest men in his
Empire, Fuad Effendi, to take this letter to St Petersburg. A similar
letter was written to Vienna, but this was to be handed to the Emperor
of Austria by the Turkish Envoy at that Court, thus very visibly marking
the difference in the value attached to the consent of the two
Sovereigns. This news reached me at the end of September. My first care
was to communicate it to England. At the same time[29] I wrote a private
letter to our Ambassador, in which I said:

     "The conduct of England, who is more interested in this affair than
     we are, and less exposed in the conflict that may arise from it,
     must needs have a great influence upon our own. The English Cabinet
     must be asked clearly and categorically to state _how far_ it is
     prepared to go. I have not forgotten the Piedmont affair. If they
     want us to assist them, they must dot their i's. It is possible
     that, in that case, we shall be found to be very determined;
     otherwise, not. It is also very important that you should ascertain
     the opinions produced by these events upon the Tories of all
     shades; for with a government conducted on the parliamentary
     system, and consequently variable, the support of the party in
     power is not always a sufficient guarantee."

     [29: Private letter, 1 October 1849.]

In spite of the gravity of the circumstances, the English ministers, who
were at that moment dispersed on account of the parliamentary holidays,
took a long time before meeting; for in that country, the only country
in the world where the aristocracy still carries on the government, the
majority of the ministers are both great landed proprietors and, as a
rule, great noblemen. They were at that time on their estates,
recruiting from the fatigue and _ennui_ of business; and they showed no
undue hurry to return to Town. During this interval, all the English
press, without distinction of party, took fire. It raged against the two
Emperors, and inflamed public opinion in favour of Turkey. The British
Government, thus stimulated, at once took up its position. This time it
did not hesitate, for it was a question, as it said itself, not only of
the Sultan, but of England's influence in the world.[30] It therefore
decided, first, that representations should be made to Russia and
Austria; secondly, that the British Mediterranean Squadron should
proceed to the Dardanelles, to give confidence to the Sultan and, if
necessary, defend Constantinople. We were invited to do the same, and to
act in common. The same evening, the order was despatched to the British
Fleet to sail.

     [30: Private letter from M. Drouyn de Lhuys, 2 October 1849.]

The news of these decisive resolutions threw me into great perplexity. I
did not hesitate to think that we should approve the generous conduct of
our Ambassador, and come to the aid of the Sultan;[31] but as to a
warlike attitude, I did not believe that it would as yet be wise to
adopt it. The English invited us to do as they did; but our position was
very different from theirs. In defending Turkey, sword in hand, England
risked her fleet; we, our very existence. The English Ministers could
rely that, in that extremity, Parliament and the nation would support
them; whereas we were almost certain to be abandoned by the Assembly,
and even by the country, if things came so far as war. For our
wretchedness and danger at home made people's minds at that moment
insensible to all beside. I was convinced, moreover, that in this case
threats, instead of serving to forward our designs, were calculated to
frustrate them. If Russia, for it was really with her alone that we had
to do, should chance to be disposed to open the question of the
partition of the East by invading Turkey--a contingency that I found it
difficult to believe in--the sending of our fleets would not prevent the
crisis; and if it was really only a question (as was probably the case)
of taking revenge upon the Poles, it would aggravate it, by making it
difficult for the Tsar to retract, and causing his vanity to join forces
with his resentment.

     [31: Private letters to Lamoriciere and Beaumont, 5 and 9 October
     1849.]

I went to the meeting of the Council with these reflections. I at once
saw that the President was already decided and even pledged, as he
himself declared to us. This resolve on his part had been inspired by
Lord Normanby, the British Ambassador, an eighteenth-century
diplomatist, who had worked himself into a strong position in Louis
Napoleon's good graces.... The majority of my colleagues thought as he
did, that we should without hesitation adopt the line of joint action to
which the English invited us, and like them send our fleet to the
Dardanelles.

Failing in my endeavour to have a measure which I considered premature
postponed, I asked that at least, before it was carried out, they should
consult Falloux, whose state of health had compelled him to leave Paris
for a time and go to the country. Lanjuinais went down to him for this
purpose, reported the affair to him, and came back and reported to us
that Falloux had without hesitation given his opinion in favour of the
despatch of the fleet. The order was sent off at once. However, Falloux
had acted without consulting the leaders of the majority or his friends,
and even without due reflection as to the consequences of his action; he
had yielded to a movement of impulse, as sometimes happened to him, for
nature had made him frivolous and light-headed before education and
habit had rendered him calculating to the pitch of duplicity. It is
probable that, after his conversation with Lanjuinais, he received
advice, or himself made certain reflections, opposed to the opinion he
had given. He therefore wrote me a very long and very involved
letter,[32] in which he pretended to have misunderstood Lanjuinais
(this was impossible, for Lanjuinais was the clearest and most lucid of
men both in speech and action). He revoked his opinion and sought to
evade his responsibility; and I replied at once with this note:

     "My dear Colleague,

     "The Council has taken its resolution, and at this late hour there
     is nothing to be done but await events; moreover, in this matter
     the responsibility of the whole Council is the same. There is no
     individual responsibility. I was not in favour of the measure; but
     now that the measure is taken, I am prepared to defend it against
     all comers."[33]

     [32: Letter from Falloux, 11 October 1849.]

     [33: Letter to Falloux, 12 October 1849.]

While giving a lesson to Falloux, I was none the less anxious and
embarrassed as to the part I was called upon to play. I cared little for
what would happen at Vienna; for in this business I credited Austria
merely with the position of a satellite. But what would the Tsar do, who
had involved himself so rashly and, apparently, so irrevocably in his
relations towards the Sultan, and whose pride had been put to so severe
a test by our threats? Fortunately I had two able agents at St
Petersburg and Vienna, to whom I could explain myself without reserve.

     "Take up the business very gently," I recommended them,[34] "be
     careful not to set our adversaries' self-esteem against us, avoid
     too great and too ostensible an intimacy with the English
     Ambassadors, whose Government is detested by the Court at which you
     are, although nevertheless maintaining good relations with those
     ambassadors. In order to attain success, adopt a friendly tone, and
     do not try to frighten people. Show our position as it is; we do
     not want war; we detest it; we dread it; but we cannot act
     dishonourably. We cannot advise the Porte, when it comes to us for
     our opinion, to commit an act of cowardice; and should the courage
     which it has displayed, and which we have approved of, bring it
     into danger, we cannot, either, refuse it the assistance it asks of
     us. A way must therefore be found out of the difficulty. Is
     Kossuth's skin worth a general war? Is it to the interest of the
     Powers that the Eastern Question should be opened at this moment
     and in this fashion? Cannot a way be found by which everybody's
     honour will be saved? What do they want, after all? Do they only
     want to have a few poor devils handed over to them? That is
     assuredly not worth so great a quarrel; but if it were a pretext,
     if at the bottom of this business lurked the desire, as a matter of
     fact, to lay hands upon the Ottoman Empire, then it would certainly
     be a general war that they wanted; for ultra-pacific though we are,
     we should never allow Constantinople to fall without striking a
     blow."

     [34: Private letters to Lamoriciere and Beaumont, 5 and 9 October
     1849.]

The affair was happily over by the time these instructions reached St
Petersburg. Lamoriciere had conformed to them before he received them.
He had acted in this circumstance with an amount of prudence and
discretion which surprised those who did not know him, but which did not
astonish me in the least. I knew that he was impetuous by temperament,
but that his mind, formed in the school of Arabian diplomacy, the wisest
of all diplomacies, was circumspect and acute to the pitch of artifice.

Lamoriciere, so soon as he had heard rumours of the quarrel direct from
Russia, hastened to express, very vividly, though in an amicable tone,
that he disapproved of what had happened at Constantinople; but he took
care to make no official, and, above all, no threatening,
representations. Although acting in concert with the British Minister,
he carefully avoided compromising himself with him in any joint steps;
and when Fuad Effendi, bearing Abdul Medjid's letter, arrived, he let
him know secretly that he would not go to see him, in order not to
imperil the success of the negociation, but that Turkey could rely upon
France.

He was admirably assisted by this envoy from the Grand Seignior, who
concealed a very quick and cunning intelligence beneath his Turkish
skin. Although the Sultan had appealed for the support of France and
England, Fuad, on arriving at St. Petersburg, showed no inclination even
to call upon the representatives of these two Powers. He refused to see
anybody before his audience of the Tsar, to whose free will alone, he
said, he looked for the success of his mission.

The Emperor must have experienced a feeling of bitter displeasure on
beholding the want of success attending his threats, and the unexpected
turn that things had taken; but he had the strength to restrain himself.
In his heart he was not desirous to open the Eastern Question, even
though, not long before, he had gone so far as to say, "The Ottoman
Empire is dead; we have only to arrange for its funeral."

To go to war in order to force the Sultan to violate the Law of Nations
was a very difficult matter. He would have been aided in this by the
barbaric passions of his people, but reproved by the opinion of the
whole civilized world. He knew what was happening in England and France.
He resolved to yield before he was threatened. The great Emperor
therefore drew back, to the immeasurable surprise of his subjects and
even of foreigners. He received Fuad in audience, and withdrew the
demand he had made upon the Sultan. Austria hastened to follow his
example. When Lord Palmerston's note arrived at St Petersburg, all was
over. The best would have been to say nothing; but while we, in this
business, had only aimed at success, the British Cabinet had also sought
for noise. It required it to make a response to the irritation of the
country. Lord Bloomfield, the British Minister, presented himself at
Count Nesselrode's the day after the Emperor's decision became known;
and was very coldly received.[35] He read him the note in which Lord
Palmerston asked, in polite but peremptory phrases, that the Sultan
should not be forced to hand over the refugees. The Russian replied that
he neither understood the aim nor the object of this demand; that the
affair to which he doubtless referred was arranged; and that, in any
case, England had nothing to say in the matter. Lord Bloomfield asked
how things stood. Count Nesselrode haughtily refused to give him any
explanation; it would be equivalent, he said, to recognizing England's
right to interfere in an affair that did not concern it. And when the
British Envoy insisted upon at any rate leaving a copy of the note in
Count Nesselrode's hands, the latter, after first refusing, at last
accepted the document with an ill grace and dismissed his visitor,
saying carelessly that he would reply to the note, that it was a
terribly long one, and that it would be very tiresome. "France," added
the Chancellor, "has already made me say the same thing; but she made me
say it earlier and better."

     [35: Letter from Lamoriciere, 19 October 1849.]

At this moment when we learnt the end of the dangerous quarrel, the
Cabinet, after thus witnessing a happy conclusion to the two great
pieces of foreign business that still kept the peace of the world in
suspense, the Piedmont War and the Hungarian War--at that moment, the
Cabinet fell.




APPENDIX


     I have recently discovered these four notes in the charter-room at
     Tocqueville, where my grandfather had carefully deposited, by the
     side of our most precious family archives, all the manuscripts of
     his brother that came into his possession. They seemed to me to
     throw some light upon the Revolution of February and the question
     of the revision of the Constitution in 1851, and to merit
     publication together with the Recollections.

     Comte de Tocqueville.




I

GUSTAVE DE BEAUMONT'S VERSION OF THE 24TH OF FEBRUARY.


I have to-day (24 October 1850) had a conversation with Beaumont which
is worth noting. This is what he told me:

"On the 24th of February, at seven o'clock in the morning, Jules
Lasteyrie and another [I have forgotten the name which Beaumont
mentioned] came to fetch me to take me to M. Thiers, where Barrot,
Duvergier, and several others were expected."

I asked him if he knew what had passed during the night between Thiers
and the King. He replied:

"I was told by Thiers, and especially by Duvergier, who had at once
taken a note of Thiers' narrative, that Thiers had been summoned at
about one o'clock; that he had found the King in an undecided frame of
mind; that he had at once told him that he could only come in with
Barrot and Duvergier; that the King, after raising many objections, had
appeared to yield; that he had put off Thiers till the morning; that
nevertheless, as he showed him to the door, he had told him that as yet
no one was bound one way or the other."

Evidently the King reserved the right of attempting to form another
combination before the morning.

"I must here," continued Beaumont, "tell you a curious anecdote. Do you
know how Bugeaud was occupied during that decisive night, at the
Tuileries itself, where he had just received the command-in-chief?
Listen: Bugeaud's hope and ambition was to become Minister of War when
Thiers should come into power. Things were so turning out, as he clearly
saw, as to make this appointment impossible; but what preoccupied him
was to assure his preponderance at the War Office even if he was not at
the head of it. Consequently, on the night of the 24th of February, or
rather in the early morning, Bugeaud with his own hand wrote to Thiers
from the Tuileries a letter of four pages, of which the substance was:

"'I understand the difficulties which prevent you from making me your
Minister of War; nevertheless I have always liked you, and I am sure
that we shall one day govern together. However, I understand the present
reasons, and I give way before them; but I beg you, at least, to give M.
Magne, who is my friend, the place of Under-Secretary of State at the
War Office.'"

Resuming his general narrative, Beaumont continued:

"When I arrived at the Place Saint-Georges, Thiers and his friends had
already left for the Tuileries. I hastily followed them, and arrived at
the same time as they did. The appearance of Paris was already
formidable; however, the King received us as usual, with the same
copious language and the same mannerisms that you know of. Before being
shown in to him [at least, I believe it was here that Beaumont placed
this incident], we talked about affairs among ourselves. I insisted
urgently upon Bugeaud's dismissal. 'If you want to oppose force to the
popular movement,' I said, 'by all means make use of Bugeaud's name and
audacity; but if you wish to attempt conciliation and you suspend
hostilities[36] ... then Bugeaud's name is a contradiction.' The others
seconded me, and Thiers reluctantly and with hesitation gave way. They
compromised the matter as you know: Bugeaud nominally retained the
command-in-chief, and Lamoriciere was placed at the head of the National
Guard. Thiers and Barrot entered the King's closet, and I do not know
what happened there. The order had been given to the troops everywhere
to cease firing, and to fall back upon the Palace and make way for the
National Guard. I myself, with Remusat, hurriedly drew up the
proclamation informing the people of these orders and explaining them.
At nine o'clock it was agreed that Thiers and Barrot should personally
attempt to make an appeal to the people; Thiers was stopped on the
staircase and induced to turn back, but with difficulty, I am bound to
admit. Barrot set out alone, and I followed him."

     [36: This clearly shows, independently of what Beaumont told me
     positively, how absolutely the new Cabinet had made up its mind to
     yield.]

Here Beaumont's account is identical with Barrot's.

"Barrot was wonderful throughout this expedition," said Beaumont. "I had
difficulty in making him turn back, although when we had once arrived at
the barricade at the Porte Saint-Denis, it would have been impossible to
go further. Our return made the situation worse: we brought in our wake,
by effecting a passage for it, a crowd more hostile than that which we
had traversed in going; by the time we arrived at the Place Vendome,
Barrot feared lest he should take the Tuileries by assault, in spite of
himself, with the multitude which followed him; he slipped away and
returned home. I came back to the Chateau. The situation seemed to me
very serious but far from desperate, and I was filled with surprise on
perceiving the disorder that had gained all minds during my absence, and
the terrible confusion that already reigned at the Tuileries. I was not
quite able to understand what had happened, or to learn what news they
had received to turn everything topsy-turvy in this fashion. I was dying
of hunger and fatigue; I went up to a table and hurriedly took some
food. Ten times, during this meal of three or four minutes, an
aide-de-camp of the King or of one of the Princes came to look for me,
spoke to me in confused language, and left me without properly
understanding my reply. I quickly joined Thiers, Remusat, Duvergier,
and one or two others who were to compose the new Cabinet. We went
together to the King's closet: this was the only Council at which I was
present. Thiers spoke, and started a long homily on the duties of the
King and the paterfamilias. 'That is to say, you advise me to abdicate,'
said the King, who was but indifferently affected by the touching part
of the speech and came straight to the point. Thiers assented, and gave
his reasons. Duvergier supported him with great vivacity. Knowing
nothing of what had happened, I displayed my astonishment and exclaimed
that all was not lost. Thiers seemed much annoyed at my outburst, and I
could not prevent myself from believing that the secret aim of Thiers
and Duvergier had, from the first, been to get rid of the King, on whom
they could no longer rely, and to govern in the name of the Duc de
Nemours or the Duchesse d'Orleans, after forcing the King to abdicate.
The King, who had struck me as very firm up to a certain moment, seemed
towards the end to surrender himself entirely."

Here there is a void in my memory in Beaumont's account, which I will
fill up from another conversation. I come to the scene of the
abdication, which followed:

"During the interval, events and news growing worse and the panic
increasing, Thiers had declared that already he was no longer possible
(which was perhaps true), and that Barrot was scarcely so. He then
disappeared--at least, I did not see him again during the last
moments--which was very wrong of him, for although he declined the
Ministry, he ought not, at so critical a juncture, to have abandoned the
Princes, and he should have remained to advise them, although no longer
their Minister. I was present at the final scene of the abdication. The
Duc de Montpensier begged his father to write and urged him so eagerly
that the King stopped and said, 'But look here, I can't write faster.'
The Queen was heroical and desperate: knowing that I had appeared
opposed to the abdication at the Council, she took my hands and told me
that such a piece of cowardice must not be allowed to be consummated,
that we should defend ourselves, that she would let herself be killed,
before the King's eyes, before they could reach him. The abdication was
signed nevertheless, and the Duc de Nemours begged me to run and tell
Marshal Gerard, who was at the further end of the Carrousel, that I had
seen the King sign, so that he might announce officially to the people
that the King had abdicated. I hastened there, and returned; all the
rooms were empty. I went from room to room without meeting a soul. I
went down into the garden; I there met Barrot, who had come over from
the Ministry of the Interior, and was indulging in the same useless
quest. The King had escaped by the main avenue; the Duchesse d'Orleans
seemed to have gone by the underground passage to the water-side. No
necessity had compelled them to leave the Chateau, which was then in
perfect safety, and which was not invaded by the people until an hour
after it had been abandoned. Barrot was determined at all costs to
assist the Duchess. He hurriedly had horses prepared for her, the young
Prince and ourselves, and wanted us to throw ourselves all together into
the midst of the people--the only chance in fact, and a feeble one at
that, that remained to us. Unable to rejoin the Duchess, we left for the
Ministry of the Interior. You met us on the road; you know the rest."




II

BARROT'S VERSION OF THE 24TH OF FEBRUARY.

(_10 October 1850._)


"I believe that M. Mole only refused the Ministry after the firing had
commenced on the Boulevard. Thiers told me that he had been sent for at
one in the morning; that he had asked the King to appoint me as the
necessary man; that the King had at first resisted and then yielded; and
that at last he had adjourned our meeting to nine o'clock in the morning
at the Palace.

"At five o'clock Thiers came to my house to awake me; we talked; he went
home, and I called for him at eight. I found him quietly shaving. It is
a great pity that the King and M. Thiers thus wasted the time that
elapsed between one and eight o'clock. When he had finished shaving, we
went to the Chateau; the population already was greatly excited;
barricades were being built, and even a few shots had already been fired
from houses near the Tuileries. However, we found the King still very
calm and retaining his usual manner. He addressed me with the
commonplaces which you can imagine for yourself. At that hour, Bugeaud
was still general-in-chief. I strongly persuaded Thiers not to take
office under the colour of that name, and at least to modify it by
giving the command of the National Guard to Lamoriciere, who was there.
Thiers accepted this arrangement, which was agreed to by the King and
Bugeaud himself.

"I next proposed to the King that he should dissolve the Chamber of
Deputies. 'Never, never!' he said; he lost his temper and left the room,
slamming the door in the faces of Thiers and me. It was quite clear that
he only consented to give us office in order to save the first moment,
and that he intended, after compromising us with the people, to throw us
over with the assistance of Parliament. Of course, at any ordinary time,
I should at once have withdrawn; but the gravity of the situation made
me stay, and I proposed to present myself to the people, myself to
apprise them of the formation of the new Cabinet, and to calm them. In
the impossibility of our having anything printed and posted up in time,
I looked upon myself as a walking placard. I must do Thiers the justice
to say that he wished to accompany me, and that it was I who refused, as
I dreaded the bad impression his presence might make.

"I therefore set out; I went up to each barricade unarmed; the muskets
were lowered, the barricades opened; there were cries of 'Reform for
ever! long live Barrot!' We thus went to the Porte Saint-Denis, where we
found a barricade two stories high and defended by men who made no sign
of concurrence in my words and betrayed no intention of allowing us to
pass the barricade. We were therefore compelled to retrace our steps. On
returning, I found the people more excited than when I had come;
nevertheless, I heard not a single seditious cry, nor anything that
announced an immediate revolution. The only word that I heard of grave
import was from Etienne Arago. He came up to me and said, 'If the King
does not abdicate, we shall have a revolution before eight o'clock
to-night.' I thus came to the Place Vendome; thousands of men followed
me, crying, 'To the Tuileries! to the Tuileries!' I reflected what was
the best thing to do. To go to the Tuileries at the head of that
multitude was to make myself the absolute master of the situation, but
by means of an act which might have seemed violent and revolutionary.
Had I known what was happening at the moment in the Tuileries, I should
not have hesitated; but as yet I felt no anxiety. The attitude of the
people did not yet seem decided. I knew that all the troops were falling
back upon the Chateau; that the Government was there, and the generals;
I could not therefore imagine the panic which, shortly afterwards,
placed it in the hands of the mob. I turned to the right and returned
home to take a moment's rest; I had not eaten anything yet and was
utterly exhausted. After a few minutes, Malleville sent word from the
Ministry of the Interior that it was urgent that I should come and sign
the telegrams to the departments. I went in my carriage, and was cheered
by the people; from there, I set out to walk to the Palace. I was still
ignorant of all that had happened. When I reached the quay, opposite the
garden, I saw a regiment of Dragoons returning to barracks; the colonel
said to me, 'The King has abdicated; all the troops are withdrawing.' I
hurried; when I reached the wicket-gates, I had great difficulty in
penetrating to the court-yard, as the troops were crowding out through
every opening. At last I reached the yard, which I found almost empty;
the Duc de Nemours was there; I entreated him to tell me where the
Duchesse d'Orleans was; he replied that he did not know, but that he
believed that at that moment she was in the pavilion at the water-side.
I hastened there; I was told that the Duchess was not there. I forced
the door and went through the rooms, which were, in fact, empty. I left
the Tuileries, recommending Havin, whom I met, not to bring the Duchess,
if he found her, to the Chamber, with which there was nothing to be
done. My intention had been, if I had found the Duchess and her son, to
put them on horseback and throw myself with them among the people: I had
even had the horses got ready.

"Not finding the Princess, I returned to the Ministry of the Interior; I
met you on the road, you know what happened there. I was sent for in
haste to go to the Chamber. I had scarcely arrived when the leaders of
the Extreme Left surrounded me and dragged me almost by main force to
the first office; there, they begged me to propose to the Assembly the
nomination of a Provisional Government, of which I was to be a member. I
sent them about their business, and returned to the Chamber. You know
the rest."




III

SOME INCIDENTS OF THE 24TH OF FEBRUARY 1848.


1

     _M. Dufaure's efforts to prevent the Revolution of
     February--Responsibility of M. Thiers, which renders them futile._

To-day (19 October 1850), Rivet recalled and fixed with me the
circumstances of an incident well worth remembering.

In the course of the week preceding that in which the Monarchy was
overthrown, a certain number of Conservative deputies began to feel an
anxiety which was not shared by the Ministers and their colleagues. They
thought that it was more advisable to overthrow the Cabinet, provided
that this could be done without violence, than to risk the adventure of
the banquets. One of them, M. Sallandrouze, made the following proposal
to M. Billault (the banquet was to take place on Tuesday the 22nd) that
on the 21st M. Dufaure and his friends should move an urgent order of
the day, drawn up in consultation with Sallandrouze and those in whose
name he spoke, some forty in number. The order of the day should be
voted by them on condition that, on its side, the Opposition should give
up the banquet and restrain the people.

On Sunday, the 20th of February, we met at Rivet's to discuss this
proposal. There were present, as far as I am able to remember, Dufaure,
Billault, Lanjuinais, Corcelles, Ferdinand Barrot, Talabot, Rivet, and
myself.

Sallandrouze's proposal was explained to us by Billault; we accepted it
at once, and drafted an order of the day in consequence. I myself
drafted it, and this draft, with some modifications, was accepted by my
friends. The terms in which it was couched (I no longer remember them)
were very moderate, but the adoption of this order of the day would
inevitably entail the resignation of the Cabinet.

There remained to be fulfilled the condition of the vote of the
Conservatives, the withdrawal of the banquet. We had had nothing to do
with this measure, and consequently we were not able to prevent it. It
was agreed that one of us should at once go in search of Duvergier de
Hauranne and Barrot, and propose that they should act according to the
condition demanded. Rivet was selected for this negociation, and we
adjourned our meeting till the evening to know how he had succeeded.

In the evening he came and reported to us as follows:

Barrot had eagerly entered into the opening offered him; he effusively
seized Rivet's hands, and declared that he was prepared to do all that
he was asked in this sense; he seemed relieved of a great weight on
beholding the possibility of escaping from the responsibility of the
banquet. But he added that he was not engaged in this enterprise alone,
and that he must come to an understanding with his friends, without whom
he could do nothing. How well we knew it!

Rivet went on to Duvergier's, and was told that he was at the
Conservatoire of Music, but that he would return home before dinner.
Rivet waited. Duvergier returned. Rivet told him of the proposal of the
Conservatives and of our order of the day. Duvergier received this
communication somewhat disdainfully; they had gone too far, he said, to
draw back; the Conservatives had repented too late; he, Duvergier, and
his friends could not, without losing their popularity and perhaps all
their influence with the masses, undertake to make the latter give up
the proposed demonstration. "However," he added, "I am only giving you
my first and personal impression; but I am going to dine with Thiers,
and I will send you a note this evening to let you know our final
decision."

This note came while we were there; it said briefly that the opinion
expressed by Duvergier before dinner was also that of Thiers, and that
the idea which we had suggested must be abandoned. We broke up at once:
the die was cast!

I have no doubt that, among the reasons for Thiers' and Duvergier's
refusal, the first place must be given to this, which was not expressed:
that if the Ministry fell quietly, by the combined effect of a part of
the Conservatives and ourselves, and upon an order of the day presented
by us, we should come into power, and not those who had built up all
this great machinery of the banquets in order to attain it.


2

     _Dufaure's conduct on the 24th of February 1848._

Rivet told me to-day (19 October 1850) that he had never talked with
Dufaure of what happened to him on the 24th of February; but that he had
gathered the following from conversation with members of his family or
of his immediate surroundings:

On the 23rd of February, at about a quarter past six, M. Mole, after
concerting with M. de Montalivet, sent to beg Dufaure to come and see
him. Dufaure, on his road to M. Mole's, called on Rivet and asked him to
wait for him, because he intended to come back to Rivet on leaving M.
Mole. Dufaure did not return, and Rivet did not see him till some time
after, but he believed that, on arriving at Mole's, Dufaure had a rather
long conversation with him, and then went away, declaring that he did
not wish to join the new Cabinet, and that, in his opinion,
circumstances called for the men who had brought about the movement,
that is to say, Thiers and Barrot.

He returned greatly alarmed at the appearance of Paris, found his wife
and mother-in-law still more alarmed, and, at five o'clock in the
morning of the 24th, set out with them and took them to Vauves. He
himself came back; I saw him at about eight or nine o'clock, and I do
not remember that he told me he had taken this morning journey. I was
calling on him with Lanjuinais and Corcelles; but we soon separated,
arranging to meet at twelve at the Chamber of Deputies. Dufaure did not
come; it seems that he started to do so, and in fact arrived at the
Palace of the Assembly, which had, doubtless, been just at that moment
invaded. What is certain is that he went on and joined his family at
Vauves.




IV

     MY CONVERSATION WITH BERRYER, ON THE 21ST OF JUNE, AT AN
     APPOINTMENT WHICH I HAD GIVEN HIM AT MY HOUSE. WE WERE BOTH MEMBERS
     OF THE COMMITTEE FOR THE REVISION OF THE CONSTITUTION.


I thus opened the conversation:

"Let us leave appearances on one side, between you and me. You are not
making a revisionist but an electoral campaign."

He replied, "That is true; you are quite right"

"Very well," I replied; "we shall see presently if you are well advised.
What I must tell you at once is that I cannot join in a manoeuvre of
which the sole object is to save a section only of the moderate party at
the next elections, leaving out of the calculation many others, and
notably that to which I belong. You must either give the moderate
Republicans a valid reason for voting for the Revision, by giving it a
republican character, or else expect us to do our best to spike your
guns."

He agreed, but raised difficulties that originated with the passions and
prejudices of his party. We discussed for some time what was to be done,
and at last we came to the policy which he was following.

This is what I said to him on this subject, of which I particularly wish
to retain the impression. I said:

"Berryer, you are dragging us all, in spite of ourselves, into a plight
for which you will have to bear the sole responsibility, you may be
quite sure of that. If the Legitimists had joined those who wished to
fight against the President, the fight might still be possible. You have
dragged your party, in spite of itself, in an opposite direction;
henceforth, we can no longer resist; we cannot remain alone with the
Montagnards; we must give way, since you give way; but what will be the
consequence? I can see your thought, it is quite clear: you think that
circumstances render the President's ascendancy irresistible and the
movement which carries the country towards him insurmountable. Unable to
fight against the current, you throw yourselves into it, at the risk of
making it more violent still, but in the hope that it will land you and
your friends in the next Assembly, in addition to various other sections
of the party of order, which is not very sympathetic with the President.
There alone you think that you will find a solid resting-place from
which to resist him, and you think that, by working his business to-day,
you will be able to keep together, in the next Assembly, a group of men
able to cope with him. To struggle against the tide which carries him at
this moment is to make one's self unpopular and ineligible and to
deliver the party to the Socialists and the Bonapartists, neither of
whom you wish to see triumph: well and good! Your plan has its plausible
side, but it fails in one principal respect, which is this: I could
understand you if the election were to take place to-morrow, and if you
were at once to gather the fruits of your manoeuvre, as at the
December election; but there is nearly a year between now and the next
elections. You will not succeed in having them held in the spring, if
you succeed in having them held at all. Between now and then, do you
imagine that the Bonapartist movement, aided, precipitated by you, will
cease? Do you not see that, after asking you for a Revision of the
Constitution, public opinion, stirred up by all the agents of the
Executive and led by our own weakness, will ask us for something more,
and then for something more still, until we are driven openly to favour
the illegal re-election of the President and purely and simply to work
his business for him? Can you go as far as that? Would your party be
willing to, if you are? No! You will therefore come to a moment when you
will have to stop short, to stand firm on your ground, to resist the
combined effort of the nation and the Executive Power; in other words,
on the one hand to become unpopular, and on the other to lose that
support, or at least that electoral neutrality, of the Government which
you desire. You will have enslaved yourselves, you will have immensely
strengthened the forces opposed to you, and that is all. I tell you
this: either you will pass completely and for ever under the President's
yoke, or you will lose, just when it is ripe for gathering, all the
fruit of your manoeuvre, and you will simply have taken upon
yourself, in your own eyes and the country's, the responsibility of
having contributed to raise this Power, which will perhaps, in spite of
the mediocrity of the man, and thanks to the extraordinary power of
circumstances, become the heir of the Revolution and our master."

Barrot seemed to me to rest tongue-tied, and the time having come to
part, we parted.




INDEX

Many of the actors in the Revolution of 1848 are comparatively unknown
in England. I did not wish to encumber these Recollections with
foot-notes; and I have preferred, instead, to amplify the following
Index by giving, in the majority of cases, the full names and titles of
these participants, with the dates of their birth and death.

A. Teixeira de Mattos.


  A

  Abdul Medjid, Sultan of Turkey (1823-1861), on question of Hungarian
    refugees, 373.

  d'Adelsward, in the National Assembly, 162.

  Ampere, Jean Jacques (1800-1864), character of, 87.

  Andryane, in the Chamber of Deputies, 72.

  Arago, Etienne, on the barricades, 387.

  Austria, her relations with Hungary and Russia, 335.
    ---- Tsar's views on, 337.

  Austrians, in Italy, 333.
    ---- submits to the influence of Russia, 352 (_foot-note_).
    ---- and Piedmont, 353.
    ---- demands Hungarian refugees from Turkey, 361.


  B

  Baden, revolution put down in, 342.
    ---- Tocqueville interferes on behalf of the rebels (_foot-note_),
         342.

  Banquets, the, affair of, 18.

  Banquet in Paris, forbidden by Government, 30.
    ---- Rivet's statement in regard to, 390

  Barbes, Armand (1810-1870), in the National Assembly, 164.
    ---- goes to the Hotel de Ville, 168.
    ---- impeached by the Assembly, 173.

  Barricades, the, construction of, 47.

  Barrot, Camille Hyacinthe Odilon (1791-1873), alliance of, with
    Thiers, 19.
    ---- replies to Hebert in Chamber of Deputies, 28.
    ---- recoils from Banquet in Paris, 31.
    ---- sent for by Louis-Philippe, 45.
    ---- on the Revolution, 59.
    ---- and the barricades, 74.
    ---- in Committee of Constitution, 243, 246, 250, 255.
    ---- tries to form a new Cabinet, 267.
    ---- succeeds, 277.
    ---- with Beaumont, &c., 379.
    ---- his version of the abdication of Louis-Philippe, 385.

  Bastide, gets the Assembly to appoint Cavaignac Military Dictator,
    204.

  Beaumont, Gustave de la Bonniniere de (1802-1866), Tocqueville's
    conversation with, 41.
    ---- is sent for by Louis-Philippe, 45.
    ---- tells Tocqueville of abdication of Louis-Philippe, 58.
    ---- meets Tocqueville, 74.
    ---- sits with Tocqueville in National Assembly, 142.
    ---- in Committee of the Constitution, 252.
    ---- his interview with Tocqueville and political friends, 267.
    ---- sent as Ambassador to Vienna, 321.
    ---- letter of Tocqueville to, on the Hungarian refugees, 370.
    ---- his account of the abdication of Louis-Philippe, 379.

  Beaumont, Madame de, notice of, 41.

  Bedeau, General Marie Alphonse (1804-1863), on the Place Louis XV, 51.
    ---- character of, 52.
    ---- nearly killed in Insurrection, 227.
    ---- his interview with Tocqueville and his political friends, 267.

  Berlin, Persigny sent to, 323.

  Berryer, Pierre Antoine (1790-1868), his discussion with Tocqueville
    on the proposed Constitution, 394.

  Billault, Auguste Adolphe Marie (1805-1863), in the Chamber of
    Deputies, 74.
    ---- and banquets, 390.

  Blanc, Jean Joseph Louis (1811-1882), in the National Assembly, 166.

  Blanqui, Louis Auguste (1805-1881), in the National Assembly, 163.

  Blanqui, Adolphe Jerome (1798-1854), anecdote of, 197.

  Bloomfield, John Arthur Douglas Bloomfield, Lord (1802-1879),
    British Minister at St Petersburg, 374.
    ---- snubbed by Nesselrode, _idem_.

  Broglie, Achille Charles Leonce Victor Duc de (1785-1870), his
    seclusion, 106.
    ---- and foreign affairs, 330.

  Buchez, Philippe Benjamin Joseph (1769-1865), in the National
    Assembly, 162.

  Bugeaud, Thomas Robert Marshal, Marquis de la Piconnerie, Duc d'Isly
    (1784-1849), in favour of the Duchesse d'Orleans, 72.
    ---- dying of cholera, 290.
    ---- his ambition, 380.

  Buffel, Minister of Agriculture, 276.


  C

  Cabinet, Members of the, 278.

  Cavaignac, General Louis Eugene (1802-1857), in the Insurrection of
    June, 195.
    ---- made Military Dictator, 204.
    ---- Tocqueville votes for, 263.
    ---- speech of, 297.

  Chamber of Deputies, the, state of in 1848, 10.
    ---- Tocqueville's speech in, on 27th January 1848, 14.
    ---- Speeches in, by Hebert and Barrot, 28.
    ---- state of, on 22nd February, 33.
    ---- state of, on 23rd February, 36.
    ---- Guizot in, 36.
    ---- state of, on 24th February, 56.
    ---- Tocqueville's estimate of its utility, 58.
    ---- Duchesse d'Orleans in, 60.
    ---- invaded by the people, 62.

  Chambers, one or two? debate on, in the Committee of the Constitution,
    242.

  Changarnier, General Nicolas Anne Theodule (1793-1877), Rulhiere's
    jealousy of, 279.
    ---- sent for, 295.
    ---- puts down insurrection, 298.

  Champeaux, his relation with Lamartine, 147.
    ---- his relation with Tocqueville, 149.

  Charles X., King of France and Navarre (1757-1836), flight of, in
    1830, 85.

  Chateaubriand, Francois Rene, Vicomte de (1768-1848), death of, 230.

  Committee for the Constitution, appointed, 233.
    ---- proceedings of, 235.

  Considerant, Victor, appointed on
    Committee of the Constitution, 233.
    ---- escapes after insurrection, 299.

  Constituent Assembly, prohibits Government from attacking Rome, 288.

  Coquerel, Athanase Laurent Charles (1795-1875), in the Committee of
    the Constitution, 246.

  Corbon, on the Committee of the Constitution, 257.

  Corcelles, with Lanjuinais and Tocqueville on the boulevards, 48.
    ---- sits with Tocqueville in National Assembly, 142.
    ---- in the Insurrection of June, 191.
    ---- his interview with Tocqueville and his political friends, 267.

  Cormenin, Louis Marie de la Haye, Vicomte de (1788-1868), appointed a
    Commissioner for Paris, 206.
    ---- appointed on the Committee of the Constitution, 232.
    ---- in the Committee of the Constitution, 247, 257.

  Council General, the, meets at Saint-Lo, 125.

  Courtais, General, in the National Assembly, 171.
    ---- impeached by Assembly, 173.

  Cremieux, Isaac Adolphe (1796-1880), in the Chamber of Deputies, 65.
    ---- appointed a Commissioner for Paris, 206.
    ---- what Janvier said of him, 210.


  D

  Degousee, in the National Assembly, 159.

  Dembinski, General Henry (1791-1864), flees to the Turks, 361.

  Dornes, appointed on the Committee of the Constitution, 235.

  Dufaure, Jules Armand Stanislas (1798-1881), Tocqueville's
    conversation with, 17.
    ---- character of, 40.
    ---- tells Tocqueville of his interview with Louis-Philippe, 47.
    ---- sits with Tocqueville in National Assembly, 142.
    ---- converses with Tocqueville, Thiers, Barrot, Remusat, and
           Lanjuinais, 203.
    ---- appointed on the Committee of the Constitution, 233.
    ---- conduct of, in the Committee, 243, 255.
    ---- his interview with Tocqueville and his political friends, 267.
    ---- made Minister of the Interior, 272.
    ---- with the President, 296.
    ---- rupture with Falloux, 307.
    ---- speech in Assembly, 310.
    ---- character of, 313.
    ---- with the President, 322.
    ---- and banquets, 390.
    ---- his conduct on 24th February 1848, 393.

  Duchatel, Charles Marie Tannequi, Comte (1803-1867), Minister of the
    Interior, character of and conversation with, 23.
    ---- want of tact in his speech on the banquets, 27.
    ---- flight of, 136.

  Dupin, Andre Marie Jean Jacques (1783-1865), speech of, in the Chamber
    of Deputies, 62.
    ---- in the Committee of the Constitution, 243.

  Duvergier de Hauranne, Prosper (1798-1881), interview with, 22.
    ---- with Beaumont, &c., 379.
    ---- refuses to compromise on the banquet, 392.

  Duvivier, killed in Insurrection, 227.


  E

  England, Tocqueville's estimate of the policy of, 359.
    ---- on question of Hungarian refugees in Turkey, 366.


  F

  Falloux, Alfred Frederic Pierre, Comte de (1811-1886), proposes the
    dissolution of the National Workshops, 193.
    ---- Minister of Public Instruction, 273.
    ---- leader of majority in the Cabinet, 281.
    ---- his influence with Louis Napoleon, 303.
    ---- intercourse with Tocqueville, 305.
    ---- rupture with Dufaure, 307.
    ---- with the President, 322.
    ---- on the question of the Hungarian refugees, 369.

  Faucher, Leon (1803-1854), Minister of the Interior, 266.

  Feast of Concord, the, proposal to hold, and celebration of, 174.

  France, state of, when Tocqueville becomes Minister of Foreign
    Affairs, 339.

  Frederic William IV., King of Prussia (1795-1861), the Tsar's opinion
    of, 337.
    ---- his character and his aims for Germany, 346.
    ---- his coquetting with revolt, 351.
    ---- submits to the influence of Russia, 352 (_foot-note_).


  G

  General Election, the, antecedents of, 105.
    ---- new, 265.

  Germany, state of, 333.
    ---- Confederation of States in, 347.
    ---- views of Baron Pfordten in regard to, 348.
    ---- views of Tocqueville in regard to, 349.
    ---- views of Tsar in regard to, 350, 353.

  Goudchaux, Michel (1797-1862), appointed a Commissioner for Paris,
    206.
    ---- his conduct in that capacity, 213.

  Guizot, Francois Pierre Guillaume (1787-1874), opinion of, 9.
    ---- in Chamber of Deputies, 36.
    ---- resigns Government, 36.
    ---- opinion of, on the Revolution, 79.
    ---- flight of, 136.


  H

  Havin, Leonor Joseph (1799-1868), chairs meeting for Tocqueville, 122.
    ---- and Barrot, 389.

  Hebert, Minister of Justice, character of and speech by, 28.

  Houghton, Richard Monckton Milnes, Lord (1809-1885), Tocqueville
    breakfasts with, 184.

  Huber, in National Assembly, 167.

  Hungary, revolting against Austria, 335.
    ---- Tsar's views on, 337.
    ---- Tocqueville's instructions concerning, 360.


  I

  Insurrection of June, nature of narrative of, 187.

  Italy, the Tsar's views on, 338.


  K

  Kossuth, Louis (1802-1894), flees to the Turks, 361.


  L

  Lacordaire, Jean Baptiste Henri Dominique (1802-1861), in the National
    Assembly, 161.

  Lacrosse, character of, 280.

  La Fayette, Edmond de, and his life-preserver, 175.

  Lamartine, Alphonse Marie Louis Prat de (1790-1869), in the Chamber of
    Deputies, 62, 66.
    ---- reads out the list of the Provisional Government, 70.
    ---- gets embarrassed in the Chamber of Deputies, 71.
    ---- his conduct and character, 145.
    ---- Tocqueville's relations with, 147.
    ---- his connexion with Champeaux, 147.
    ---- his speech in the Assembly, 151.
    ---- his sudden departure from the Assembly, 159.
    ---- reappears in National Assembly, 171.
    ---- at the Feast of Concord, 180.
    ---- shot at in the Insurrection of June, 194.

  Lamartine, Madame de, notice of, 154.

  Lamennais, Hugues Felicite Robert de (1782-1855), appointed on
    Committee of the Constitution, 233.

  Lamoriciere, General Christophe Leon Louis Juchault de (1806-1865),
    character of, 91.
    ---- in Insurrection of June, 192, 220.
    ---- his interview with Tocqueville and his political friends, 267.
    ---- sent as Ambassador to Russia, 303.
    ---- letter about the Tsar of Russia, 336.
    ---- instructions of Tocqueville to, 360.
    ---- letter of, to Tocqueville, 364.
    ---- letter of Tocqueville to, on Hungarian refugees, 370.
    ---- conduct of, in regard to them, 372.

  Lanjuinais, Victor Ambroise de (1802-1869), Tocqueville in company of,
    42.
    ---- with Tocqueville and Corcelles on the boulevards, 46.
    ---- sits with Tocqueville in the National Assembly, 142.
    ---- his interview with Tocqueville and his political friends, 267.
    ---- joins the Council, 274.
    ---- on the question of the Hungarian refugees, 369.

  Ledru-Rollin, Alexandre Auguste (1807-1874), in the Chamber of
    Deputies, 65, 71.
    ---- character of, 150.
    ---- in the National Assembly, 163.
    ---- has to escape from the National Assembly, 173.
    ---- demands the indictment of Louis Napoleon, 292.
    ---- escapes after the Insurrection, 299.

  Legitimists, views and condition of, 302.

  Lepelletier d'Aunay, Tocqueville meets, 213.

  Louis Napoleon, Prince President of the French Republic (1808-1873),
    elected to the National Assembly, 183.
    ---- President of the Republic, 270.
    ---- character of, 283.
    ---- orders the attack on Rome, 289.
    ---- attacked in Assembly, 292.
    ---- puts down Insurrection, 298.
    ---- intrigues with Thiers and Mole, 315.
    ---- in connexion with Tocqueville, 317.
    ---- with Beaumont, Dufaure and Passy, 321-2.
    ---- his general ignorance, 331.
    ---- wishes to take Savoy, 332.
    ---- Tocqueville and Berryer's discussion about the powers of, 394.

  Louis-Philippe, King of the French (1773-1850), Tocqueville's
    interview with, 7.
    ---- his opinion of Lord Palmerston, _idem_.
    ---- of the Tsar Nicholas, _idem_.
    ---- refers to Queen Victoria, _idem_.
    ---- influence of, 10.
    ---- on the Banquets, 26.
    ---- Sallandrouze, conversation with, 35.
    ---- sends for Mole, 37.
    ---- sends for Beaumont, 45.
    ---- abdicates, 58.
    ---- character of, and of his Government, 81.
    ---- finally disappears from France, 105.
    ---- Beaumont's account of abdication of, 379.

  Lyons, insurrection in, 298.


  M

  Manche, la, department of, 114.
    ---- proceedings in election of, 117.
    ---- election of Tocqueville for, 263.

  Marrast, Armand (1780-1852), and the Provisional Government, 71.
    ---- suggests costume for National Representatives, 135.
    ---- as Mayor of Paris, 227.
    ---- appointed on the Committee of the Constitution, 233.
    ---- conduct of, in the Committee, 241, 247, 255.
    ---- appointed Secretary of the Committee, 256.

  Martin, on the Committee of the Constitution, 254.

  Middle Class, the, government of, 5.
    ---- despair of, 133.

  Mole, Matthieu Louis, Comte (1781-1855), sent for by Louis-Philippe,
    37.
    ---- declines office, 45.
    ---- opinion of, on the Revolution, 79.
    ---- on General Election, 107.
    ---- elected to the National Assembly, 182.
    ---- refuses to take office, 267.
    ---- intrigues with the President, 315.
    ---- on Foreign Affairs, 330.
    ---- and abdication of Louis-Philippe, 385.
    ---- with Rivet and Dufaure, 393.

  Montagnards, the description of, 137.
    ---- separation of, from the Socialists, 154.
    ---- crushed, 231.
    ---- strengthened at the new election, 263.
    ---- supporters of, 266.
    ---- feelings towards the President, 292.

  Montalembert, Charles Forbes Rene, Comte de (1810-1870), opposes the
    Government scheme on railways, 190.

  Montpensier, Antoine d'Orleans, Duc de (1824-1890), at the abdication
    of Louis-Philippe, 384.


  N

  National Assembly, the, meets on 4th of May, 133.
    ---- description of, 133.
    ---- Tocqueville's opinion of, 142.
    ---- speech of Lamartine in, 151.
    ---- invaded by the mob, 160.
    ---- breaks up, 168.
    ---- National Guards take possession of, 170.
    ---- addresses from provinces, in support of, 182.
    ---- agrees to pension families of men killed in putting down the
           Insurrection, 206.
    ---- threatened, 228.
    ---- state of the new Assembly, 265, 270, 291.

  National Guard, the, invited by Radical party to the banquet in Paris,
    30.
    ---- on the morning of the 24th February, 44.
    ---- shouting "Reform," 49.
    ---- Detachment of, in the Chamber of Deputies, 61, 72.
    ---- disappearance of, 94.
    ---- take possession of National Assembly, 170.
    ---- at Feast of Concord, 178.
    ---- in Insurrection of June, 200.
    ---- shout "Long live the National Assembly," 207.
    ---- eager to put down the Insurrection, 213.
    ---- wounded of, being carried away, 226.
    ---- surrounded, 294.
    ---- three regiments of, cashiered, 309.

  National Workshops, the, create anxiety in the Assembly, 181.
    ---- Falloux proposes dissolution of, 193.
    ---- supply weapons to insurgents in June, 198.

  Negrier, killed in the Insurrection, 227.

  Nemours, Louis Charles Philippe Raphael d'Orleans, Duc de (1814-1896),
    thought of as Regent, 383.
    ---- and Barrot, 388.

  Nesselrode, Charles Robert, Count (1780-1862), snubs Lord Palmerston,
  374.

  Nicholas I., Tsar of all the Russias (1796-1855), supports Austria
    against Hungary, 335.
    ---- his general policy, 336.
    ---- Lamoriciere's letter about, 336.
    ---- his family affection, 339.
    ---- the real support of his power, 339.
    ---- views of, on an United Germany, 350.
    ---- demands Hungarian refugees from Turkey, 364.
    ---- his irritation about Hungarian refugees, 373.

  Normanby, Constantine Henry Phipps, Marquess of (1797-1863),
    Ambassador in Paris, 368.

  Novara, Battle of, 323.


  O

  D'Orleans, Helene, Duchesse (1814-1858), in the Chamber of Deputies,
    60.
    ---- and the abdication of Louis-Philippe, 384.
    ---- and Barrot, 389.

  Oudinot, General Nicolas Charles Victor, Duc de Reggio (1791-1863), in
    the Chamber of Deputies, 72.


  P

  Palmerston, Henry John Temple, Viscount (1784-1865) on Piedmont and
    Austria, 359.
    ---- snubbed by Nesselrode, 374.

  Paris, Louis Philippe d'Orleans, Comte de (1838-1894), in the Chamber
    of Deputies, 60.

  Passy, character of, 272.
    ---- with the President, 322.

  Paulmier, Tocqueville dines with, on the 22nd February, 34.

  Persigny, Jean Gilbert Victor Fialin, Duc de (1808-1872), sent to
    Berlin and Vienna, 323.

  Piedmont and Austria, 353.

  Portalis, character of, 42.

  Presidency, condition of, discussed in the Committee of the
    Constitution, 246.

  Provisional Government, the, proclaimed, 59.
    ---- Lamartine reads list of, in the Chamber of Deputies, 70.
    ---- appoints a costume for National Representatives, 134.
    ---- reports its proceedings to the National Assembly, 135.


  R

  Radetzky, Field-Marshal Johann Joseph Wenzel Anton Franz Carl, Count
    (1766-1858), and Piedmont, 355.

  Radical Party, state of the, in January 1848, 25.

  Raspail, Francois Vincent (1794-1878), in the National Assembly, 162.

  Revolutionaries, description of the, 137.
    ---- in the National Assembly, 158.

  Rivet, his conversation with Tocqueville, 389.
    ---- consultation of, with Liberals, on the subject of the banquets,
           390.
    ---- another conversation with Tocqueville, 392.
    ---- with Mole and Dufaure, 393.

  Rome, the French Army at, 263.
    ---- difficulties about, 269.
    ---- secret order to the army to attack, 291.

  Rulhiere, character of, 279.


  S

  Saint-Lo, meeting of the Council General at, 125.

  Sallandrouze de Lamornaix meets Tocqueville at dinner at Paulmier's,
    35.
    ---- snubbed by Louis-Philippe, _idem_.

  Sand, George (1804-1876), Tocqueville's conversation with, 183.

  Sauzet, President of the Chamber of Deputies, 57.

  Savoy, Louis Napoleon wishes to seize, 332.

  Schwarzenberg, Felix Ludwig Johann Friedrich, Prince von (1808-1852),
    and Tocqueville, 358.

  Senard, President of the Assembly, 214.

  Sicily, state of, 333.

  Sobrier, in National Assembly, 167.

  Socialism, influence of theories of, 97.
    ---- Dufaure's conflict with, 312.

  Socialists, the, description of, 137.
    ---- separation of, from Montagnards, 154.

  Switzerland, Tocqueville's correspondence with, on the subject of the
    refugees, 343.


  T

  Talabot, and Thiers, 75.

  Thiers, Louis Adolphe (1797-1877), alliance of, with Barrot, 19.
    ---- sent for by Louis-Philippe, 45.
    ---- wandering round Paris, 74.
    ---- opinion of, on the Revolution, 79.
    ---- on the General Election, 106.
    ---- defeated at the General Election, 136.
    ---- elected to the National Assembly, 182.
    ---- addresses Barrot, Dufaure, Remusat, Lanjuinais and Tocqueville
           in private, 202.
    ---- with Lamoriciere, 225.
    ---- refuses to take office, 267.
    ---- with the President, 296.
    ---- intrigues with the President, 315.
    ---- on foreign affairs, 330.
    ---- with Beaumont, &c., 379.
    ---- advises Louis-Philippe to abdicate, 383.
    ---- his interview with Barrot, 385.
    ---- refuses to compromise on the banquets, 392.

  Tocqueville, Charles Alexis Henri Maurice Clerel de (1805-1859), his
    purpose in writing these memoirs, 3.
    ---- his intercourse with Louis-Philippe, 7.
    ---- his estimate of the state of France in January 1848, 9.
    ---- picture of the state of the Chamber of Deputies in 1847, 12.
    ---- his speech in the Chamber of Deputies, 29th January 1848, 14.
    ---- remarks on this speech by Dufaure and others, 17.
    ---- his position on the affair of the banquets, 19.
    ---- his estimate of Duchatel, Minister of the Interior, 23.
    ---- his thoughts on the policy of the Radical party, 25.
    ---- his knowledge of how the affair of the banquets passed into an
           insurrection, 30.
    ---- in the Chamber of Deputies on 22nd and 23rd February, when the
           gloom of the Revolution began to gather, 33.
    ---- his estimate of the selfishness of both sides, 39.
    ---- private conversation with Dufaure, 40.
    ---- private conversation with Beaumont, 41.
    ---- private conversation with Lanjuinais, 42.
    ---- hears of the firing in the streets on 24th February 1848, 44.
    ---- sees preparations for barricades, 46.
    ---- meets a defeated party of National Guards on the boulevards,
           and hears shouts of "Reform," 49.
    ---- reflections which this occasions, 50.
    ---- goes to Chamber of Deputies on 24th February, 51.
    ---- recognises Bedeau on his way, 52.
    ---- character of Bedeau and condition on that day, 53.
    ---- appearance presented by the Chamber of Deputies, 56.
    ---- sees the Duchesse d'Orleans and the Comte de Paris there, 60.
    ---- tries to get Lamartine to speak, 63.
    ---- his interest in the Duchess and her son, 69.
    ---- seeks to protect them, 69.
    ---- leaves the Chamber and meets Oudinot and Andryane, 72.
    ---- contradicts an assertion of Marshal Bugeaud, 72.
    ---- converses with Talabot about the movements of Thiers, 75.
    ---- his reflections on the fate of the Monarchy, 80.
    ---- spends the evening with Ampere, 87.
    ---- goes to inquire about his nephews on the 25th February, 90.
    ---- walks about Paris in the afternoon, 92.
    ---- reflections on what he sees, 93.
    ---- keeps in retirement for some days, 102.
    ---- further reflections on the Revolution, 103.
    ---- his own individual feelings and intentions, 107.
    ---- resolves to seek re-election, 113.
    ---- visits the Department of la Manche, 114.
    ---- makes Valognes his head-quarters, 117.
    ---- publishes his address to the electors, 118.
    ---- meets the electors at Valognes, 120.
    ---- addresses workmen at Cherbourg, 122.
    ---- goes to Saint-Lo to the General Council, 125.
    ---- his reflections on a visit to Tocqueville, 126.
    ---- returns to Paris and finds himself elected, 129.
    ---- his view of the state of politics and of Paris, 130.
    ---- National Assembly meets, 133.
    ---- his opinion of the Montagnards, 138.
    ---- his estimate of the Assembly, 141.
    ---- his character of Lamartine, 146.
    ---- his intercourse with Champeaux, 149.
    ---- his observation of the popular mind, 161.
    ---- his interview with Tretat, 168.
    ---- at the Feast of Concord, 175.
    ---- conversation with Carnot, 176.
    ---- anticipations of the Insurrection of June, 183.
    ---- conversation with Madame Sand, 183.
    ---- sees barricades of the Insurrection, 190.
    ---- interview with Lamoriciere, 192.
    ---- goes about Paris in time of insurrection, 197.
    ---- describes the Assembly, 198.
    ---- writes to his wife, 203.
    ---- protests against Paris being declared in a state of siege, 205.
    ---- elected a Commissioner for Paris, 206.
    ---- as such, walks through Paris, 208.
    ---- his scene with his porter, 215.
    ---- his scene with his man-servant, 217.
    ---- in the streets in the Insurrection, 219.
    ---- on his way to the Hotel de Ville, 225.
    ---- his account of the Montagnards, Socialists, &c., 231.
    ---- appointed on the Committee of the Constitution, 233.
    ---- his narrative of its proceedings, 234.
    ---- on the duality of the Chambers, 242.
    ---- on the conditions of the Presidency, 246.
    ---- re-elected for la Manche, 263.
    ---- leaves his wife ill at Bonn, 264.
    ---- his opinion of the new Assembly, 264.
    ---- his interview with Dufaure, &c., 267.
    ---- ought he to enter the Ministry?, 268.
    ---- accepts the Foreign Office, 273.
    ---- intimacy with Lanjuinais, 275.
    ---- his opinion of his colleagues, 278.
    ---- his opinion of France and the Republic, 281.
    ---- his opinion of Louis Napoleon, 284.
    ---- speech in Assembly on the Roman expedition, 293.
    ---- his letters to and from Considerant, 299.
    ---- his view of affairs after the Insurrection, 301.
    ---- sends Lamoriciere to Russia, 303.
    ---- his difficulties with Falloux and Dufaure, 306.
    ---- his advice to Louis Napoleon, 317.
    ---- sends Beaumont to Vienna, 321.
    ---- his view of Foreign and Domestic Affairs when he became Foreign
           Minister, 325.
    ---- his despatch to the French Minister in Bavaria (_foot-note_),
           342.
    ---- his dealings with Switzerland about the refugees, 344.
    ---- his observations on the Revolution in Germany, 345.
    ---- his intervention between Austria and Piedmont, 353.
    ---- his interposition in support of Turkey on the Hungarian
           refugees question, 361.
    ---- his instruction to Lamoriciere and Beaumont, 371.
    ---- narrative of Beaumont to, on the abdication, 379.
    ---- narrative of Barrot to, on the abdication, 385.
    ---- Rivet and De Tocqueville's efforts to prevent Revolution, 389.
    ---- discussion of, with Berryer on the Constitution, 394.

  Tocqueville, Madame de, _nee_ Mottley, her report of firing in Paris,
    196.
    ---- taken ill at Bonn, 264.

  Tocqueville, Manor of, Tocqueville visits, 126.

  Tracy, character of, 279.

  Tretat, and Tocqueville, 168.

  Turkey, refuses to surrender the Hungarian refugees, 362.


  V

  Valognes, town of, head-quarters in Tocqueville's election, 117.

  Valognes, Tocqueville at, 130.

  Vaulabelle, appointed on the Committee of the Constitution, 235.

  Victor Emmanuel II., King of Piedmont (1820-1878), ascends the throne
    on the abdication of Charles Albert, 333.

  Vieillard speaks at the meeting for the election of Tocqueville, 123.

  Vienna, Beaumont sent as Ambassador to, 321.
    ---- Persigny sent to, 323.

  Vivien appointed on the Committee of the Constitution, 233.
    ---- in the Committee of Constitution, 253.
    ---- his interview with Tocqueville and his political friends, 267.


  W

  Wolowski, Louis (1810-1876), in the National Assembly on 15th
    May, 158.




  PRINTED BY
  TURNBULL AND SPEARS
  EDINBURGH




ANNOUNCEMENTS




INDEX OF AUTHORS                          PAGE


  Abbott, Angus Evan,                        414

  Alison, William,                           413


  Basile, Giovanni Battista,                 415

  Bate, Francis,                             414

  Beerbohm, Max,                             414

  Burton, Sir Richard, K.C.M.G.,        414, 415


  Cobban, J. MacLaren,                       416

  Common, Thomas,                            415

  Connell, F. Norreys,                       414

  Creswick, Paul,                            414


  Dearmer, Mrs Percy,                        414

  Dobson, Austin,                            414

  Donovan, Major C.H.W.,                     416

  Dowson, Ernest,                            414


  Farrar, Evelyn L.,                         416

  Farrar, Very Rev. Dean F.W.,               416

  Field, Michael,                            414


  Garnett, Dr Richard,                       414

  Gosse, Edmund,                             414

  Gray, John,                           414, 415

  Guiffrey, Jules J.,                        413


  Haussmann, William A., Ph.D.,              415

  Herrick, Robert,                           414

  Hobbes, John Oliver,                       414

  Housman, Lawrence,                         414

  Hoytema, Th. van,                          416


  Image, Selwyn,                             414


  Jepson, Edgar,                             414

  Johnson, Lionel,                           414

  Jones, Alfred,                             414


  Langley, Hugh,                             416

  Le Gallienne, Richard,                     414


  MacColl, D.S.,                             414

  Maeterlinck, Maurice,                      414

  Mann, Mary E.,                        414, 416

  Marriott Watson, Rosamond,                 414

  Molesworth, Mrs.,                          414

  Moore, T. Sturge,                          414

  Muther, Richard,                           413


  Nietzsche, Friedrich,                      415


  Oudinot, Marechale, Duchesse de Reggio,    413


  Pain, Barry,                               414

  Plarr, Victor,                             414

  Powell, F. York,                           414

  Purcell, Edward,                           414


  Ricketts, Charles,                         414

  Rubens, Paul,                              414

  Ruvigny et Raineval, Marquis de,           416


  Scull, W. Delaplaine,                      414

  Shannon, Charles Hazelwood,                414

  Spalding, Thomas Alfred,                   416

  Stiegler, Gaston,                          413

  Strange, E.F.,                             414

  Strange, Captain H.B.,                     414


  Teixeira de Mattos, Alexander,             413

  Tille, Alexander, Ph.D.,                   415


  Villiers de l'Isle-Adam, Comte,            414

  Volz, Johanna,                             415


  White, Gleeson,                            414

  Widdrington, George,                       416

  Wood, Starr,                               414


  Zimmern, Helen,                            415




ANNOUNCEMENTS


  MEMOIRS OF MARSHAL OUDINOT, DUC DE REGGIO.
     Compiled from the hitherto unpublished Souvenirs of the DUCHESSE DE
     REGGIO by GASTON STIEGLER, and translated by ALEXANDER TEIXEIRA DE
     MATTOS. With Two Portraits in Heliogravure. _Demy 8vo, crimson
     cloth extra, in a cover adorned with the Marshal's arms, gilt top,
     17s. net; 10 copies on Japanese vellum, L3, 3s. net._


  THE LIFE AND WORK OF SIR ANTHONY VAN DYCK.
     By JULES J. GUIFFREY. Translated from the French by WILLIAM ALISON.
     One Vol. folio. With Nineteen Etchings of Paintings (now etched for
     the first time), Eight Heliogravures, and upwards of One Hundred
     Illustrations in the Text. _Folio, grey buckram extra, adorned with
     the painter's arms. Edition limited to 250 copies, numbered, L4,
     4s. net; 10 copies on Japanese vellum, L12, 12s. net._ (_Only two
     copies remain unsold._)

"A truly sumptuous and imposing volume."--_Globe._

"A great book on a great painter."--_St James's Gazette._


  THE HISTORY OF MODERN PAINTING.
     By RICHARD MUTHER, Professor of Art History at the University of
     Breslau, Late Keeper of the Royal Collection of Prints and
     Engravings at Munich. 2304 pages. Over 1300 Illustrations. _Three
     Volumes imperial 8vo, dark blue cloth extra, with a cover design
     by_ HOWARD STRINGER, _gilt top and lettering, other edges uncut,
     L2, 15s. net; Library Edition, green half morocco, gilt top, L3,
     15s. net. This work is also published in 36 Parts at 1s. net, or in
     16 Parts at 2s. 6d. net._

"There need be no hesitation in pronouncing this work of Muther the most
authoritative that exists on the subject, the most complete, the best
informed of all the general histories of Modern Art."--_Times_.

"Not only the best, but the only history of Modern Painting which has
any pretension to cover the whole ground."--_Times_ (_second notice_).

"A monumental work ... of cyclopaedic value.... This author is distinctly
cheering. He has no slavish and indiscriminate admiration for the old
masters, and his enthusiasm and his hopes are with the art of his
time.... There are many illustrations, a copious bibliography, and a
good index.... It is incomparably the best work of its kind; in some
respects, the only one of its kind."--_Daily News_.

"A history as crowded and as stirring as a novel."--_Saturday Review_.

"A great book on a great subject."--_Graphic_.

"Not merely readable, but at times fascinating.... The book, although
not an exhaustive record, is indispensable for one's shelves of
reference, and worth careful reading."--_Studio_.


  THE PAGEANT, 1897.
     Edited by CHARLES HAZELWOOD SHANNON and GLEESON WHITE. With
     Twenty-six Full-Page Illustrations (including a Woodcut in Four
     Colours and Gold) and Ten Illustrations in the Text. _Crown 4to,
     chocolate cloth extra, with a cover design by_ CHARLES RICKETTS,
     _and a coloured wrapper by_ GLEESON WHITE, _6s. net_; _Large Paper
     Edition (limited to 150 copies), L1, 5s. net. These copies contain
     a special reproduction in photogravure of Rossetti's_ "Hamlet and
     Ophelia."

  _Contributions in Art by_--

     SIR EDWARD BURNE-JONES, GEORGE FREDERICK WATTS, R.A., PUVIS DE
     CHAVANNES, GUSTAVE MOREAU, DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI, REGINALD SAVAGE,
     CHARLES HAZELWOOD SHANNON, CHARLES RICKETTS, LAURENCE HOUSMAN,
     CHARLES CONDER, WALTER CRANE, WILL ROTHENSTEIN, WILLIAM STRANG,
     LUCIEN PISSARRO.

  _Contributions in Literature by_--

     AUSTIN DOBSON, VILLIERS DE L'ISLE-ADAM, EDMUND GOSSE, Mrs MARRIOTT
     WATSON, LIONEL JOHNSON, D.S. MACCOLL, F. YORK POWELL, VICTOR PLARR,
     GLEESON WHITE, MICHAEL FIELD, ANGUS EVAN ABBOTT, CHARLES RICKETTS,
     JOHN GRAY, W. DELAPLAINE SCULL, MAURICE MAETERLINCK, Dr RICHARD
     GARNETT, T. STURGE MOORE, EDWARD PURCELL, SELWYN IMAGE, MAX
     BEERBOHM, ERNEST DOWSON.


  THE PAGEANT, 1896.
     Edited by C.H. SHANNON and GLEESON WHITE. _Ordinary Edition, 6s.
     net. Large Paper Edition, 150 Copies only. The price of the few
     that remain for sale has been raised to L1, 5s. net._


  THE PARADE, 1897.
     A Gift-Book for Boys and Girls. Edited by GLEESON WHITE. With 35
     Full-Page Illustrations; 3 Coloured Plates; 10 Head-and
     Tail-Pieces; Illustrated Initials, Devices, &c. _Crown 4to, scarlet
     cloth extra, with a Cover designed by_ PAUL WOODROFFE, _coloured
     edges, 6s. net_.

  _Contributions in Literature by_--

     JOHN OLIVER HOBBES, Mrs MOLESWORTH, LAURENCE HOUSMAN, Sir RICHARD
     BURTON, ALFRED JONES, E.F. STRANGE, EDGAR JEPSON, BARRY PAIN, Mrs
     MARY E. MANN, F. NORREYS CONNELL, PAUL CRESWICK, Captain H.B.
     STRANGE, ROBERT HERRICK, Mrs PERCY DEARMER, MAX BEERBOHM, RICHARD
     LE GALLIENNE, PAUL RUBENS, VICTOR PLARR, STARR WOOD, FRANCIS BATE.

  _Contributions in Art by_--

     PAUL WOODROFFE, AUBREY BEARDSLEY, ALAN WRIGHT, Miss DE MONTMORENCY,
     W.J. OVERNELL, HAROLD NELSON, LESLIE BROOKE, LAURENCE HOUSMAN,
     ALFRED JONES, LEON SOLON, A.A. VAN ANROOY, G.A. GORDON, STARR WOOD,
     Mrs PERCY DEARMER, MAX BEERBOHM, CHARLES ROBINSON, NICO JUNGMAN,
     Miss MILNE, WILLIAM SHACKLETON, HENRY TEIXEIRA DE MATTOS.


  IL PENTAMERONE; OR, THE TALE OF TALES.
     Being a Translation by the Late Sir RICHARD BURTON, K.C.M.G., of
     "Il Pentamerone; overo lo Cunto de li Cunte, trattenemiento de li
     peccerille," of GIOVANNI BATTISTA BASILE, Count of Torone (Gian
     Alessio Abbattutis). _Two volumes, demy 8vo, black cloth gilt, L3,
     3s. net. Large Paper Edition, on hand-made paper (limited to 150
     copies), royal 8vo, black cloth gilt_, L5, 5_s._ _net_.

This is the only unabridged and unexpurgated edition of "Il Pentamerone"
in the English language.


  THE WORKS OF FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.
     Edited by ALEXANDER TILLE, PH.D., Lecturer at the University of
     Glasgow. Sole Authorized English and American Edition; issued under
     the supervision of the "Nietzsche Archiv" at Naumburg. _Eleven
     Volumes, medium 8vo, dark blue buckram extra, with a cover design
     by_ GLEESON WHITE, L5, 19_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

  _The following Volumes are ready_:

     Vol.   XI.  The Case of WAGNER; NIETZSCHE CONTRA WAGNER; THE
                   TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS; THE ANTICHRIST. Translated
                   by THOMAS COMMON. 10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

     Vol. VIII.  THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA. Translated by ALEXANDER
                   TILLE, Ph.D. 17_s._ _net_.

     Vol.    X.  A GENEALOGY OF MORALS. Translated by WILLIAM A.
                   HAUSSMANN, Ph.D. POEMS. Translated by JOHN GRAY.
                   8_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

  _The following will appear successively within two or three years_:

     Vol.  IX.  BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL. Translated by HELEN ZIMMERN.
                  10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

     Vol.  VI.  DAWN OF THE DAY. Translated by JOHANNA VOLZ.
                  13_s._ _net_.

     Vol.  IV.  HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN, I. Translated by HELEN ZIMMERN.
                  13_s._ _NET_.

     Vol.   V.  HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN, II. Translated by HELEN ZIMMERN.
                  13_s._ _net_.

     Vol. VII.  JOYFUL SCIENCE. Translated by THOMAS COMMON. Poems
                  Translated by JOHN GRAY. 13_s._ _net_.

     Vol.  II.  INOPPORTUNE CONTEMPLATIONS, I. and II. Translated by
                  JOHANNA VOLZ. 7_s._ _net_.

     Vol. III.  INOPPORTUNE CONTEMPLATIONS, III. and IV. Translated by
                  JOHANNA VOLZ. 7_s._ _net_.

     Vol.   I.  THE BIRTH OF TRAGEDY. Translated by WILLIAM A.
                  HAUSSMANN, Ph.D. 7_s._ _net_.

"Nietzsche is worse than shocking; he is simply awful: his epigrams are
written with phosphorus or brimstone. The only excuse for reading him is
that before long you must be prepared either to talk about Nietzsche, or
else retire from society, especially from aristocratically minded
society.... His sallies, petulant and impossible as some of them are,
are the work of a rare spirit, and pregnant with its vitality."--MR
GEORGE BERNARD SHAW in the _Saturday Review_.

"Lurking behind the intellectual movements of Europe in philosophy as in
everything else, England is just now beginning to hear of the existence
of Friedrich Nietzsche."--MR ERNEST NEWMAN in the _Free Review_.

"Nietzsche is, without doubt, an extraordinarily interesting figure ...
the greatest spiritual force which has appeared since Goethe."--MR
HAVELOCK ELLIS in the _Savoy_.


  FEDERATION AND EMPIRE: A Study in Politics.
     By THOMAS ALFRED SPALDING, LL.B., Author of "The House of Lords: a
     Retrospect and a Forecast," "Elizabethan Demonology," &c. _Demy
     8vo, dark blue buckram extra_, 10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.


  WITH WILSON IN MATABELELAND; OR, SPORT AND WAR IN ZAMBESIA.
     By MAJOR G.H.W. DONOVAN (of the Army Service Corps). With a Map and
     Numerous Illustrations from Photographs. _Demy 8vo, dark blue cloth
     extra_, 18_s._


  THE LEGITIMIST KALENDAR FOR 1895.
     Edited by the MARQUIS DE RUVIGNY and RAINEVAL. With 8 Genealogical
     Tables and a Portrait of the King and Queen of Spain, France, and
     Navarre. _Crown 8vo, white art linen, limited to 500 copies_, 5_s._
     _net_.

"A real curiosity."--_Review of Reviews_.

"It is just possible that the volume may one day obtain a success of
curiosity, and be eagerly sought after by collectors of odd
books."--_Athenaeum_.


  STORIES FROM THE BIBLE.
     By EVELYN L. FARRAR. With an Introductory Chapter on the
     Unspeakable Value of Early Lessons in Scripture, by her Father, the
     Very Rev. F.W. FARRAR, D.D., Dean of Canterbury; and Twelve
     Illustrations, printed in colour, and a Cover Design, by REGINALD
     HALLWARD. _Crown 4to, dark green cloth extra_, 3_s._ 6_d._


  THE HAPPY OWLS.
     Told, Drawn, and Lithographed by T. VAN HOYTEMA. Containing Twenty
     Pictures in four colours, drawn on the stone by the Artist. _Crown
     4to, picture boards_, 2_s._ 6_d._


  THE PASSION FOR ROMANCE.
     By EDGAR JEPSON, Author of "Sybil Falcon." _Large crown 8vo, gold
     art canvas_, 6_s._


  THE TIDES EBB OUT TO THE NIGHT.
     Being the Journal of a Young Man, Basil Brooke. Edited by his
     Friend, HUGH LANGLEY. _Large crown 8vo, crimson art canvas_, 6_s._


  LADY LEVALLION.
     By GEORGE WIDDRINGTON. _Crown 8vo, heliotrope cloth elegant_, 5_s._


  WHEN ARNOLD COMES HOME.
     By MARY E. MANN, Author of "Susannah." With a Frontispiece by ALAN
     WRIGHT. _Crown 8vo, blue cloth elegant_, 3_s._ 6_d._


  THE TYRANTS OF KOOL-SIM.
     By J. MACLAREN COBBAN, Author of "The Red Sultan." New and Cheaper
     Edition. With a Frontispiece by ALAN WRIGHT. _Crown 8vo, brown and
     scarlet cloth extra_, 3_s._ 6_d._


  THERE WAS ONCE A PRINCE.
     By MARY E. MANN, Author of "When Arnold Comes Home." New and
     Cheaper Edition. With a Frontispiece by ALAN WRIGHT. _Crown 8vo,
     blue cloth_, 3_s._ 6_d._




LONDON: H. HENRY & CO., LTD., 93 St Martin's Lane, W.C.




[Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious typesetting errors have been corrected. Questionable, vintage
and British spellings have been left as printed in the original
publication. Variations in spelling have been left as printed, unless
otherwise noted in the following.

Footnotes in the original text were marked at the page level, beginning
at footnote 1 each time footnotes appeared on a page. Footnote numbers
for the whole text have been replaced with sequential footnote numbers,
from 1 to 36.

Inconsistencies in the use of "St" and "St." as an abbreviation for
"Saint" have been normalized in this transcription to "St".

Page 238: Transcribed "likes" as "like". As originally printed: "likes
the _roues_ of the Regency".

Page 343 (footnote 19): The concluding sentence in a quoted letter by
the author ends with a question mark in the original publication, a
likely typesetting error for a period at the end of the sentence which
would agree with the context. The punctuation has been left as printed
in the original publication.]











*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RECOLLECTIONS OF ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
