motion embracing the whole world, as Schiller also describes it in his “Ode

to Joy”:

Approach, ye millions, and embrace!

To the whole world my kiss shall swell!

…

All the world may draughts of joy From the breasts of Nature take; Good and

ill alike employ

Pains to trace joy’s rosy wake. Kisses gave she and the grape, And the

faithful, lifelong friend; Even the worm its joy can shape,

Heavenwards the cherubs wend.

18

This is Dionysian expansion. It is a flood of overpowering universal

feeling which bursts forth irresistibly, intoxicating the senses like the

strongest wine. It is intoxication in the highest sense of the word.

[235] In this state the psychological function of sensation, whether it be

sensory or affective, participates to the highest degree. It is an extraversion

of all those feelings which are inextricably bound up with sensation, for

which reason we call it feeling-sensation. What breaks out in this state

has more the character of pure affect, something instinctive and blindly

compelling, that finds specific expression in an  affection of the bodily

sphere.

[236] In contrast to this, the Apollinian is a perception of inner images of

beauty, of measure, of controlled and  proportioned feelings. The

comparison with dreaming clearly indicates the character of the Apollinian

state: it is a state of introspection, of contemplation turned inwards to the

dream world of eternal ideas, and hence a state of introversion.

[237] So far the analogy with our mechanisms is unarguable. But if we

were to be content with the analogy, it would be a limitation of outlook that

does violence to Nietzsche’s concepts by putting them on a Procrustean bed.

[238] We shall see in the course of our investigation that the state of

introversion, if habitual, always entails a differentiation of the relation to

the world of ideas, while  habitual extraversion involves a similar

differentiation of the  relation to  the  object. We see  nothing  of  this

differentiation in  Nietzsche’s two concepts. Dionysian feeling has the

thoroughly archaic character of affective sensation. It is therefore not pure

feeling, abstracted and differentiated from instinct and becoming a mobile

element, which, in the  extraverted type, is obedient to the dictates ofreason and lends itself to them as their willing instrument. Similarly,

Nietzsche’s conception of introversion is not that pure,  differentiated

relation to ideas which has freed itself from the perception of inner images

whether sensuously determined or creatively produced, and has become a

contemplation of pure and abstract forms. The Apollinian mode is an

inner perception, and intuition of the world of ideas. The parallel  with

dreaming clearly shows that Nietzsche thinks of this state as on the one

hand merely perceptive and on the other merely eidetic.

[239] These characteristics are individual peculiarities which we must not

import into our conception of the introverted or extraverted attitude. In a

man whose attitude is predominantly reflective, the Apollinian perception

of inner  images produces an elaboration of the perceived material in

accordance with the nature of intellectual thinking. In other  words, it

produces ideas. In a man whose attitude is predominated by feeling a

similar process results: a “feeling through” of the images and the production

of a feeling-toned  idea, which may coincide in essentials with an idea

produced  by thinking. Ideas, therefore, are just as much feelings as

thoughts, examples being the idea of the fatherland, freedom,  God,

immortality, etc. In both elaborations the principle is a rational and logical

one. But there is also a quite different standpoint, from which the rational

and logical elaboration is not valid. This is the aesthetic standpoint. In

introversion it dwells on the perception of ideas, it develops intuition, the

inner vision; in extraversion it dwells on sensation and develops the senses,

instinct, affectivity. From this standpoint, thinking is not the principle of an

inner perception of ideas, and feeling just as little; instead, thinking and

feeling are mere derivatives of inner perception and outer sensation.

[240] Nietzsche’s concepts thus lead us to the principles of a third and a

fourth psychological type, which one might call  “aesthetic” types as

opposed to the rational types (thinking and feeling). These are the intuitive

and sensation types. Both of them have the mechanisms of introversion and

extraversion in common with the rational types, but they do not—like the

thinking type—differentiate the perception and contemplation  of inner

images into thought, nor—like the feeling type—differentiate the affective

experience of instinct and sensation into feeling. On the contrary, the

intuitive raises  unconscious perception to the level of a differentiated

function, by which he also achieves his adaptation to the  world. He

adapts by means of unconscious directives, which he receives through anespecially sensitive and sharpened perception and interpretation of dimly

conscious stimuli. To describe such a function is naturally very difficult on

account of its irrational and quasi-unconscious character. In a sense one

might compare it to the daemon of Socrates—with the  qualification,

however, that the strongly rationalistic attitude of Socrates repressed the

intuitive function as far as possible, so that it had to make itself felt

in the form of concrete hallucinations since it had no direct  access to

consciousness. But this is not the case with the intuitive type.

[241] The sensation type is in every respect the converse of the intuitive. He

relies almost exclusively on his sense  impressions, and his whole

psychology is oriented by instinct and sensation. He is therefore entirely

dependent on external stimuli.

[242] The fact that it is just the psychological functions of intuition on the

one hand and sensation and instinct on the other that Nietzsche emphasizes

must be characteristic of his own personal psychology. He must surely be

reckoned an intuitive with leanings towards introversion. As evidence of

the former we have his pre-eminently intuitive-artistic manner of production,

of which The Birth of Tragedy is very characteristic, while his masterpiece

Thus Spake Zarathustra is even more so. His aphoristic writings express his

introverted intellectual side. These, in spite of a strong  admixture of

feeling, display a pronounced critical intellectualism in the manner of the

intellectuals of the eighteenth century. His lack of rational moderation and

conciseness argues for the intuitive type in general. Under  these

circumstances it is not surprising that in his early work he unwittingly sets

the facts of his personal psychology in the foreground. This is quite in accord

with the intuitive attitude, which perceives the outer primarily through the

medium of the inner, sometimes even at the expense of reality. By means of

this attitude he also gained deep insight into the Dionysian qualities of his

unconscious, the crude forms of which, so far as we know, reached the

surface of his consciousness only after the outbreak of his illness, although

they had previously revealed their presence in various erotic allusions. It is

extremely regrettable, therefore, from the standpoint of psychology, that

the fragmentary writings—so significant in this respect—which were found

in Turin after the onset of his malady should have met with destruction in

deference to moral and aesthetic scruples.                                          IV

          THE TYPE PROBLEM IN HUMAN

                                CHARACTER  GENERAL REMARKS ON JORDAN’S TYPES

[243] Continuing my chronological survey of previous contributions to this

interesting problem of psychological types, I now come to a small and rather

odd work, my acquaintance with which I owe to my esteemed colleague Dr.

Constance Long, of London: Character as Seen in Body and Parentage, by

Furneaux Jordan, F.R.C.S.

[244] In this little book of one hundred and twenty-six  pages, Jordan

describes in the main two characterological types, the definition of which

is of interest to us in more than  one respect. Although—to anticipate

slightly—the author is really concerned with only one half of our types,

thinking and feeling, he nevertheless introduces the standpoint of the other

half, the intuitive and sensation types, and blends the two together. I will

first let the author speak for himself in his introductory definition:

There are two generic fundamental biases in character … two conspicuous

types of character (with a third, an intermediate one) … one in which the

tendency to action is extreme and the tendency to reflection slight, and

another in which the proneness to reflection greatly predominates and the

impulse for action is feebler. Between the two extremes are innumerable

gradations; it is sufficient to point only to a third type … in which the

powers of reflection and action tend to meet in more or less equal degree. …

In an intermediate class may also be placed the characters which tend to

eccentricity, or in which other possibly abnormal tendencies predominate

over the emotional and non-emotional.

1

[245] It is clear from this definition that Jordan contrasts  reflection, or

thinking, with action. It is readily understandable that an observer of men,

not probing too deeply, would first be  struck by the contrast between

reflective and active natures,  and would therefore tend to define the

observed antithesis in those terms. The simple reflection, however, that

activity is not necessarily the product of mere impulse, but can also

proceed from thinking, would make it seem necessary to carry the definition a

stage further. Jordan himself reaches this conclusion, for on page 6 he

introduces a further element which for us has a particular value, the element

of feeling. He states here that the active type is less passionate, while the

reflective temperament is distinguished by its passionate feelings. Hence he

calls his types the “less impassioned” and the “more impassioned.” Thus the

element he overlooked in his introductory definition subsequently acquiresthe status of a fixed term. But what mainly distinguishes his conception

from ours is that he makes the “less impassioned” type active and the “more

impassioned” inactive.

[247] This combination seems to me unfortunate, since highly passionate

and profound natures exist which at the same time are very energetic and

active, and conversely, there  are less passionate and superficial natures

which are in no way distinguished by activity, not even by the low form

of activity that consists in being busy. In my view, his otherwise valuable

conception would have gained much in clarity if he had left the factors of

activity and inactivity altogether out of account, as belonging to a quite

different point of view,  although in themselves they are important

characterological determinants.

[246] It will be seen from the arguments which follow that  the “less

impassioned and more active” type describes the extravert, and the “more

impassioned and less active” type the  introvert. Either can be active or

inactive without changing his type, and for this reason the factor of activity

should, in  my opinion, be ruled out as a main characteristic. As a

determinant of secondary importance, however, it still plays a role, since the

whole nature of the extravert appears more mobile, more full of life and

activity than that of the introvert. But this quality entirely depends on the

phase in which the  individual momentarily finds himself vis-à-vis the

external world. An introvert in an extraverted phase appears active, while

an extravert in an introverted phase appears passive.

Activity itself, as  a fundamental trait of character, can sometimes be

introverted; it is then all directed inwards, developing a lively activity of

thought or feeling behind an outward mask of profound repose. Or else it

can be extraverted, showing itself a vigorous action while behind the scenes

there stands a firm unmoved thought or untroubled feeling.

[248] Before we examine  Jordan’s arguments  more closely,  I must, for

greater clarity, stress yet another point which, if not borne in mind, may

give rise to confusion. I remarked at the beginning of this book that in my

earlier publications I identified the introvert with the thinking and the

extravert with the feeling type. As I have said before, it became clear to me

only later that introversion and extraversion are to be distinguished as

general basic attitudes from the function-types. These two attitudes may be

recognized with the greatest ease, while it requires considerable experience

to distinguish the function-type. At times it is uncommonly difficult to findout which function holds prior place. The fact that the introvert, because of

his abstracting attitude, naturally has a reflective and contemplative air is

misleading. One is inclined to assume that in him the primacy falls to

thinking. The extravert, on the contrary, naturally displays many immediate

reactions, which easily lead one to conjecture a predominance of feeling.

These suppositions are deceptive,  since the extravert may well be a

thinking, and the introvert a feeling type. Jordan describes in general merely

the introvert  and the extravert. But, when he goes into details, his

description becomes misleading, because traits of different function-types

are blended together which a more thorough examination of the material

would have kept apart. In its general outline, however, the picture of the

introverted and extraverted attitudes is unmistakable, so that the nature of the

two basic attitudes can plainly be discerned.

[249] The characterization of types in terms of affectivity seems to me the

really important aspect of Jordan’s work. We have already seen that the

reflective, contemplative nature of  the introvert is compensated by a

condition in which instinct and sensation are unconscious and archaic. We

might even say this is just why he is introverted: he has to rise above his

archaic, impulsive nature to the safe heights of abstraction in  order to

dominate from there his unruly and turbulent affects.

This point of view is not at all wide of the mark in many cases. We might

also say, conversely, that the affective life of the  extravert, being less

deeply rooted, lends itself more readily to differentiation and domestication

than his unconscious, archaic thinking and feeling, and that this fantasy life

of his can have a dangerous influence on his personality. Hence he is always

the one who seeks life and experience as busily and abundantly as possible in

order not to have to come to himself and face his evil thoughts and feelings.

These observations,  which can easily be verified, help to explain an

otherwise paradoxical passage in Jordan, where he says (p. 6) that in the “less

impassioned” (= extraverted) temperament the intellect predominates and

has an unusually large share in the  regulation of life, whereas in the

“reflective” (= introverted) temperament it is affects that claim the greater

importance.

[250] At first glance, this view would seem to fly in the face of my

assertion that the “less impassioned” type corresponds to the extravert. But

closer scrutiny proves that this is not so, since the reflective character,

the introvert, though certainly trying to deal with his unruly affects, is inreality more influenced by his passions than the man whose  life is

consciously guided by desires oriented to objects. The latter, the extravert,

tries to get away with this all the time, but is forced to experience how his

subjective thoughts and feelings constantly stand in his way. He is far

more influenced by his psychic inner world than he suspects. He cannot

see it himself, but the people around him, if observant, will always detect the

personal purpose in his striving. Hence his golden rule should always be to

ask himself: “What am I really after? What is my secret intention?” The

other, the

introvert, with his conscious thought-out intentions, always overlooks what

the people around him see only too clearly, that his intentions are really

subservient to powerful impulses, lacking both aim and object, and are in a

high degree influenced by them. The observer and critic of the extravert is

liable to take the parade of thinking and feeling as a thin covering that

only imperfectly conceals a cold and calculated personal aim. Whereas the

man who tries to understand the  introvert will readily conclude that

vehement passions are  only with difficulty held in check by apparent

sophistries.

[251] Either judgment is both true and false. It is false when the

conscious standpoint, or consciousness itself, is  strong enough to offer

resistance to the unconscious; but it is true when a weaker conscious

standpoint encounters a strong unconscious and eventually has to give way

to it. Then the motive that was kept in the background breaks through: in

one case the egoistic aim, in the other the unsubdued passion, the elemental

affect, that throws every consideration to the winds.

[252] These reflections enable us to discern Jordan’s mode of observation:

he is evidently preoccupied with the affectivity of the observed type, hence

his nomenclature: “less  impassioned,” “more impassioned.” When,

therefore, from the standpoint of affect, he conceives the introvert as the

more impassioned, and the extravert as the less impassioned and even as

the intellectual type, he displays a peculiar kind of discernment which one

must describe as intuitive. I have already pointed out that Jordan blends the

standpoint of the rational types with that of the “aesthetic” types.

2 So when he characterizes the introvert as passionate and the extravert as

intellectual he is obviously seeing the two types from the unconscious side,

that is, he perceives them through the medium of his own unconscious. He

observes and cognizes intuitively, and this must always be the case, moreor less, with a practical observer of men.

[253] But however true and profound such an apprehension may sometimes

be, it suffers from one very important limitation: it overlooks the living

reality of the person  observed, since it always judges him by his

unconscious mirror-image instead of by his actual appearance. This error is

inseparable from all intuition, and reason has always been at loggerheads

with it on that account, only grudgingly admitting its right to exist despite

the fact that in many cases the objective rightness of the intuition cannot be

denied. Thus  Jordan’s formulations accord on the whole with reality,

though not with reality as it is understood by the rational types, but with

the reality which for them is unconscious. Naturally these conditions are

calculated to confuse all judgment of the observed and to make agreement

about it all the more difficult. One should therefore  not quarrel over the

nomenclature but should stick exclusively  to the observable differences.

Although I, in accordance with my nature, express myself quite differently

from Jordan, we are—allowing for certain divergences—nevertheless at one

in our classification of the observed material.

[254] Before going on to discuss Jordan’s typology, I should like to return

for a moment to the third or “intermediate” type which he postulates. Under

this heading  he includes on the one hand characters that are entirely

balanced, and on the other those that are unbalanced or “eccentric.” It will

not be superfluous to recall at this point the classification of the Valentinian

school, according to which the hylic man is inferior to the psychic and the

pneumatic man. The hylic man corresponds by definition to the sensation

type, whose ruling determinants are supplied by the senses. The sensation

type possesses neither differentiated thinking nor differentiated feeling, but

his sensuousness is well developed. This, as we know, is also the case

with the primitive. The instinctive sensuousness of the primitive has its

counterpart in the spontaneity of his psychic processes: his mental products,

his thoughts, just appear to him, as it were. It is not he who makes them or

thinks them—he is not capable  of that—they make themselves,  they

happen to him, they even confront him as hallucinations. Such a mentality

must be termed intuitive, for intuition is the instinctive perception of an

emergent psychic content. Although the principal psychological function of

the primitive is as a rule sensation,  the less conspicuous compensatory

function is intuition. On the higher levels of civilization, where one man has

thinking more more or less differentiated and another feeling, there are alsoquite a number who have developed intuition to a high degree and can

employ it as the essentially determining function. From these we get the

intuitive type. It is my belief, therefore, that Jordan’s intermediate group

can be resolved into the sensation and intuitive types.SPECIAL DESCRIPTION AND CRITICISM OF

                            JORDAN’S TYPES

[255] As regards the general characterization of the two  types, Jordan

emphasizes (p. 17) that the more impassioned  type includes far fewer

prominent and striking personalities  than the  less impassioned. This

assertion derives from the fact that Jordan identifies the active type with

the less impassioned,  which in my opinion is inadmissible. But if we

discount this  error, it is certainly true that the behaviour of the less

impassioned or extraverted type makes him more conspicuous than the more

impassioned or introverted type.  THE INTROVERTED WOMAN (“THE MORE

                      IMPASSIONED WOMAN”)

[256] We will first summarize the chief points in Jordan’s discussion of the

introverted woman:

She has quiet manners, and a character not easy to read: she is occasionally

critical, even sarcastic, but though bad temper is sometimes noticeable, she

is not habitually fitful, or restless, or captious, or censorious, nor is she a

“nagging” woman. She diffuses an atmosphere of repose, and unconsciously

she consoles and heals, but under the surface emotions and passions lie

dormant. Her emotional nature matures slowly. As she grows older the

charm of her character increases. She  is “sympathetic,” i.e., she brings

insight and experience to bear on the problems of others. Yet the very worst

characters are found among the more impassioned women. They are the

cruellest stepmothers. They make most affectionate wives and mothers, but

their passions and emotions are so strong that these frequently hold reason

in subjection or carry it away with them. They love too much, but they also

hate too much. Jealousy can make wild beasts of them. Stepchildren, if hated

by them, may even be done to death. If evil is not in the ascendant,

morality itself is associated with deep feeling, and may take a profoundly

reasoned and independent course  which will not always fit itself to

conventional standards. It will not be an imitation or a submission; not a

bid for a reward here or hereafter. It is only in intimate relations that the

excellences and drawbacks of the impassioned woman are seen. Here she

unfolds herself; here are her joys and sorrows,  here her faults and

weaknesses are seen, perhaps slowness to forgive, implacability, sullenness,

anger, jealousy, or degraded uncontrolled passions. She is charmed with the

moment, and less apt to think of the comfort and welfare of the absent. She

is disposed to forget others and forget time. If  she is affected, her

affectation is less an imitation than a pronounced change of manners and

speech with changing shades of thought and especially of feeling. In social

life she tends to be the same in all circles. In both domestic and social life she

is as a rule not difficult to please, she spontaneously  appreciates,

congratulates, and praises. She can soothe the  mentally bruised and

encourage the unsuccessful. She rises to the high and stoops to the low, she

is the sister and playmate of all nature. Her judgment is mild and lenient.

When she reads she tries to grasp the inmost thought and deepest feeling ofthe book; she reads and rereads the book, marks it freely, and turns down its

corners.

3

[257] From this description it is not difficult to recognize the introverted

character. But it is, in a certain sense, one-sided, because the chief stress is

laid on feeling, without considering the one characteristic to which I attach

special value—the conscious inner life. Jordan mentions in passing that the

introverted woman is “contemplative” (p. 18), but he does not pursue the

matter further. His description, however, seems to me a confirmation of my

comments on his mode of observation. It is chiefly the outward behaviour

constellated by feeling, and the expressions of passion that strike him; he

does not probe into the conscious life of this type. He never mentions that

the inner life plays an altogether decisive role in the introvert’s conscious

psychology.  Why, for example,  does  the introverted woman read so

attentively? Because above  everything else she loves to understand and

grasp ideas. Why is she restful and soothing? Because she usually keeps

her feelings to herself, expressing them in her thoughts instead of unloading

them on others. Her unconventional morality is backed by deep reflection

and convincing inner feelings. The  charm of her quiet and intelligent

character depends not merely on a peaceful attitude, but on the fact that one

can talk  with her reasonably and coherently, and that she is able to

appreciate the value of her partner’s argument. She does not interrupt him

with impulsive exclamations, but accompanies  his meaning with her

thoughts and feelings, which none the less remain steadfast, never yielding

to the opposing argument.

[258] This compact and well-developed ordering of the conscious psychic

contents is a stout defence against a chaotic and passionate emotional life of

which the introvert is very often aware, at least in its personal aspect: she

fears it because she knows it too well. She meditates about herself, and is

therefore outwardly calm and can acknowledge and accept others without

overwhelming them with praise or blame. But because her emotional life

would devastate these good qualities, she rejects as far as possible her

instincts and affects, though without mastering them. In contrast, therefore, to

her  logical  and well-knit consciousness,  her  affective  life  is  elemental,

confused, and ungovernable. It lacks the true  human note, it is out of

proportion, irrational, a phenomenon of nature that breaks through the

human order. It lacks any kind of palpable afterthought or purpose, so attimes it is  purely destructive, a raging torrent that neither intends

destruction nor avoids it, ruthless and necessary, obedient only to its own

laws, a process that is its own fulfillment. Her good qualities depend on her

thinking, which by its tolerant or  benevolent outlook has succeeded in

influencing or restraining one part of her instinctive life, though without

being able to embrace and transform the whole. The introverted woman

is far less conscious of the full range of her affectivity than she is of her

rational thoughts and feelings. Her affectivity is much less mobile than

her  intellectual content; it is, as it were, viscous and curiously  inert,

therefore hard to change; it is persevering, hence her  unconscious

steadiness and equability, but also her self-will  and her occasional

unreasonable inflexibility in things that touch her emotions.

[259] These reflections may explain why any judgment on the introverted

woman in terms of affectivity alone is incomplete and unfair in good and

bad alike. If Jordan finds the vilest characters among introverted women,

this, in my opinion, is due to the fact that he lays too great a stress on

affectivity, as if passion alone were the mother of all evil. We can torture

children to death in other ways than the merely physical. And, conversely,

that wondrous wealth of love in the introverted woman is not by any

means always her own possession; she is more often possessed by it and

cannot choose but love, until one day a favourable opportunity occurs, when

suddenly, to the amazement of her partner, she displays an inexplicable

coldness. The emotional life of the  introverted woman is generally her

weak side, it is not absolutely trustworthy. She

deceives herself about it; others also are deceived and disappointed in her

if they rely too much on her emotionality. Her mind is more to be relied on,

because more adapted. Her affect is too close to sheer untamed nature.  THE EXTRAVERTED WOMAN (“THE LESS

                      IMPASSIONED WOMAN”)

[260] Let us now turn to Jordan’s description of the “less impassioned”

woman. Here too I must reject everything the author has confused by the

introduction of activity, since this admixture is only calculated to make the

typical character less  recognizable. Thus when he speaks of a certain

“quickness” of the extravert, this does not mean vivacity or activity, but

merely the mobility of active psychological processes.

[261] Of the extraverted woman Jordan says:

She is marked by activity, vivacity, quickness, and opportuneness rather

than by persistence or consistency. Her life is almost wholly occupied with

little things. She goes even further than Lord Beaconsfield in the belief

that unimportant things are not very unimportant, and important things not

very important. She likes to dwell on the way her grandmother did things,

and how her grandchildren will do them, and on the universal degeneracy

of human beings and affairs. Her daily wonder is how things would go on

if she were not there to look after them. She is frequently invaluable in social

movements. She expends her energies in household cleanliness, which is the

end and aim of existence to not a few women. Frequently she is “idea-less,

emotionless, restless and spotless.” Her emotional development is usually

precocious, and at eighteen she is little less wise than at twenty-eight or

forty-eight. Her mental outlook usually lacks range and depth, but it is clear

from the first. When intelligent, she is capable of taking a leading position.

In society she is kindly, generous and hospitable. She judges her neighbours

and friends, forgetful that she is herself being judged, but she is active in

helping them in misfortune. Deep passion is absent in her, love is simply

preference, hatred merely dislike, and jealousy  only injured  pride. Her

enthusiasm is not sustained, and she is more alive to the beauty of poetry

than she is to its passion and pathos. Her beliefs and disbeliefs are complete

rather than strong. She has no convictions, but she has no misgivings. She

does not believe, she adopts, she does not disbelieve, she ignores. She never

enquires and she never doubts. In large affairs she defers to authority; in

small affairs she jumps to conclusions. In the detail of her own little world,

whatever is, is wrong: in the larger world outside, whatever is, is right.

She instinctively rebels against carrying  the conclusions of reason into

practice.At home she shows quite a different character from the one  seen in

society. With her, marriage is much influenced by ambition, or a love of

change, or obedience to well-recognized custom and a desire to be “settled in

life,” or from a sincere wish to enter a greater sphere of usefulness. If her

husband belongs to the impassioned type, he will love children more than

she does.

In the domestic circle, her least pleasing characteristics are evident. Here

she indulges in disconnected, disapproving comment, and none can foresee

when there will be a gleam of sunshine through the cloud. The unemotional

woman has little or no self-analysis. If she is plainly accused of habitual

disapproval she is surprised and offended, and intimates that  she only

desires the general good, “but some people do not know what is good for

them.” She has one way of doing good to her family, and quite another way

where society is  concerned. The household must always be ready for

social inspection. Society must be encouraged and propitiated. Its upper

section must be impressed and its lower section kept in order. Home is her

winter, society her summer. If the door but opens and a visitor is announced,

the transformation is instant.

The less emotional woman is by no means given to  asceticism;

respectability and orthodoxy do not demand it of  her. She is fond of

movement, recreation, change. Her busy  day may open with a religious

service, and close with a comic opera. She delights, above all, to entertain

her friends and to be entertained by them. In society she finds not only her

work and her happiness, but her rewards and her consolations. She believes

in society, and society believes in her. Her feelings are little influenced by

prejudice, and as a rule she is “reasonable.” She is very imitative and

usually selects good models, but is only dimly conscious of her imitations.

The books she reads must deal with life and action.

4

[262] This familiar type of woman is extraverted beyond a  doubt. Her

whole demeanour indicates a character that by its  very nature must be

called extraverted. The continual criticizing, which is never based on real

reflection, is an extraversion of a fleeting impression that has nothing to do

with real thinking. I remember a witty aphorism I once read somewhere:

“Thinking is difficult, therefore let the herd pass  judgment!” Reflection

demands time above everything: hence  the man who  reflects has no

opportunity for continual criticism. Incoherent and inconsequential criticism,dependent on tradition and  authority, reveals the absence of any

independent reflection; similarly the lack of self-criticism and the dearth of

independent ideas betray a defect in the function of judgment. The absence of

inner mental life in this type comes out much more clearly than its presence

in the introverted type described earlier. From this sketch one might easily

conclude that there is just as great or even greater a lack of affectivity, for it

is obviously superficial, shallow, almost spurious,  because the ulterior

motive always bound up with it or  discernible behind it makes the

affective output practically worthless. I am, however, inclined to assume

that our author is undervaluing here, just as much as he overvalued in the

former case.  In  spite  of  an  occasional admission of  good qualities, the

type on the whole comes out of it very badly. I believe this is due to a bias

on the part of the author. It is  usually enough to have had bitter

experiences with one or more representatives of the same type for one’s

taste to be spoiled for all of them. One must not forget that, just as the

good sense of the introverted woman depends on a careful accommodation

of her mental contents to  the general  thinking, the affectivity of the

extraverted woman possesses a certain lability and shallowness because it is

adapted to the  ordinary life of human society. It is thus a socially

differentiated affectivity with an incontestable general value,  which

compares very favourably with the heavy, sultry, passionate affect of the

introvert. This differentiated affectivity has sloughed off everything chaotic

and pathetic and become a disposable function of adaptation, even though it

be at the expense of the inner mental life, which is  conspicuous by its

absence. It none the less exists in the unconscious, and moreover in a

form corresponding to the  passion of the introvert, i.e., it is in an

undeveloped, archaic,  infantile  state.  Working  from  the  unconscious,  the

undeveloped mentality supplies the affective output with contents and hidden

motives that cannot fail to make a bad impression on the critical observer,

although they may be unperceived by the uncritical eye. The disagreeable

impression that the constant perception of thinly veiled egoistic motives has

on the observer makes him only too prone to forget the actual reality and

adapted usefulness of the affective output displayed. All that is easy-going,

unforced, temperate, harmless, and superficial in life would disappear if there

were no differentiated affects. One would either be stifled in perpetual pathos

or engulfed in the yawning abyss of repressed passion. If the social function

of the introvert concentrates mainly on individuals, it is usually true that theextravert promotes the life of the community, which also has a right to exist.

For this extraversion is needed, because it is first and foremost the bridge to

one’s neighbour.

[263] As we all know, the expression of affect works by  suggestion,

whereas the mind can operate only indirectly, after arduous translation

into another medium. The affects required by the social function need not

be at all deep, otherwise they beget passion in others, and passion upsets the

life and wellbeing of society. Similarly, the adapted, differentiated mentality

of the introvert has extensity rather than intensity; hence it is not disturbing

and provocative but reasonable and calming. But, just as the introvert causes

trouble by the violence of his passions, the extravert irritates by his half-

unconscious thoughts and feelings, incoherently and abruptly applied in

the form of tactless and unsparing judgments on his fellow men. If we were

to make a collection of such judgments and tried to construct a psychology

out of them, they would build up into an utterly brutal outlook, which in

chilling savagery, crudity, and stupidity rivals the murderous affectivity of

the introvert. Hence I cannot subscribe to Jordan’s view that the very worst

characters are to be found among passionate introverted natures. Among

extraverts there is just as much inveterate wickedness. But  whereas

introverted passion expresses itself in brutal actions, the vulgarity of the

extravert’s unconscious thoughts and feelings commits crimes against the

soul of the victim. I do not know which is worse. The drawback in the

former case is that the deed is visible, while the latter’s vulgarity of mind is

concealed behind the veil of acceptable behaviour. I would like, however,

to stress the social thoughtfulness of this type, his active concern for the

general welfare, as well as a decided tendency to give pleasure to others. The

introvert as a rule has these qualities only in his fantasies.

[264] Differentiated affects have the further advantage of  charm and

elegance. They spread about them an air that is aesthetic and beneficial. A

surprising number of extraverts  practise an  art—chiefly music—not so

much because they are specially qualified for it as from a desire to make

their contribution to  social life. Nor is their fault-finding always

unpleasant or altogether worthless. Very often it is no more than a well-

adapted educative tendency which does a great deal of good. Equally, their

dependence on the judgment of others is not necessarily a bad thing, as it

often conduces to the suppression of extravagances and pernicious excesses

which  in no way further the life and welfare of society. It would bealtogether unjustifiable to maintain that one type is in any respect more

valuable than the other. The types are mutually complementary, and their

differences generate the tension that both the individual and society need for

the maintenance of life.      THE EXTRAVERTED MAN (“THE LESS

                        IMPASSIONED MAN”)

[265] Of the extraverted man Jordan says:

He is fitful and uncertain in temper and behaviour, given to petulance, fuss,

discontent and censoriousness. He makes depreciatory judgments on all and

sundry, but is ever well satisfied with himself. His judgment is often at

fault and his projects often fail, but he never ceases to place unbounded

confidence in both. Sidney Smith, speaking of a conspicuous statesman of

his time, said he was ready at any moment to command the Channel Fleet

or amputate a limb. He has an incisive formula for everything that is put

before him—either the thing is not true, or everybody knows it already. In his

sky there is not room for two suns. If other suns insist on shining, he has a

curious sense of martyrdom.

He matures early. He is fond of administration, and is often an admirable

public servant. At the committee of his charity he is as much interested in

the selection of its washer-woman as in the selection of its chairman. In

company he is usually alert, to the  point, witty,  and apt at  retort. He  

resolutely, confidently, and constantly shows himself. Experience helps him

and he insists on getting experience. He would rather be the known chairman

of a committee of three than the unknown benefactor of a nation. When he is

less gifted he is probably not less self-important. Is he busy? He believes

himself to be  energetic. Is he loquacious? He believes himself to be

eloquent.

He rarely puts forth new ideas, or opens new paths, but he is  quick to

follow, to seize, to apply, to carry out. His natural tendency is to ancient,

or at least accepted, forms of belief and policy. Special circumstances may

sometimes lead him to contemplate with admiration the audacity of his own

heresy. Not rarely the less emotional intellect is so lofty and commanding

that no disturbing influence can hinder the  formation of broad and just

views in all the provinces of life.  His life is usually characterized by

morality, truthfulness, and high principle; sometimes his desire to produce an

immediate effect however leads to later trouble.

If, in public assembly, adverse fates have given him nothing  to do,—

nothing to propose, or second, or support, or amend, or oppose—he will rise

and ask for some window to be closed to keep out a draught, or, which is

more likely, that one be opened to let in more air; for, physiologically, hecommonly needs much air as well as much notice. He is especially prone to

do what he is not asked to do—what, perhaps, he is not best fitted to do;

nevertheless he constantly believes that the public sees him as he wishes it

to see him, as he sees himself—a sleepless seeker of the public good. He puts

others in his debt, and he cannot go unrewarded. He may, by well-chosen

language, move his audience although he is not  moved himself. He is

probably quick to understand his time or at least his party; he warns it of

impending evil, organizes its forces, deals smartly with its opponents. He

is full of projects and prophecies and bustle. Society must be pleased if

possible; if it will not be pleased it must be astonished; if it will neither be

pleased nor astonished it must be pestered and shocked. He is a saviour by

profession and as an acknowledged saviour is not ill pleased with himself.

We can of ourselves do nothing right—but we can believe in him, dream

of him, thank God for him, and ask him to address us.

He is unhappy in repose, and rests nowhere long. After a busy day he must

have a pungent evening. He is found in the theatre, or concert, or church,

or the bazaar, at the dinner, or conversazione or club, or all these, turn and

turn about. If he  misses a meeting, a telegram announces a more

ostentatious call.

5

[266] From this description, too, the type can easily be recognized. But,

perhaps even more than in the description of the extraverted woman, there

emerges, in spite of occasional  appreciative touches, an element of

depreciation that amounts to caricature. It is due partly to the fact that this

method of description cannot hope to be fair to the extraverted nature in

general, because it is virtually impossible for the intellectual approach to put

the specific value of the extravert in the right  light. This is much more

possible with the introvert, because  his essential reasonableness and his

conscious motivation can be expressed in intellectual terms as readily as

his passions can and the actions resulting from them. With the extravert, on

the other hand, the specific value lies in his relation to the object. It seems to

me that only life itself can grant the extravert the just dues that intellectual

criticism cannot give him. Life alone reveals his values and appreciates

them. We can, of course, establish that the extravert is socially useful, that

he has made great contributions to the progress of human society, and so on.

But any analysis of his resources and motives will always yield a negative

result, because his specific value lies in the reciprocal relation to the objectand  not in himself. The relation to the object is one of those

imponderables that an intellectual formulation can never grasp.

[267] Intellectual criticism cannot help proceeding  analytically and

bringing the observed type to full clarity by pinning down its motives and

aims. But this, as we have said,  results in a picture that amounts to a

caricature of the psychology of the extravert, and anyone who believes he

has found the right attitude to an extravert on the basis of such a description

would be astonished to see how the actual personality turns the description

into a mockery. Such a one-sided view of things makes any adaptation to

the extravert impossible. In order to do him justice, thinking about him must

be altogether excluded, while for his part the extravert can properly adapt to

the introvert only when he is prepared to accept his mental contents in

themselves regardless of their practical utility. Intellectual analysis cannot

help attributing to the extravert every conceivable  design,  stratagem,

ulterior motive, and so forth, though they have no actual existence but at

most are shadowy effects leaking in from the unconscious background.

[268] It is certainly true that the extravert, if he has nothing else to say, will

at least demand that a window be open or shut. But who notices, who is

struck by it? Only the man who is trying to account for all the possible

reasons and intentions behind such an action, who reflects, dissects, puts

constructions on it,  while for everyone  else this little stir vanishes in the

general bustle of life without their seeing in it  anything sinister or

remarkable. But this is just the way the  psychology of the  extravert

manifests itself: it is part and parcel of the happenings of daily human

life, and it signifies nothing more than that, neither better nor worse. But the

man who reflects sees further and—so far as actual life is concerned—

sees  crooked, though his vision is sound enough as regards the

unconscious background of the extravert’s thought. He does not see the

positive man, but only his shadow. And the shadow proves the judgment

right at the expense of the  conscious,  positive man. For  the sake  of

understanding,  it  is,  I  think, a good thing to detach the man from his

shadow, the unconscious, otherwise the discussion is threatened with an

unparalleled confusion of ideas. One sees much in another man that does

not belong to his conscious psychology, but is a  gleam from his

unconscious, and one is deluded into attributing the observed quality to his

conscious ego. Life and fate may do this, but the psychologist, to whom

knowledge of the structure of the psyche and the possibility of a betterunderstanding of man are of the deepest concern, must not. A  clear

differentiation of the conscious man from his unconscious is imperative,

since only by the assimilation of conscious standpoints will clarity and

understanding be  gained, but never by a process of reduction to the

unconscious backgrounds, sidelights, quarter-tones.                  THE INTROVERTED MAN          (“THE MORE IMPASSIONED MAN”)

[269] Of the introverted man Jordan says:

He may spend his evenings in pleasure from a genuine love of it; but his

pleasures do not change every hour, and he not driven to them from mere

restlessness. If he takes part in public work he is probably invited to do so

from some special  fitness; or it may be that he has at heart some

movement—beneficent or mischievous—which he wishes to  promote.

When his work is done he willingly retires. He is able to see what others

can do better than he; and he would rather that his cause should prosper in

other hands than fail in his own. He has a hearty word of praise for his

fellow-workers. Probably he errs in estimating too generously the merits of

those around him. He is never, and indeed cannot be, an habitual scold. …

Men of profound feeling and illimitable pondering tend to suspense or even

hesitation; they are never the founders of religions; never leaders of religious

movements; they neither receive nor deliver divine messages.

They are moreover never so supremely confident as to what is error that they

burn their neighbours for it; never so confident that they possess infallible

truth that, although not wanting in courage, they are prepared to be burnt

in its behalf.

6

[270] To me it seems significant that in his chapter on the introverted man

Jordan says no more in effect than what is given in the above excerpts.

What we miss most of all is a description of the passion on account of

which the introvert is called “impassioned” in the first place. One must, of

course, be cautious in making diagnostic conjectures, but this case seems

to invite the supposition that the introverted man has  received such

niggardly treatment for subjective reasons.  After the elaborately unfair

description of the extraverted  type, one might have expected an equal

thoroughness in the description of the introvert. Why is it not forthcoming?

[271] Let us suppose that Jordan himself is on the side of the introverts. It

would then be intelligible that a description like the one he gives of his

opposite number with such pitiless severity would hardly have suited his

book. I would not say  from  lack of objectivity, but  rather from lack  of

knowledge  of  his own shadow. The introvert cannot possibly know or

imagine how he appears to his opposite type unless he allows the extravert

to tell him to his face, at the risk of having to challenge him to a duel. For

as little as the extravert is disposed to accept Jordan’s description as anamiable and apposite picture of his character is the introvert inclined to let

his picture be painted by an extraverted observer and critic. The one would

be as depreciatory as the other. Just as the introvert who tries to get hold

of the nature of the extravert  invariably goes wide of the mark,  so the

extravert who tries to understand the other’s inner life from the standpoint

of externality is equally at sea. The introvert makes the mistake of always

wanting to derive the other’s actions from the subjective psychology of the

extravert, while the extravert can conceive the other’s inner life only as a

consequence of external circumstances. For the extravert an abstract train of

thought must be a fantasy, a sort of cerebral mist, when no relation to an

object is in evidence. And as a matter of fact the introvert’s brain-weavings

are often nothing more. At all  events a lot more could be said of the

introverted man, and one could draw a shadow portrait of him no less

complete and no less unfavourable than the one Jordan drew  of the

extravert.

[272] His observation that the introvert’s love of pleasure is “genuine” seems

to me important. This appears to be a peculiarity of introverted feeling in

general: it is genuine because it is there of itself, rooted in the man’s deeper

nature; it wells up out of itself, having itself as its own aim; it will serve

no other ends, lending itself to none, and is content to be an end in itself.

This hangs together with the spontaneity of  any archaic and natural

phenomenon that has never yet bowed to the ends and aims of civilization.

Rightly or wrongly, or at  any rate without regard to right or wrong,

suitability or unsuitability, the affective state bursts out, forcing itself on

the subject even against his will and expectation. There is nothing about it

that suggests a calculated motivation.

[273] I do not wish to discuss the remaining chapters of Jordan’s book.

He cites historical personalities as examples, presenting numerous distorted

points of view which all derive from the fallacy already referred to, of

introducing the criterion of active and passive and mixing it up with the other

criteria. This leads to the frequent conclusion that an active personality

must be reckoned a passionless type and, conversely, that a passionate nature

must be passive. I seek to avoid this error by excluding the factor of activity

as a criterion altogether.

[274] To Jordan, however, belongs the credit for having been the first, so

far as I know, to give a relatively appropriate  character sketch of the

emotional types.                                          V            THE TYPE PROBLEM IN POETRY

                Carl Spitteler: Prometheus and Epimetheus              INTRODUCTORY REMARKS ON

                    SPITTELER’S TYPOLOGY

[275] If, besides the themes offered to the poet by the  complications of

emotional life, the type problem did not also play a significant role, it would

almost amount to a proof that  the problem did not exist. But we have

already seen how in Schiller this problem stirred the poet in him as deeply

as the thinker. In this chapter we shall turn our attention to a poetic work

based almost exclusively  on the type problem: Carl  Spitteler’s

Prometheus and Epimetheus, published in 1881.

[276] I have no wish to declare at the outset that  Prometheus, the

“forethinker,” stands for the introvert, and Epimetheus, the man of action

and “afterthinker,”  for the  extravert. The conflict between these two

figures is essentially a struggle between the introverted and extraverted lines

of development in one and the same individual, though  the poet has

embodied it in two independent figures and their typical destinies.

[277] There can be no mistaking the fact that Prometheus  exhibits

introverted character traits. He presents the picture of a man introverted to

his inner world, true to his “soul.” He expresses his nature perfectly in the

reply he gives to the angel:

But it does not lie with me to judge of the face of my soul, for lo, she is my

Lady and Mistress, and she is my God in joy and sorrow, and all that I am, I

owe to her alone. And so I will share my honour with her, and, if needs

must, I am ready to forego it altogether.

1

[278] Prometheus surrenders himself, come honour or dishonour, to his

soul, that is, to the function of relation to the inner world. That is why the

soul has a mysterious, metaphysical character, precisely on account of her

relation to  the unconscious. Prometheus concedes her an absolute

significance, as mistress and guide, in the same unconditional  manner in

which Epimetheus surrenders himself to the world.  He sacrifices his

individual ego to the soul, to the relation with the unconscious as the

matrix of eternal images and  meanings, and becomes de-individualized,

because he has lost the counterweight of the persona,

2 the function of relation to the external object. With this surrender to his

soul Prometheus loses all connection with the surrounding world, and hence

also the very necessary corrective offered by external reality. But this losscannot be reconciled with the nature of the real world. Therefore an angel

appears to Prometheus, evidently a representative of the powers-that-be; in

psychological terms, he is the projected image of a tendency aiming  at

adaptation to reality. The angel accordingly says to Prometheus:

It shall come to pass, if you do not prevail and free yourself from your

froward soul, that you shall lose the great reward of many years, and the joy

of your heart, and all the fruits of your richly endowed mind.

3

And again:

You shall be cast out on the day of your glory on account of your soul, for

she knows no god and obeys no law, and nothing is sacred to her pride, either

in heaven or on earth.

4

[279] Because Prometheus has a one-sided orientation to  his soul, all

tendencies to adapt to the external world are repressed and sink into the

unconscious. Consequently, if  perceived at all, they appear as not

belonging to his own personality but as projections.  There would seem

to be a contradiction in the fact that the soul, whose cause Prometheus has

espoused and whom he has, as it were, fully assimilated into consciousness,

appears at the same time as a projection. But since the soul, like the persona,

is a function of relationship, it must consist in a certain sense of two

parts—one part belonging to the individual, and the other adhering to the

object of  relationship, in this case the unconscious. Unless one frankly

subscribes to von Hartmann’s philosophy, one is generally  inclined to

grant the unconscious only a conditional existence as a psychological factor.

On epistemological grounds, we are at present quite unable to make any

valid statement about the objective reality of the complex psychological

phenomenon we call the unconscious, just as we are in no position to say

anything valid about the essential nature of real things, for  this lies

beyond our psychological ken. On the grounds of practical experience,

however, I must point out that, in relation to the activity of consciousness,

the contents of the unconscious lay the same claim to reality on account of

their obstinate persistence as do the real things of the external world,

even though this claim must appear very improbable to a mind that is “outer-

directed.” It must not be forgotten that there have always been many people

for whom the contents of the unconscious possessed a greater reality than

the things of the outside world. The history of human thought bearswitness to both realities. A more searching investigation of the human

psyche shows beyond question that there is in general an equally strong

influence from both sides on the  activity of consciousness, so that,

psychologically, we have a right on purely empirical grounds to treat the

contents of the unconscious as just as real as the things of the outside world,

even though these two realities are mutually contradictory and appear to be

entirely different in their natures. But to subordinate one reality to the

other would be an altogether  unjustifiable presumption. Theosophy and

spiritualism are just as violent in their encroachments on other spheres as

materialism. We have to accommodate ourselves to our  psychological

capacities, and be content with that.

[280] The peculiar reality of unconscious contents, therefore, gives us the

same right to describe them as objects as the things of the outside world.

Now just as the persona,  being a function of relationship, is always

conditioned by the external object and is anchored as much in it as in the

subject, so the soul, as a function of relationship to the inner object, is

represented by that object; hence she is always distinct from the subject in

one sense and is actually perceived as something different. Consequently,

she appears to Prometheus as something quite separate from his individual

ego. In the same way as a man who surrenders entirely to the outside

world  still has the world as an object distinct from himself, the

unconscious world of images behaves as an object distinct from the subject

even when a man surrenders to it completely. And, just as the unconscious

world of mythological images speaks indirectly, through the experience of

external things, to the man who surrenders wholly to the outside world, so

the real world and its demands find their way indirectly to the man who

has surrendered wholly to the soul; for no man can escape both realities. If

he is intent only on the outer reality, he must live his myth; if he is turned

only towards the inner reality, he must dream his outer, so-called real life.

Accordingly the soul says to Prometheus:

I told you I was a wayward goddess, who would lead you  astray on

untrodden paths. But you would not listen to me, and now it has come to

pass according to my words: for my sake they have robbed you of the

glory of your name and stolen from you your life’s happiness.

5

[281] Prometheus refuses the kingdom the angel offers him, which means

that he refuses to adapt to things as they are because his soul is demandedfrom him in exchange. The subject, Prometheus, is essentially human, but

his soul is of a quite different character. She is daemonic, because the inner

object, the suprapersonal, collective unconscious with which  she is

connected as the function of relationship, gleams  through her. The

unconscious, considered as the historical  background of the human

psyche, contains in concentrated  form the entire succession of engrams

(imprints) which from  time immemorial have determined the psychic

structure as it now exists. These engrams are nothing other than function-

traces that typify, on average, the most frequently and intensively used

functions of the human psyche. They present themselves in the form of

mythological motifs and images, appearing often in identical form and

always with striking similarity among all races; they can also be easily

verified in the unconscious material of modern  man. It is therefore

understandable that decidedly animal  traits or elements should appear

among the unconscious contents side by side with those sublime figures

which from ancient times have been man’s companions on the road of

life. The unconscious is a whole world of images whose range is as boundless

as that of the world of “real” things. Just as the man who has surrendered

entirely to the outside world encounters it in the form of some intimate and

beloved being through whom, should his destiny lie in extreme devotion to a

personal object, he will experience the whole ambivalence of the world and

of his own nature, so the other, who has  surrendered to the soul, will

encounter her as a daemonic  personification of the unconscious,

embodying the totality, the utter polarity and ambivalence of the world of

images. These are borderline phenomena that overstep the norm; hence the

normal, middle-of-the-road man knows nothing of  these cruel enigmas.

They do not exist for him. It is always only a few who reach the rim of the

world, where its mirror-image begins. For the man who always stands in

the middle the soul has a human and not a dubious, daemonic character,

neither does his neighbour appear to him in the least problematical. Only

complete surrender to one world or the other evokes their ambivalence.

Spitteler’s intuition caught a soul-image which would have appeared to a

less profound nature at most in a dream:

And while he thus bore himself in the frenzy of his ardour, a strange quiver

played about her lips and face, and her eyelids  flickered, opening and

closing quickly. And behind the soft and delicate fringe of her eyelashes

something menacing lurked and prowled, like the fire that steals through ahouse maliciously and stealthily, or like the tiger that winds through  the

jungle, showing amid the dark leaves glimpses of its striped and yellow body.

6

[282] The life-line that Prometheus chooses is unmistakably introverted. He

sacrifices all connection with the present in order to create by forethought a

distant future. It is very different with Epimetheus: he realizes that his aim

is the world and what the world values. Therefore he says to the angel:

But now my desire is for truth and my soul lies in my hand, and if it please

you, pray give me a conscience that I may mind my “p’s” and “q’s” and

everything that is just.

7

Epimetheus cannot resist the temptation to fulfil his own destiny and submit

to the “soulless” point of view. This alliance with the world is immediately

rewarded:

And it came to pass that as Epimetheus stood upon his feet, he felt his

stature was increased and his courage firmer, and all his being was at one

with itself, and all his feeling was sound and mightily at ease. And thus

he strode with bold steps through the valley, following the straight path as

one who fears no man, with free and open bearing, like a man inspired by

the contemplation of his own right-doing.

8

[283] He has, as Prometheus says, bartered his soul for the “p’s” and “q’s”.

9 He has lost his soul—to his brother’s gain. He has followed  his

extraversion, and, because this orients him to the external  object, he is

caught up in the desires and expectations of the world, seemingly at first to

his great advantage. He has become an extravert, after having lived many

solitary years under the influence of his brother as an extravert falsified by

imitating the introvert. This kind of involuntary “simulation  dans le

caractère” (Paulhan) is not uncommon. His conversion to true extraversion

is therefore a step towards “truth” and brings him a just reward.

[284] Whereas Prometheus, through the tyrannical claims of his  soul, is  

hampered  in every  relation to  the  external  object and has to make the

cruellest sacrifices in the service of the soul, Epimetheus is armed with an

effective shield against the danger that most threatens the extravert—the

danger of complete surrender to the external object. This protection consists

in a conscience that is backed by the traditional “right ideas,” that is, by  the

not-to-be-despised treasures of worldly wisdom, which are employed bypublic opinion in much the same way as the judge uses the penal code.

This provides Epimetheus with a protective barrier that restrains him from

surrendering to the object as boundlessly as Prometheus does to his soul.

This is forbidden him by his  conscience, which deputizes for his soul.

When Prometheus turns his back on the world of men and their codified

conscience, he plays into the hands of his cruel soul-mistress  and her

caprices, and only after endless suffering does he atone for his neglect of

the world.

[285] The prudent restraint of a blameless conscience puts such a bandage

over Epimetheus’ eyes that he must blindly live his myth, but ever with the

sense of doing right, because he always does what is expected of him, and

with success ever at his side, because he fulfils the wishes of all. That is

how men desire to see their king, and thus Epimetheus plays his part to the

inglorious end, never forsaken by the  spine-stiffening approval of the

public. His self-assurance and self-righteousness, his unshakable confidence

in his own worth, his indubitable “right-doing” and good conscience, present

an easily recognizable portrait of the extraverted character as depicted by

Jordan. Let us hear how Epimetheus visits the sick Prometheus, desiring to

heal his sufferings:

When all was set in order, King Epimetheus stepped forward supported by a

friend on either side, greeted Prometheus, and spoke to him these well-meant

words: “I am heartily sorry for  you, Prometheus, my dear brother! But

nonetheless take courage, for look, I have a salve here which is a sure

remedy for every ill and works wondrously well in heat and in frost, and

moreover can be used alike for solace as for punishment.”

So saying, he took his staff and tied the box of ointment to it, and reached it

carefully and with all due solemnity towards his brother. But as soon as he

saw and smelt the ointment, Prometheus turned away his head in disgust. At

that the King changed his tone, and shouted and began to read his brother a

lesson with great zest: “Of a truth it seems you have need of yet greater

punishment, since your present fate does not suffice to teach you.”

And as he spoke, he drew a mirror from the folds of his robe, and made

everything clear to him from the beginning, and waxed very eloquent and

knew all his faults.

10

[286] This scene is a perfect illustration of Jordan’s words: “Society must be

pleased if possible; if it will not be pleased, it must be astonished; if it willneither be pleased nor astonished, it must be pestered and shocked.”

11 In the East a rich man proclaims his rank by never showing himself in

public unless supported by two slaves.  Epimetheus affects this pose in

order to make an impression.

Well-doing must at the same time be combined with admonition and moral

instruction. And, as that does not produce an effect, the other must at least

be horrified by the picture of his own baseness. Everything is aimed at

creating  an impression. There is an American saying that runs: “In

America two kinds of men make good—the man who can do, and the man

who can bluff.” Which means that pretence is sometimes just as successful

as actual performance. An  extravert of this kind prefers to work by

appearance. The introvert tries to do it by force and misuses his work to

that end.

[287] If we fuse Prometheus and Epimetheus into one  personality, we

should have a man outwardly Epimethean and  inwardly Promethean—an

individual constantly torn by both tendencies, each seeking to get the ego

finally on its side.

1. A COMPARISON OF SPITTELER’S WITH

    GOETHE’S PROMETHEUS

[288] It is of considerable interest to compare this conception of Prometheus

with Goethe’s. I believe I am  justified in the conjecture that Goethe

belongs more to the extraverted than to the introverted type, while Spitteler

would seem to belong to the latter. Only an exhaustive examination and

analysis of Goethe’s biography would be able to establish the rightness of

this supposition. My conjecture is based on a variety of impressions, which I

refrain from mentioning here for lack of sufficient evidence to support them.

[289] The introverted attitude need not necessarily coincide with the figure

of Prometheus, by which I mean that the traditional Prometheus can be

interpreted quite differently. This other version is found, for instance, in

Plato’s Protagoras, where the bestower of vital powers on the creatures the

gods have created out of fire and water is not Prometheus but Epimetheus.

Here, as in the myth, Prometheus (conforming to classical taste) is the

crafty and inventive genius. There are two versions of Prometheus in

Goethe’s works. In the “Prometheus Fragment” of 1773 Prometheus is the

defiant, self-sufficient, godlike, god-disdaining creator and artist. His soul

is Minerva, daughter of Zeus. The relation of Prometheus to Minerva isvery like the relation of Spitteler’s Prometheus to his soul:

From the beginning thy words have been celestial light to me! Always as

though my soul spoke to herself

Did she reveal herself to me, And in her of their own accord Sister harmonies

rang out.

And when I deemed it was myself, A goddess spoke,

And when I deemed a goddess was speaking, It was myself.

So it was between thee and me, So fervently one.

Eternal is my love for thee!

12

And again:

As the twilight glory of the departed sun Hovers over the gloomy Caucasus

And encompasses my soul with holy peace, Parting, yet ever present with me,

So have my powers waxed strong

With every breath drawn from thy celestial air.

13

[290] So Goethe’s Prometheus, too, is dependent on his soul. The

resemblance between this relationship and that of

Spitteler’s Prometheus to his soul is very striking. The latter says to his soul:

And though I be stripped of all, yet am I rich beyond all measure so long

as you alone remain with me, and name me “my friend” with your sweet

mouth, and the light of your proud and gracious countenance go not from

me.

14

[291] But for all the similarity of the two figures and their relations with the

soul, one essential difference remains. Goethe’s Prometheus is a creator and

artist, and  Minerva  inspires his clay images with life. Spitteler’s

Prometheus is suffering rather than creative; only his soul is creative, but her

work is secret and mysterious. She says to him in farewell:

And now I depart from you, for a great work awaits me, a work of

immense labour, and I must hasten to accomplish it. 15

[292] It would seem that, with Spitteler, the Promethean creativity falls to

the soul, while Prometheus himself merely suffers the pangs of the creative

soul within him. But Goethe’s Prometheus is self-activating, he is essentially

and exclusively creative, defying the gods out of the strength of his own

creative power:

Who helped meAgainst the pride of the Titans? Who saved me from death?

And slavery?

Did you not do it all alone, O ardent, holy heart?

16

[293] Epimetheus in this fragment is only sparingly  sketched, he is

thoroughly inferior to Prometheus, an advocate of collective feeling who

can only understand the  service of the soul as “obstinacy.” He says to

Prometheus:

You stand alone!

You in your obstinacy know not that bliss When the gods, you, and all that

you have, Your world, your heaven,

Are enfolded in one embracing unity.

17

[294] Such indications as are to be found in the Prometheus fragments are

too sparse to enable us to discern the character of Epimetheus. But Goethe’s

delineation of Prometheus shows a typical difference from the Prometheus

of Spitteler. Goethe’s Prometheus creates and works outwards into the

world, he peoples space with the figures he has fashioned and his soul has

animated, he fills the earth with the offspring of his creativeness, he is at

once the master and teacher of man. But with the Prometheus of Spitteler

everything goes inwards and vanishes in the darkness of the soul’s depths,

just as he himself disappears from the world of men, even wandering from

the narrow confines of his homeland as though to make himself the more

invisible. In accordance with the principle of  compensation in analytical

psychology, the soul, the personification of the unconscious, must then be

especially active, preparing a work that is not yet visible. Besides the

passage already quoted, there is in Spitteler a full description  of  this

expected compensatory process. We find it in the Pandora interlude.

[295] Pandora, that enigmatical figure in the Prometheus  myth, is in

Spitteler’s version the divine maiden who lacks  every relation with

Prometheus but the very deepest. This conception is based on a version of

the myth in which the woman who enters into relation with Prometheus

is either Pandora or Athene. The Prometheus of mythology has his soul-

relation with Pandora or Athene, as in Goethe. But, in  Spitteler, a

noteworthy departure is introduced, though it is already indicated in the

historical myth, where Prometheus  and Pandora are contaminated with

Hephaestus and Athene.  In Goethe, the Prometheus-Athene version isgiven preference. In Spitteler, Prometheus is removed from the divine sphere

and granted a soul of his own. But his divinity and his original relation with

Pandora in the myth are  preserved as a cosmic counterplot, enacted

independently in the celestial sphere. The happenings in the other world

are what takes place on the further side of consciousness, that is in the

unconscious. The Pandora interlude, therefore, is an account of what goes

on in the unconscious during the  sufferings of Prometheus. When

Prometheus vanishes from the world, destroying every link that binds him

to mankind, he sinks into his own depths, and the only thing around him, his

only object, is himself. He has become “godlike,” for God is by definition a

Being who everywhere reposes in himself  and by virtue of his

omnipresence has himself always and everywhere for an object. Naturally

Prometheus does not feel in the least godlike—he is supremely wretched.

After Epimetheus has come to spit upon his misery, the interlude in the other

world begins, and that naturally is just at the moment when all Prometheus’

relations to the world are suppressed to the point of extinction. Experience

shows that at such moments the contents of the unconscious have the best

opportunity to assert their independence and vitality, so much so that they

may even overwhelm consciousness.

18 Prometheus’ condition in the unconscious is reflected in the following

scene:

And on the dark morning of that very day, in a still and  solitary

meadow above all the worlds, wandered God, the  creator of all life,

pursuing the accursed round in obedience to  the strange nature of his

mysterious and grievous sickness.

For because of this sickness, he could never make an end of the weariness

of his walk, might never find rest on the path of his feet, but ever with

measured tread, day after day, year after year, must make the round of

the still meadow, with plodding steps, bowed head, furrowed brow, and

distorted  countenance, his beclouded gaze turned always towards the

midpoint of the circle.

And when today as on all other days he made the inevitable round and his

head sank deeper for sorrow and his steps dragged the more for weariness

and the wellspring of his life seemed spent by the sore vigils of the night,

there came to him through night and early dawn Pandora, his youngest

daughter, who with uncertain step demurely approached the hallowed spot,

and stood there humbly at his side, greeting him with modest glance, andquestioning him with lips that held a reverential silence.

19

[296] It is evident at  a glance that God  has caught  the  sickness of

Prometheus. For just as Prometheus makes all his passion, his whole libido

flow inwards to the soul, to his  innermost depths, dedicating himself

entirely to his soul’s service, so God pursues his course round and round

the pivot of the world and exhausts himself exactly like Prometheus, who

is near to self-extinction. All his libido has gone into the unconscious, where

an equivalent must be prepared; for libido is energy, and energy cannot

disappear without a trace, but must always produce an equivalent. This

equivalent is Pandora and the gift she brings to her father: a precious jewel

which she wants to give to mankind to ease their sufferings.

[297] If we translate this process into the human sphere of Prometheus, it

would mean that while Prometheus lies  suffering in his state of

“godlikeness,” his soul is preparing a  work destined to alleviate the

sufferings of mankind. His soul wants to get to men. Yet the work which

his soul actually plans and carries out is not identical with the work of

Pandora. Pandora’s jewel is an unconscious mirror-image that symbolizes the

real work of the soul of Prometheus. The text shows unmistakably what the

jewel signifies: it is a God-redeemer, a renewal of the sun.

20 The sickness of God expresses his longing for rebirth, and to this end his

  whole life-force flows back into the centre of the self, into the depths of

  the unconscious, out of which life  is born anew. That is why the

  appearance of the jewel in the world is described in a way that reflects

  the imagery of the birth of the Buddha in the Lalita-Vistara:

21 Pandora lays the jewel beneath a walnut-tree, just as Maya bears her child

  under a fig-tree:

In the midnight shade beneath the tree it glows and sparkles and flames

evermore, and, like the morning star in the dark sky, its diamond lightning

flashes afar.

And the bees also, and the butterflies, which danced over the flowery mead,

hurried up, and played and rocked around the wonder-child … and the larks

dropped down sheer from the upper air, all eager to pay homage to the

new and lovelier sun-countenance, and as they drew near and beheld the

dazzling radiance, their hearts swooned …

And, enthroned over all, fatherly and benign, the chosen tree with his giant

crown and heavy mantle of green, held his kingly hands protectingly overthe faces of his children. And his many branches bent lovingly down and

bowed themselves towards the earth as though they wished to screen and

ward off alien glances, jealous that they alone might enjoy the unearned

grace of the gift; while all the myriads of gently moving leaves fluttered

and trembled with rapture, murmuring in joyous exultation a soft, clear-

voice chorus in rustling accord: “Who could know what lies hidden beneath

this lowly roof, or guess the treasure reposing in our midst!” 22

[298] So Maya, when her hour was come, bore her child  beneath the

plaksa tree, which bowed its crown shelteringly  to earth. From the

incarnate Bodhisattva an immeasurable radiance spread through the world;

gods and all nature took part in the birth. At his feet there grew up an

immense lotus, and standing in the lotus he scanned the world. Hence the

Tibetan prayer: Om mani padme hum (Om! Behold the jewel in the lotus).

And the moment of rebirth found the Bodhisattva beneath the chosen bodhi

tree, where he became the Buddha, the Enlightened One. This rebirth or

renewal was attended by the same light-phenomena, the same prodigies of

nature and apparitions of gods, as the birth.

[299] In Spitteler’s version, the inestimable treasure gets  lost in the

kingdom of Epimetheus, where only conscience reigns and not the soul.

Raging over the stupidity of Epimetheus, the angel upbraids him: “And had

you no soul, that like the dumb and unreasoning beasts you hid from the

wondrous divinity?” 23

[300] It is clear that Pandora’s jewel symbolizes a renewal of God, a new

God, but this takes place in the divine sphere, i.e., in the unconscious. The

intimations of the process that filter through into consciousness are not

understood by the Epimethean principle, which governs the relation to the

world. This is elaborated by Spitteler in the ensuing sections, 24 where we

see how the world of consciousness with its  rational attitude and 

orientation  to objects  is incapable  of appreciating  the true value and

significance of the jewel. Because of this, it is irretrievably lost.

[301] The renewed God signifies a regenerated attitude, a  renewed

possibility of life, a recovery of vitality, because,  psychologically

speaking, God always denotes  the highest  value, the maximum sum of

libido, the fullest intensity of life, the optimum of psychological vitality.

But in Spitteler the Promethean attitude proves to be just as inadequate as

the  Epimethean. The two tendencies get dissociated: the  Epimethean

attitude is adapted to the world as it actually is, but the Promethean is not,and for that reason it has to work for a renewal of life. It also produces a

new attitude to the world (symbolized by the jewel given to mankind),

though  this does not find favour with Epimetheus. Nevertheless, we

recognize in Pandora’s gift a symbolic attempt to solve the  problem

discussed in the chapter on Schiller’s Letters—the problem of uniting the

differentiated with the undifferentiated function.

[302] Before proceeding further with this problem, we must turn back to

Goethe’s Prometheus. As we have seen, there are unmistakable differences

between the creative  Prometheus of Goethe and the suffering figure

presented by  Spitteler. Another and more important difference is the

relation to Pandora. In Spitteler, Pandora is a duplicate of the  soul of

Prometheus belonging to the other world, the sphere of the gods; in Goethe

she is entirely the creature and daughter of the Titan, and thus absolutely

dependent on him.

The relation of Goethe’s Prometheus with Minerva puts him in the place of

Vulcan, and the fact that Pandora is wholly his creature, and does not

figure as a being of divine origin, makes him a creator-god and removes him

altogether from the human sphere. Hence Prometheus says:

And when I deemed it was myself, A goddess spoke,

And when I deemed a goddess was speaking, It was myself.

[303] With Spitteler, on the other hand, Prometheus is stripped of divinity,

even his soul is only an unofficial daemon; his divinity is hypostatized, quite

detached from everything human. Goethe’s version is classical to this extent:

it emphasizes the divinity of the Titan. Accordingly Epimetheus too must

diminish in stature, whilst in Spitteler he emerges as a much more positive

character. Now in Goethe’s  “Pandora” we are fortunate in possessing a

work which conveys a far more complete portrait of Epimetheus than the

fragment we have been discussing. Epimetheus introduces  himself as

follows:

For me day and night are not clearly divided, Always I carry the old evil of

my name:

My progenitors named me Epimetheus. Brooding on the past with its hasty

actions, Glancing back, troubled in thought,

To the melancholy realm of fugitive forms Interfluent with the opportunities

of past days. Such bitter toil was laid on my youth

That turning impatiently towards life

I seized heedlessly the present momentAnd won tormenting burdens of fresh care.

25

[304] With these words Epimetheus reveals his nature: he broods over the

past, and can never free himself from Pandora, whom (according to the

classical  myth)  he has  taken  to wife. He cannot rid himself of her

memory-image, although she herself has long since deserted him, leaving

him her daughter Epimeleia (Care), but taking with her Elpore (Hope).

Epimetheus is portrayed so clearly that we are at once able to recognize what

psychological function he represents. While Prometheus is still the same

creator and modeller, who daily rises early from his couch with the same

inexhaustible urge to create and to set his stamp on the world, Epimetheus is

entirely given up to  fantasies, dreams, and memories, full of anxious

misgivings and troubled deliberations. Pandora appears as the creature of 

Hephaestus, rejected by  Prometheus but  chosen by Epimetheus for a wife.

He says of her: “Even the pains which such a treasure brings are pleasure.”

Pandora is to him a precious jewel, the supreme value:

And forever she is mine, the glorious one! From her I have received supreme

delight.

I possessed Beauty, and Beauty enfolded me, Splendidly she came in the

wake of the spring. I knew her, I caught her, and then it was done.

Clouding thoughts vanished like mist,

She raised me from earth and up to heaven. You seek for words worthy to

praise her,

You would extol her, she wanders already on high. Set your best beside her,

you’ll see it is bad.

Her words bewilder, yet she is right. Struggle against her, she’ll win the fight.

Faltering to serve her, you’re still her slave. Kindness and love she loves to

fling back.

What avails high esteem? She will strike it down. She sets her goal and wings

on her way.

If she blocks your path, she at once holds you up. Make her an offer and

she’ll raise your bid,

You’ll give riches and wisdom and all in the bargain. She comes down to

earth in a thousand forms, Hovering the waters, striding the meadows.

Divinely proportioned she dazzles and thrills,

Her form ennobling the content within, Lending it and herself the mightiest

power.She came radiant with youth and the flesh of woman.

26

[305] For Epimetheus, as these verses clearly show, Pandora has the value

of a soul-image—she stands for his  soul; hence her divine power, her

unshakable supremacy.  Whenever such attributes are conferred upon a

personality, we may conclude with certainty that such a personality is a

symbol-carrier, or an image of  projected unconscious contents. For it is  

the contents of the unconscious that have the supreme power Goethe has

described, incomparably characterized in the line: “Make her an offer and

she’ll raise your bid.” In this line the peculiar emotional reinforcement of

conscious contents by  association  with analogous contents  of the  

unconscious is caught to perfection. This reinforcement has in it something

daemonic and compelling, and thus has a “divine” or “devilish” effect.

[306] We have already described Goethe’s Prometheus as extraverted. It is

still the same in his “Pandora,” although here the relation of Prometheus

with the soul, the unconscious feminine principle, is missing. To make up

for this, Epimetheus emerges as the introvert turned to the inner world. He

broods, he calls back memories from the grave of the past, he “reflects.” He

differs absolutely from Spitteler’s Epimetheus. We could therefore say that

in Goethe’s “Pandora” the situation suggested in his earlier fragment has

actually come about. Prometheus represents the extraverted man of action,

and Epimetheus the brooding introvert. This Prometheus is, in extraverted

form, what Spitteler’s is in introverted form. In Goethe’s “Pandora” he is

purely creative for collective ends—he sets up a regular factory in his

mountain, where articles of use for the whole world are produced. He is cut

off from his inner world, which relation devolves this time on Epimetheus,

i.e., on the secondary and  purely reactive thinking and feeling of the

extravert which  possess all the characteristics of the undifferentiated

function. Thus it comes about that Epimetheus is wholly at the mercy of

Pandora, because she is in every respect superior to him.  This means,

psychologically, that the unconscious Epimethean function of the extravert,

namely that fantastic,  brooding, ruminative fancy, is intensified by the

intervention of the soul. If the soul is coupled with the less differentiated

function, one must conclude that the superior, differentiated function is too

collective; it is the servant of the collective conscience (Spitteler’s “p’s”

and “q’s”) and not the servant of freedom. Whenever this is so—and it

happens very frequently—the less differentiated function or the “other side”is reinforced by a pathological egocentricity. The extravert then fills  up 

his  spare time  with  melancholic or hypochondriacal brooding and may even

have hysterical fantasies and other symptoms,

27 while the introvert grapples with compulsive feelings of inferiority

28 which take him unawares and put him in a no less dismal plight.

[307] The resemblance between the Prometheus of  “Pandora” and the

Prometheus of Spitteler ends here. He is merely a collective itch for action,

so one-sided that it amounts to a repression of eroticism. His son Phileros

(‘lover of Eros’) is simply erotic passion; for, as the son of his father, he

must, as is often the case with children, re-enact under  unconscious

compulsion the unlived lives of his parents.

[308] The daughter of Pandora and Epimetheus, the man  who always

broods afterwards on his unthinking actions, is fittingly named Epimeleia,

Care. Phileros loves Epimeleia,  and thus the guilt of Prometheus in

rejecting Pandora is expiated. At the same time, Prometheus and Epimetheus

become reconciled when the industriousness of Prometheus is shown to be

nothing but unadmitted eroticism, and Epimetheus’ constant broodings on

the past to be rational  misgivings which might have checked the

unremitting  productivity of Prometheus and kept it within reasonable

bounds.

[309] This attempt of Goethe’s to find a solution, which appears to have

evolved from his extraverted psychology, brings us back to Spitteler’s

attempt, which we left for the  time being in order to discuss Goethe’s

Prometheus.

[310] Spitteler’s Prometheus, like his God, turns away from the world, from

the periphery, and gazes inwards to the centre, the “narrow passage”

29 of rebirth. This concentration or introversion pipes the libido into the

    unconscious. The activity of the unconscious is increased—the psyche

  begins to “work” and creates a product that wants to get out of the

  unconscious into consciousness. But consciousness has two attitudes:

  the Promethean, which withdraws the libido from the world, introverting

  without giving out, and the Epimethean, constantly giving out and

    responding in a soulless fashion, fascinated by the claims  of external

  objects. When Pandora makes her gift to the world  it means,

    psychologically, that an unconscious product of great value is on the

  point of reaching the extraverted consciousness, i.e., it is seeking a

  relation to the real world. Although the Promethean side, or in human  terms the artist, intuitively apprehends the great value of the product, his

  personal relations to the world are so subordinated to the tyranny of

  tradition that it is appreciated merely as a work of art and not taken for

  what it actually is, a symbol that promises a renewal of life. In order to

    transform it from a purely aesthetic interest into a living reality, it must

  be assimilated into life and actually lived. But when a man’s attitude

  is mainly introverted and given to abstraction, the  function of

  extraversion is inferior, in the grip of collective  restraints. These

  restraints prevent the symbol created by the psyche from living. The

  jewel gets lost, but one cannot really live if “God,” the supreme vital

  value that is expressed in the  symbol, cannot become a living fact.

  Hence the loss of the jewel signifies at the same time the beginning of

    Epimetheus’ downfall.

[311] And now the enantiodromia begins. Instead of taking for granted, as

every rationalist and optimist is inclined to do, that a good state will be

followed by a better, because  everything tends towards an “ascending

development,” Epimetheus, the man of blameless conscience and universally

acknowledged moral principles, makes a pact with Behemoth and his evil

host, and even the divine children entrusted to his care are bartered to the

devil.30 Psychologically, this means that the collective, undifferentiated attitude

  to the world stifles a man’s highest values and becomes a destructive

  force, whose influence increases until the Promethean side, the ideal

  and abstract

attitude, places itself at the service of the soul’s jewel and, like a true

Prometheus, kindles for the world a new fire. Spitteler’s Prometheus has

to come out of his solitude and tell men, even at the risk of his life, that

they are in error, and where they err. He must acknowledge the pitilessness

of truth,  just as Goethe’s Prometheus has to experience in Phileros the

pitilessness of love.

[312] That the destructive element in the Epimethean attitude is actually

this traditional and collective restraint is shown in Epimetheus’ raging fury

against the “little lamb,” an obvious caricature of traditional Christianity. In

this outburst of affect something breaks through that is familiar to us from

the Ass  Festival in Zarathustra. It is the expression of a contemporary

tendency.

[313] Man is constantly inclined to forget that what was once good does

not remain good eternally. He follows the old ways that once were good

long after they have become bad, and only with the greatest sacrifices and

untold suffering can he rid himself of this delusion and see that what was

once good is now perhaps grown old and is good no longer. This is so in 

great things  as in small. The ways and customs of  childhood, once so

sublimely good, can hardly be laid aside even when their harmfulness has

long since been proved. The  same, only on a gigantic scale, is true of

historical changes of  attitude. A collective attitude is equivalent to a

religion, and changes of religion constitute one of the most painful chapters in

the world’s history. In this respect our age is afflicted with a blindness that

has no parallel. We think we have only to declare an accepted article of

faith incorrect and invalid, and we shall be psychologically rid of all the

traditional effects of

Christianity or Judaism. We believe in enlightenment, as if an intellectual

change of front somehow had a profounder  influence on the emotional

processes or even on the unconscious. We entirely forget that the religion

of the last two thousand years is a psychological attitude, a definite form and

manner of adaptation to the world without and within, that lays down a

definite cultural pattern and creates an atmosphere which remains wholly

uninfluenced by any intellectual denials. The change of front is, of course,symptomatically important as an indication of possibilities to come, but on

the deeper levels the psyche continues to work for a long time in the old

attitude, in accordance with the laws of psychic inertia. Because of this, the

unconscious was able to keep paganism alive. The ease with which the

spirit of antiquity springs to life again can be observed in the Renaissance,

and the readiness of the vastly older primitive mentality to rise up from the

past can be seen in our own day, perhaps better than at any other epoch

known to history.

[314] The more deeply rooted the attitude, the more violent  will be the

attempts to shake it off. “Écrasez l’infâme,” the  cry of  the Age of

Enlightenment, heralded the religious upheaval started off by the French

Revolution, and this religious  upheaval was nothing but a basic

readjustment of attitude, though it lacked universality. The problem of a

general change of attitude has never slept since that time; it cropped up

again in many prominent minds of the nineteenth century. We have seen

how Schiller sought to master it, and in Goethe’s treatment of Prometheus

and Epimetheus we see  yet  another attempt to effect some sort of union

between the more highly differentiated function, which corresponds to the

Christian ideal of favouring the good, and the less differentiated function,

whose repression corresponds to the Christian ideal of rejecting the evil.

31 In the symbols of Prometheus and Epimetheus, the  difficulty that

  Schiller sought to master philosophically and aesthetically is clothed in

  the garment of a classical myth.  Consequently, something happens

  which, as I pointed out earlier, is a typical and regular occurrence: when

  a man meets a difficult task which he cannot master with the means at

  his disposal, a retrograde movement of libido automatically sets in, i.e.,

  a regression. The libido draws away from the problem of the moment,

  becomes introverted, and reactivates in the unconscious a more or less

  primitive analogue of the  conscious situation. This law determined

  Goethe’s choice of a symbol: Prometheus was the saviour who brought

  light and  fire to mankind languishing in darkness. Goethe’s deep

    scholarship could easily have picked on another saviour, so that the

  symbol he chose is not sufficient as an explanation. It must lie rather in

  the classical spirit, which at the turn of the eighteenth century was felt to

  contain a compensatory value  and was given expression in every

  possible way—in  aesthetics, philosophy, morals, even politics

    (Philhellenism). It was the paganism of antiquity, glorified as “freedom,”    “naïveté,” “beauty,” and so on, that met the yearnings of that age. These

  yearnings, as Schiller shows so clearly, sprang  from a feeling of

    imperfection, of spiritual barbarism, of  moral servitude, of drabness.

  This feeling in its turn arose from a one-sided evaluation of everything

  Greek, and from the consequent fact that the psychological dissociation

  between the differentiated and the undifferentiated functions became

  painfully evident. The Christian division of man into two halves, one

  valuable and one depraved, was unbearable to the superior sensibilities

  of that age. Sinfulness stumbled on the idea of an everlasting natural

  beauty, in the contemplation of which the age reached back to an earlier

  time when the idea of sinfulness had not yet disrupted man’s wholeness,

  when the heights and depths of human nature could still dwell together

  in complete naïveté without offending moral or aesthetic susceptibilities.

[315] But the attempt at a regressive Renaissance shared the fate of the

“Prometheus Fragment” and “Pandora”: it was  stillborn. The classical

solution would no longer work,  because the intervening centuries of

Christianity with their profound spiritual upheavals could not be undone.

So the penchant for the antique gradually petered out in medievalism. This

process sets in with Goethe’s Faust, where the problem is seized by both

horns. The divine wager between good and evil is accepted. Faust, the

medieval Prometheus, enters the lists with Mephistopheles, the  medieval

Epimetheus, and makes a pact with him. And here the problem becomes so

sharply focussed that one can see that Faust and Mephisto are the same

person. The Epimethean  principle, which always thinks backwards and

reduces everything to the primal chaos of “interfluent forms” (par. 303),

condenses into the devil whose evil power threatens everything living with

the “devil’s cold fist” and would force  back the light into the maternal

darkness whence it was born.  The devil everywhere displays a true

Epimethean thinking, a thinking in terms of “nothing but” which reduces All

to Nothing. The naïve passion of Epimetheus for Pandora  becomes the

diabolical plot of Mephistopheles for the soul of Faust. And the cunning

foresight of Prometheus in turning down the divine Pandora is expiated in

the tragedy of  Gretchen and the yearning for Helen, with its belated

fulfillment, and in the endless ascent to the Heavenly Mothers (“The Eternal

Feminine / Leads us upward and on”).

[316] The Promethean defiance of the accepted gods is personified in the

figure of the medieval magician. The magician has preserved in himself atrace of primitive paganism;

32 he possesses a nature that is still unaffected by the Christian dichotomy

  and is in touch with the still pagan unconscious, where the opposites lie

  side by side in their  original naïve state, beyond the reach of

    “sinfulness” but liable, if assimilated into conscious life, to beget evil as

  well as good with the same daemonic energy (“Part of that power which

  would / Ever work evil yet engenders good”). He is a destroyer but also

  a saviour, and such a figure is pre-eminently suited to become the

  symbolic bearer of an attempt to resolve the conflict. Moreover the

  medieval magician has laid aside the classical naïveté which was no

  longer possible, and become thoroughly steeped in the  Christian

    atmosphere. The old pagan element must at first  drive him into a

  complete Christian denial and mortification of self, because his longing

  for redemption is so strong that every avenue has to be explored. But in

  the end the Christian  attempt at a solution fails too, and it then

    transpires that the  possibility of redemption lies precisely in the

  obstinate  persistence of the old pagan element, because the  anti-

  Christian symbol opens the way for an acceptance of evil. Goethe’s

  intuition thus grasped the problem in all its acuteness. It is certainly

    significant that the more superficial  attempts at a solution—the

    “Prometheus Fragment,” “Pandora,” and the Rosicrucian compromise, a

  blend of Dionysian joyousness and Christian self-sacrifice—remained

    uncompleted.

[317] Faust’s redemption began at his death. The divine,  Promethean

character he had preserved all his life fell away from him only at death,

with his rebirth. Psychologically, this means that the Faustian attitude must

be abandoned before the individual can become an integrated whole. The

figure that first appeared as Gretchen and then on a higher level as Helen,

and was finally exalted as the Mater Gloriosa, is a symbol whose many

meanings cannot be discussed here.  Suffice to say that it is the same

primordial image that lies at the heart of Gnosticism, the image of the divine

harlot—Eve, Helen, Mary, Sophia-Achamoth.      THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE UNITING

                                    SYMBOL

[318] If, from the vantage point we have now gained, we glance once

more at Spitteler’s presentation of the problem, we are immediately struck

by the fact that the pact with evil

33 came about by  no  design of  Prometheus but  because of the

    thoughtlessness of Epimetheus, who possesses a merely  collective

    conscience but has no power of discrimination with regard to the things

  of the inner world. As is invariably the case with a standpoint oriented

  to the object, it allows itself to be determined exclusively by collective

  values and consequently overlooks what is new and unique. Current

    collective values can certainly be measured by an objective criterion,

  but only a free and individual assessment—a matter of living feeling—

  can give the true measure of something newly created. It also needs a

  man who has a “soul” and not merely relations to objects.

[319] The downfall of Epimetheus begins with the loss of the new-born

God-image. His morally unassailable thinking, feeling, and acting in no way

prevent the evil and destructive element from creeping in and gaining the

upper hand. The invasion of evil signifies that something previously good

has turned into something harmful. Spitteler is here expressing the idea

that the ruling moral principle, although excellent to begin with, in time

loses its essential connection with life, since it no longer embraces life’s

variety and  abundance. What is rationally correct is too narrow a concept to

grasp life in its totality and give it permanent expression. The divine birth

is an event altogether outside the bounds of rationality. Psychologically, it

proclaims the fact that a new symbol, a new expression of life at its most

intense, is being created.  Every Epimethean man, and everything

Epimethean in man,  prove incapable of comprehending this event. Yet,

from that moment, the highest intensity of life is to be found only in this

new direction. Every other direction gradually drops  away, dissolved in

oblivion.

[320] The new life-giving symbol springs from Prometheus’ love for his

soul-mistress, a daemonic figure indeed. One can therefore be certain that,

interwoven with the new symbol and its living beauty, there will also be the

element of evil, for otherwise it  would lack  the  glow of  life as  well as

beauty, since life and beauty are by nature morally neutral. That is why theEpimethean, collective mentality  finds nothing estimable in it. It is

completely blinded by its one-sided moral standpoint, which is identical

with the “little lamb.” The raging of Epimetheus when he turns against the

“little lamb” is merely “Écrasez l’infâme” in new form, a revolt against

established Christianity, which was incapable  of understanding the new

symbol and so giving life a new direction.

[321] This bare statement of the case might leave us entirely cold were

there no poets who could fathom and read the collective unconscious. They

are always the first to divine the darkly moving mysterious currents and to

express them, as best they can, in symbols that speak to us. They make

known, like true prophets, the stirrings of the collective unconscious or, in

the language of the Old Testament, “the will of God,” which in the course

of time must inevitably come to the surface as a collective phenomenon.

The redemptive significance of the deed of Prometheus, the downfall of

Epimetheus, his reconciliation with his  soul-serving brother, and the

vengeance Epimetheus wreaks on the “little lamb”—recalling in its cruelty

the scene between Ugolino and Archbishop Ruggieri

34—prepare a solution of the conflict that entails a sanguinary revolt against

traditional collective morality.

[322] In a poet of modest capacity we may assume that the pinnacle of his

work does not transcend his personal joys, sorrows, and aspirations. But

Spitteler’s work entirely transcends his personal destiny. For this reason his

solution of the problem is not an isolated one. From here to Zarathustra, the

breaker of the tables, is only a step. Stirner had also joined the company in

the wake of Schopenhauer, who was the first to conceive the theory of

“world negation.” Psychologically, “world” means how I see the world, my

attitude to the world; thus the world can be conceived as “my will” and “my

idea.”

35 In itself the world is indifferent. It is my Yes and No that create the

differences. Negation, therefore, is itself an attitude  to the world, a

particularly Schopenhauerian attitude that on  the one hand is purely

intellectual and rational, and on the other a profound feeling of mystical

identity with the world.

This attitude is introverted; it suffers therefore from its  typological

antithesis. But Schopenhauer’s work by far transcends his personality. It

voices what was obscurely thought and felt by many thousands. Similarly

with Nietzsche: his Zarathustra, in particular, brings to light the contentsof the collective unconscious of our time, and in him we find the same

distinguishing features: iconoclastic revolt against the conventional moral

atmosphere, and acceptance  of  the “Ugliest Man,” which leads to the

shattering unconscious tragedy presented in Zarathustra. But what creative

minds bring up out of the collective unconscious also actually exists, and

sooner or later must make its appearance in collective  psychology.

Anarchism, regicide, the constant increase and splitting off of a nihilistic

element on the extreme Left, with a programme absolutely hostile to culture

—these are  phenomena of mass psychology, which were long ago

adumbrated by poets and creative thinkers.

[323] We cannot, therefore, afford to be indifferent to the poets, since in

their principal works and deepest inspirations they create from the very

depths of the collective unconscious, voicing aloud what others only dream.

But though they proclaim it aloud, they fashion only a symbol in which they

take aesthetic pleasure, without any consciousness of its true meaning. I

would be the last to dispute that poets and thinkers have an educative

influence on their own and succeeding generations, but it seems to me that

their influence consists essentially in the fact that they voice rather more

clearly and resoundingly what all men know, and only to the extent that they

express this universal unconscious “knowledge” have they an educative or

seductive effect. The  poet who has the greatest and most immediately

suggestive effect is the one who knows how to express the most superficial

levels of the unconscious in a suitable form.

But the more deeply the vision of the creative mind  penetrates, the

stranger it becomes to mankind in the mass,  and the greater is the

resistance to the man who in any way stands out from the mass. The mass

does not understand him although unconsciously living what he expresses;

not because the poet proclaims it, but because the mass draws its life from the

collective unconscious into which he has peered. The more thoughtful of

the nation certainly comprehend something of his message, but, because his

utterance coincides with processes already going on in the mass, and also

because he anticipates their own aspirations, they hate the creator of such

thoughts, not out of malice, but merely  from the instinct of self-

preservation. When his insight into the collective unconscious reaches a

depth where its content can no longer be grasped in any conscious form of

expression, it is difficult to decide whether it is a morbid product or

whether it is incomprehensible because of its extraordinary profundity. Animperfectly understood yet  deeply significant content usually has

something morbid about it. And morbid products are as a rule significant.

But in both cases the approach to it is difficult. The fame of these creators,

if it ever arrives at all, is posthumous and often  delayed for several

centuries. Ostwald’s assertion that a genius today is misunderstood at most

for a decade is confined, one must hope, to the realm of technological

discoveries, otherwise such an assertion would be ludicrous in the extreme.

[324] There is another point of particular importance to which I feel I

ought to draw attention. The solution of the problem in Faust, in Wagner’s

Parsifal, in Schopenhauer, and even in Nietzsche’s Zarathustra, is religious.

It is therefore not surprising that Spitteler too is drawn towards a religious

setting. When a problem is grasped as a religious one, it  means,

psychologically, that it is seen as something very important, of particular

value, something that concerns the  whole man, and hence also the

unconscious (the realm of the gods, the other world, etc.). With Spitteler the

religious background is of such luxuriance that the specifically religious

problem loses in depth, though gaining in  mythological richness and

archaism. The lush mythological  texture makes the work difficult to

approach, as it shrouds the problem from clear comprehension and obscures

its solution.

The abstruse, grotesque, somewhat tasteless quality that always attaches to

this kind of mythological embroidery checks the flow of empathy, alienates

one from the meaning of the work, and gives the  whole a rather

disagreeable flavour of a certain kind of originality that manages to escape

being psychically abnormal  only by its meticulous attention to detail.

Nevertheless, this  mythological profusion, however tiresome and

unpalatable it may be, has the advantage of allowing the symbol plenty of

room to unfold, though in such an unconscious fashion that the conscious

wit of the poet is quite at a loss to point up its meaning, but devotes itself

exclusively to mythological  proliferation and its embellishment. In this

respect Spitteler’s poem differs from both Faust and Zarathustra: in these

works there is a greater conscious participation by the authors in the meaning

of the symbol, with the result that the mythological profusion of Faust and

the intellectual profusion of Zarathustra are pruned back in the interests of

the desired solution. Both Faust and Zarathustra are, for this reason, far

more satisfying aesthetically than Spitteler’s Prometheus, though the latter, as

a more or less  faithful reflection of actual  processes of the collectiveunconscious, has a deeper truth.

[325] Faust and Zarathustra are of very great assistance in the individual

mastery of the problem, while Spitteler’s Prometheus and Epimetheus,

thanks to the wealth of  mythological material, affords a more general

insight into it  and the way it appears in collective life. What, first and

foremost, is revealed in Spitteler’s portrayal of unconscious  religious

contents is the symbol of God’s renewal, which was subsequently treated at

greater length in his Olympian Spring. This symbol appears to be intimately

connected with the  opposition between the psychological types and

functions, and is obviously an attempt to find a solution in the form of a

renewal of the general attitude, which in the language of the unconscious is

expressed as a renewal of God. This is a well-known primordial image that

is practically universal; I  need only mention the whole mythological

complex of the dying and resurgent god and its primitive precursors all the

way down to the re-charging of fetishes and churingas with magical force.

It expresses a transformation of attitude by  means of which a new

potential, a new manifestation of life, a new fruitfulness, is created. This latter

analogy explains  the  well-attested connection  between the renewal of the

god and seasonal and vegetational phenomena. One is naturally inclined to

assume that seasonal, vegetational, lunar, and solar myths underlie these

analogies. But that is to forget that a myth, like everything psychic,

cannot be solely conditioned by external events. Anything psychic brings

its own internal conditions with it, so that one might assert with equal right

that the myth is purely  psychological  and uses meteorological or

astronomical events merely as a means of expression. The whimsicality and

absurdity of many primitive myths often makes the latter explanation seem

far more appropriate than any other.

[326] The psychological point of departure for the  god-renewal is an

increasing split in the deployment of psychic energy, or libido. One half of

the libido is deployed in a Promethean direction, the other half in the

Epimethean. Naturally this split is a hindrance not only in society but also in

the individual. As a result, the vital optimum withdraws more and more

from the opposing extremes and seeks a middle way, which must naturally

be irrational and unconscious, just because the opposites are rational and

conscious. Since the middle position, as a function of mediation between

the opposites, possesses an irrational character and is still unconscious, it

appears projected in the form of a mediating god, a Messiah. In our moreprimitive, Western forms of religion—primitive because lacking insight—

the new bearer of life appears as a God or Saviour who, in his fatherly love

and solicitude or from his own inner resolve, puts an end to the division as

and when it suits him and for reasons we are not fitted to understand. The

childishness of this conception needs no stressing. The East  has for

thousands of years been familiar with this process and has founded on it a

psychological doctrine of salvation which  brings the way of deliverance

within man’s ken and capacity. Thus the religions of India and China, and

particularly Buddhism which combines the spheres of both, possess the

idea of a redemptive middle way of magical efficacy which is attainable by

means of a conscious attitude. The Vedic  conception is a conscious

attempt to find release from the pairs of opposites in order to reach the path

of redemption.    THE BRAHMANIC CONCEPTION OF THE

                    PROBLEM OF OPPOSITES

[327] The Sanskrit term for pairs of opposites in the psychological sense

is dvandva. It also means pair  (particularly man and woman), strife,

quarrel, combat, doubt. The pairs of opposites were ordained by the world-

creator. The Laws of Manu says:

36

Moreover, in order to distinguish actions, he separated merit from demerit,

and he caused the creatures to be affected by the pairs of opposites, such as

pain and pleasure.

As further pairs of opposites, the commentator Kulluka names desire and

anger, love and hate, hunger and thirst, care and folly, honour and disgrace.

The Ramayana says: “This world must suffer under the pairs of opposites for

ever.”

37 Not  to allow  oneself to  be influenced  by the  pairs of  opposites, but

to be nirdvandva (free, untouched by the opposites), to raise oneself above

them, is an essentially ethical task, because deliverance from the opposites

leads to redemption.

[328] In the following passages I give a series of examples: When by the

disposition [of his heart] he becomes indifferent to all objects, he obtains

eternal happiness both in this world and after death. He who has in this

manner gradually given up all attachments and is freed from all pairs of

opposites reposes in Brahman alone.

38

The Vedas speak of the three gunas; but do you, O Arjuna, be indifferent to

the three gunas, indifferent to the opposites, ever steadfast in courage.

39

Then [in deepest meditation, samadhi] comes the state of  being

untroubled by the opposites.

40

There he shakes off his good deeds and his evil deeds. His dear relatives

succeed to the good deeds; those not so dear, to the evil deeds. Then, just as

one driving a chariot looks down upon the two chariot wheels, so he looks

down upon day and night, so upon good deeds and evil deeds, and upon all

the pairs of opposites. Being freed from good and from evil, the knower of

Brahman enters into Brahman.41

One entering into meditation must be a master over anger, attachment to

the world, and the desires of the senses, free from the pairs of opposites,

void of self-seeking, empty of expectation.

42

Clothed with dust, housed under the open sky, I will make my lodging at the

root of a tree, surrendering all things loved as  well as unloved, tasting

neither grief nor pleasure, forfeiting  blame and praise alike, neither

cherishing hope, nor offering respect, free from the opposites, with neither

fortune nor belongings.

43

He who remains the same in living as in dying, in fortune as in misfortune,

whether gaining or losing, loving or hating, will be liberated. He who

covets nothing and despises nothing, who is free from the opposites, whose

soul knows no passion, is in every way liberated. … He who does neither

right nor wrong, renouncing the merit and demerit acquired in former lives,

whose soul is tranquil when the bodily elements vanish away, he will be

liberated.

44

A thousand years I have enjoyed the things of sense, while still the craving

for them springs up unceasingly. These I will therefore renounce, and direct

my mind upon Brahman; indifferent to the opposites and free from self-

seeking, I will roam with the wild.

45

Through forbearance towards all creatures, through the  ascetic life,

through self-discipline and freedom from desire, through the vow and the

blameless life, through equanimity and endurance of the opposites, man will

partake of the bliss of Brahman, which is without qualities.

46

Free from pride and delusion, with the evils of attachment  conquered,

faithful always to the highest Atman, with desires extinguished, untouched

by the opposites of pain  and  pleasure, they go, undeluded, towards that

imperishable place. 47

[329] As is clear from these quotations, it is external opposites, such as

heat and cold, that must first be denied participation in the psyche, and

then extreme fluctuations of emotion, such as love and hate. Fluctuations of

emotion are, of course, the constant concomitants of all psychic opposites,and hence of all conflicts of ideas, whether moral or otherwise. We know

from experience that the emotions thus aroused increase in proportion as

the exciting factor affects the individual as a whole. The Indian purpose is

therefore clear: it wants to free the individual altogether from the opposites

inherent in human nature, so that he can attain a new life in Brahman,

which is the state of redemption and at the same time God. It is an irrational

union of opposites, their final overcoming. Although Brahman, the world-

ground and world-creator, created the opposites, they must nevertheless be

cancelled out in it again, for otherwise it would not amount to a state of

redemption. Let me give another series of examples:

Braham is sat and asat, being and non-being, satyam and

asatyam, reality and irreality.

48

There are two forms of Brahman: the formed and the formless, the mortal

and the immortal, the stationary and the  moving, the actual and the

transcendental.

49

That Person, the maker of all things, the great Self, seated forever in the

heart of man, is perceived by the heart, by the thought, by the mind; they

who know that become immortal. When there is no darkness [of ignorance]

there is neither day nor night, neither being nor not-being.

50

In the imperishable, infinite, highest Brahman, two things are  hidden:

knowing and not-knowing. Not-knowing perishes, knowing is immortal; but

he who controls both knowing and not-knowing is another.

51

That Self, smaller than small, greater than great, is hidden in the heart of

this creature here. Man becomes free from desire and free from sorrow

when by the grace of the Creator he beholds the glory of the Self. Sitting

still he walks afar; lying down he goes every where. Who but I can know the

God who rejoices and rejoices not?

52

Unmoving, the One is swifter than the mind. Speeding ahead, it outruns the

gods of the senses. Past others running, it goes standing.

…

It moves. It moves not. Far, yet near.

Within all,Outside all.

53

Just as a falcon or an eagle, after flying to and fro in space, wearies, and

folds its wings, and drops down to its eyrie, so this Person (purusha)

hastens to that state where, asleep, he desires no desires and sees no dream.

This, verily, is that form of his which is beyond desire, free from evil,

without fear. As a man in the embrace of a beloved woman knows nothing of

a without and within, so this Person, in the embrace of the knowing Self,

knows nothing of a without and within. This, verily, is that form of his in

which all desire is satisfied, Self his sole desire, which is no desire, without

sorrow.

An ocean of seeing, one without a second, he becomes whose  world is

Brahman. … This is man’s highest achievement, his greatest wealth, his final

goal, his utmost joy.

54

That which moves, that which flies and yet stands still, That which breathes

yet draws no breath, that which closes the eyes,

That, many-formed, sustains the whole earth, That, uniting, becomes One

only.

55

[330] These quotations show that Brahman is the union and dissolution of all

opposites, and at the same time stands outside them as an irrational factor.

It is therefore wholly beyond cognition and comprehension. It is a divine

entity, at  once the self (though to a lesser degree than the analogous

Atman concept) and a definite psychological state characterized by isolation

from the flux of affects. Since suffering is an affect, release from affects

means deliverance. Deliverance from the flux of affects, from the tension of

opposites, is synonymous with the way of redemption that gradually leads to

Brahman. Brahman  is thus not only a state but also a process, a durée

créatrice. It  is therefore not surprising that it is expressed in the

Upanishads by means of the symbols I have termed libido symbols.

56 In the following section I give some examples of these.    THE BRAHMANIC CONCEPTION OF THE

                          UNITING SYMBOL

[331] When it is said that Brahman was first born in the East, it means

that each day Brahman is born in the East like yonder sun.

57

Yonder man in the sun is Parameshtin, Brahman, Atman.

58

Brahman is a light like the sun.

59

As to that Brahman, it is yonder burning disk.

60

First was Brahman born in the East.

From the horizon the Gracious One appears in splendour;

He illumines the forms of this world, the deepest, the highest,

He is the cradle of what is and is not.

Father of the luminaries, begetter of the treasure, He entered many-formed

into the spaces of the air. They glorify him with hymns of praise,

Making the youth that is Brahman increase by Brahman.

61

Brahman brought forth the gods, Brahman created the world.

62

[332] In this last passage, I have italicized certain  characteristic points

which make it clear that Brahman is not only the producer but the produced,

the ever-becoming. The epithet “Gracious One” (vena), here bestowed on

the sun, is elsewhere applied to the seer who is endowed with the divine

light, for, like the Brahman-sun, the mind of the seer traverses “earth and

heaven contemplating Brahman.”

63 The intimate connection, indeed identity, between the divine being and

the self (Atman) of man is generally known. I give an example from the

Atharva Veda:

The disciple of Brahman gives life to both worlds. In him all the gods are of

one mind.

He contains and sustains earth and heaven, His tapas is food even for his

teacher.

To the disciple of Brahman there come, to visit him, Fathers and gods, singly

and in multitudes,And he nourishes all the gods with his tapas.

64

[333] The disciple of Brahman is himself an incarnation of  Brahman,

whence it follows that the essence of Brahman is identical with a definite

psychological state.

The sun, set in motion by the gods, shines unsurpassed yonder.

From it came the Brahma-power, the supreme Brahman, And all the gods, and

what makes them immortal.

The disciple of Brahman upholds the splendour of Brahman,

Interwoven in him are the hosts of the gods.

65

[334] Brahman is also prana, the breath of life and the cosmic principle;

it is vayu, wind, which is described in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad (3,

7) as “the thread by which this world and the other world and all things are

tied together, the Self, the inner controller, the immortal.”

He who dwells in man, he who dwells in the sun, are the same.

66

Prayer of the dying: The face of the Real

Is covered with a golden disk. Open it, O sun,

That we may see the nature of the Real.

…

Spread thy rays, and gather them in! The light which is thy fairest form,

I see it.

That Person who dwells yonder, in the sun, is myself. May my breath go to

the immortal wind

When my body is consumed to ash.

67

And this light which shines above this heaven, higher than all, on top of

everything, in the highest world, beyond which there are no other worlds,

this same is the light which is in man. And of this we have tangible proof,

when we perceive by touch the heat here in the body.

68

As a grain of rice, or a grain of barley, or a grain of millet, or the kernel of a

grain of millet, is this golden Person in the heart, like a flame without

smoke, greater than the earth, greater than the sky, greater than space,

greater than all these  worlds. That is the soul of all creatures, that is

myself. Into that I shall enter on departing hence.69

[335] Brahman is conceived in the Atharva Veda as the  vitalistic-

principle, the life force, which fashions all the organs and their respective

instincts:

Who planted the seed within him, that he might spin the  thread of

generation? Who assembled within him the powers of the mind, gave him

voice and the play of features?

70

[336] Even man’s strength comes  from  Brahman.  It  is  clear from these

examples, which could be multiplied  indefinitely, that the Brahman

concept, by virtue of all its attributes and symbols, coincides with that of

a dynamic or  creative principle which I have termed libido. The word

Brahman means prayer, incantation,  sacred speech, sacred  knowledge

(veda), holy life, the sacred caste (the Brahmans), the Absolute. Deussen

stresses the prayer connotation as being especially characteristic.

71 The word derives from barh (cf. L. farcire), ‘to swell,’

72

whence “prayer” is conceived as “the upward-striving will of man towards

the holy, the divine.” This derivation indicates a  particular psychological

state, a specific concentration of  libido, which through overflowing

innervations produces a general state of tension associated with the feeling

of

swelling. Hence, in common speech, one frequently uses  images like

“overflowing with emotion,” “unable to restrain oneself,” “bursting” when

referring to such a state. (“What filleth the heart, goeth out by the mouth.”)

The yogi seeks to induce this concentration or accumulation of libido by

systematically withdrawing attention (libido) both from external objects and

from interior psychic states, in a word, from the opposites. The elimination

of sense-perception and the blotting out of conscious contents enforce a

lowering of consciousness (as in hypnosis) and an activation of the contents

of the unconscious, i.e., the primordial images, which, because of their

universality and immense antiquity,  possess a cosmic and suprahuman

character. This accounts for all those sun, fire, flame, wind, breath similes

that from  time immemorial have been symbols of the procreative and

creative power that moves the world. As I have made a special study of

these libido symbols in my book Symbols of Transformation, I need not

expand on this theme here.[337] The idea of a creative world-principle is a projected perception of the

living essence in man himself. In order to  avoid all vitalistic

misunderstandings, one would do well to regard this essence in the abstract,

as simply energy. On the  other hand, the hypostatizing of the energy

concept after the fashion of modern physicists must be rigorously rejected.

The concept of energy implies that of polarity, since a current of energy

necessarily presupposes two different states, or poles, without which there

can be no current. Every energic phenomenon (and there is no phenomenon

that is not energic) consists of pairs of opposites: beginning and end, above

and  below, hot and cold, earlier and later, cause and effect, etc.  The

inseparability of the energy concept from that of polarity also applies to the

concept of libido. Hence libido symbols,

whether mythological or speculative in origin, either present  themselves

directly as opposites or can be broken down into opposites. I have already

referred in my earlier work to this  inner splitting of libido, thereby

provoking considerable resistance, unjustifiably,

it seems to me, because the direct connection between a libido symbol and the

concept of polarity is sufficient justification in itself. We find this connection

also in the concept or symbol of Brahman. Brahman as a combination of

prayer and primordial creative power, the latter resolving itself into the

opposition of the sexes, occurs in a remarkable hymn of the Rig Veda

(10.31.6):

And this prayer of the singer, spreading afar,

Became the bull which existed before the world was. The gods are nurslings

of the same brood,

Dwelling together in Asura’s mansion. What was the wood, what was the tree,

Out of which heaven and earth were fashioned? These two stand fast and

never grow old,

They have sung praises to many a dawn and morning. There is no other thing

greater than he,

The bull, supporter of earth and heaven.

He makes his skin a filter purifying the rays, When as Surya his bay horses

bear him along.

As the arrow of the sun he illumines the broad earth,

As the wind scatters the mist he storms through the world. With Mitra and

Varuna he comes anointed with ghee,

As Agni in the firesticks he shoots out splendour. Driven to him, the cow oncebarren brought forth,

The moveless thing she created moved, pasturing freely.

She bore the son who was older than the parents.

73

[338] The polarity of the creative world principle is represented in another

form in the Shatapatha Brahmana (2.2.4):

In the beginning, Prajapati

74 was this world alone. He meditated: How can I propagate myself? He

    travailed, he practised tapas; then he begat Agni (fire) out of his mouth,

75 and because he begat him out of his mouth, Agni is a devourer of

  food.

Prajapati meditated: As a devourer of food I have begotten this

Agni out of myself, but there is nothing else beside myself that he may

devour. For the earth at that time  was quite barren, there were no herbs

and no trees, and this thought was heavy upon him.

Then Agni turned upon him with gaping maw. His own greatness spoke to

him: Sacrifice! Then Prajapati knew: My own greatness has spoken to me.

And he sacrificed.

Thereupon that rose up which shines yonder (the sun); thereupon that rose

up which purifies all things here (the wind). Thus Prajapati, by offering

sacrifice, propagated  himself, and at the same time saved himself from

death, who as Agni would have devoured him.

[339] Sacrifice always means the renunciation of a  valuable part of

oneself, and through it the sacrificer escapes  being devoured. In other

words, there is no transformation  into the opposite, but rather

equilibration and union, from which arises a new form of libido: sun and

wind. Elsewhere the Shatapatha Brahmana says that one half of Prajapati

is mortal, the other immortal.

76

[340] In the same way as he divides himself into bull and cow, Prajapati

also divides himself into the two principles manas (mind) and vac (speech):

This world was Prajapati alone, vac was his self, and vac his second self. He

meditated: This vac I will send forth, and she shall go hence and pervade all

things. Then he sent forth vac, and she went and filled the universe.

77

This passage is of especial interest in that speech is conceived as a creative,

extraverted movement of libido, a diastole in Goethe’s sense. There is afurther parallel in the following passage:

In truth Prajapati was this world, and with him was vac his second self. He

copulated with her; she conceived; she went forth out of him, and made

these creatures, and once again entered into Prajapati.

78

[341] In Shatapatha Brahmana 8.1.2, 9 the role attributed  to vac is a

prodigious one: “Truly vac is the wise Vishvakarman, for by vac was this

whole world made.” But at 1.4.5, 8–11 the question of primacy between

manas and vac is decided differently:

Now it happened that Mind and Speech strove for priority one with the other.

Mind said: I am better than you, for you speak nothing that I have not first

discerned. Then Speech said: I am better than you, for I announce what you

have discerned and make it known.

They went to Prajapati for judgment. Prajapati decided in favour of Mind,

saying to Speech: Truly Mind is better than you, for you copy what Mind

does and run in his tracks; moreover it is the inferior who is wont to imitate

his betters.

[342] These passages show that the principles into which the world-creator

divides himself are themselves divided.  They were at first contained in

Prajapati, as is clear from the following:

Prajapati desired: I wish to be many, I will multiply myself.  Then he

meditated silently in his Mind, and what was in his Mind became brihat

(song). He bethought himself: This embryo of me is hidden in my body,

through Speech I will bring it forth. Then he created Speech.

79

[343] This passage shows the two principles as psychological functions:

manas an introversion of libido begetting an inner product, vac a function of

exteriorization or extraversion. This brings us to another passage relating

to Brahman:

When Brahman had entered into that other world, he bethought himself:

How can I extend myself through these worlds? And he extended himself

twofold through these worlds, by Form and Name.

These two are the two monsters of Brahman; whoever knows  these two

monsters of Brahman, becomes a mighty monster himself. These are the

two mighty manifestations of Brahman.

80

[344] A little later, Form is defined as manas (“manas is  form, forthrough manas one knows it is this form”) and  Name as vac (“for

through vac one grasps the name”). Thus the two “mighty monsters” of

Brahman turn out to be mind and speech, two psychic functions by which

Brahman can “extend himself” through both worlds, clearly signifying the

function of “relationship.” The forms of things are  “apprehended” or

“taken in” by introverting through manas; names are given to things by

extraverting through vac. Both involve relationship and  adaptation to

objects as well as their assimilation. The two  “monsters” are evidently

thought of as personifications; this is indicated by their other name, yaksha

(‘manifestation’) for yaksha means much the same as a daemon or

superhuman  being. Psychologically, personification always denotes the

relative autonomy of the content personified, i.e., its splitting off from the

psychic hierarchy. Such contents cannot be  voluntarily reproduced; they

reproduce themselves  spontaneously,  or else withdraw  themselves from

consciousness in the same way.

81 A dissociation of this kind occurs, for instance, when an incompatibility

  exists between the ego and a particular complex. As we know, it is

  observed most frequently when the latter is a sexual complex, but other

  complexes can get split off too, for instance the power-complex, the

  sum of all those strivings and ideas aiming at the acquisition of personal

  power. There is, however, another form of dissociation, and that is the

  splitting off of the conscious ego, together with a  selected function,

  from the other components of the personality. This form of dissociation

  can be defined as an identification of the ego with a particular function

  or group of functions. It is very common in people who are too deeply

  immersed in one of their psychic functions and have differentiated it

  into their sole conscious means of adaptation.

[345] A good literary example of such a man is Faust at the beginning of the

tragedy. The other components of his personality approach him in the shape

of the poodle, and later as Mephistopheles. Although Mephistopheles, as is

perfectly  clear from many of his associations, also represents the sexual

complex, it would in my view be a mistake to explain him as a split-off

complex and declare that he is nothing but  repressed sexuality. This

explanation is too narrow, because  Mephistopheles is far more than

sexuality—he is also power; in fact, he is practically the whole life of

Faust, barring that part of it which is taken up with thinking and research.

The result of the pact with the devil makes this very evident. What undreamt-of possibilities of power unfold themselves before the rejuvenated Faust!

The correct explanation, therefore, would seem to be that Faust identified

with one function and got split off as Mephistopheles from his personality

as a whole. Subsequently, Wagner the thinker also gets split off from

Faust.

[346] A conscious capacity for one-sidedness is a sign of  the highest

culture, but involuntary one-sidedness, i.e., the inability to be anything but

one-sided, is a sign of barbarism. Hence the most one-sided differentiations

are found among semi-barbarous people—for instance, certain aspects of

Christian asceticism that are an affront to good taste, and  parallel

phenomena among the yogis and Tibetan Buddhists. For the barbarian, this

tendency to fall a victim to one-sidedness in one way or another, thus losing

sight of his  total personality, is a great and constant danger. The

Gilgamesh epic, for example, begins with this conflict. The one-sidedness

of the barbarian takes the form of daemonic compulsion; it has something

of the character of going  berserk or running amok. In all cases it

presupposes an atrophy of instinct that is not found in the true primitive, for

which reason he is in general still free from the one-sidedness of the cultural

barbarian.

[347] Identification with one particular function at once produces a tension

of opposites. The more compulsive the  one-sidedness, and the more

untamed the libido which streams off to one side, the more daemonic it

becomes. When a man is carried away by his uncontrolled, undomesticated

libido, he speaks of daemonic possession or of magical influences. In this

sense manas and vac are indeed mighty demons, since they work mightily

upon men. All things that produced powerful effects were once regarded

as gods or demons. Thus, among the Gnostics, the mind was personified as

the serpent-like Nous, and speech as Logos. Vac bears the same relation to

Prajapati as Logos to God. The sort of  demons that introversion and

extraversion may become is a daily experience for us psychotherapists. We

see in our patients and can feel in ourselves with what irresistible force the

libido streams inwards  or  outwards,  with  what  unshakable  tenacity an

introverted or extraverted attitude can take root. The description of manas

and vac as “mighty monsters of Brahman” is in complete accord with the

psychological fact that at the instant of its appearance the libido divides into

two streams, which as a rule alternate periodically but at times may appear

simultaneously in the form of a conflict, as an outward stream opposing aninward stream. The daemonic quality of the two movements lies in their

ungovernable nature and overwhelming power.  This  quality,  however,

makes itself felt only when the instinct of the primitive is already so stunted

as to prevent a natural and purposive counter-movement to one-sidedness,

and culture not sufficiently advanced for man to tame his libido to the point

where he can follow its introverting or extraverting movement of his own

free will and intention.THE UNITING SYMBOL AS THE PRINCIPLE

                OF DYNAMIC REGULATION

[348] In the foregoing passages from Indian sources we have followed the

development of a redemptive principle from the pairs of opposites and have

traced their origin to the same creative principle, thereby gaining an insight

into a regular psychological occurrence which was found to be compatible

with the concepts of modern psychology. The impression that this occurrence

is a regular one is confirmed by the Indian sources themselves, since they

identify  Brahman with rta. What is rta? Rta means established order,

regulation, destiny, sacred custom, statute, divine law, right,  truth.

According to the etymological evidence its root meaning is: ordinance,

(right) way, direction, course (to be followed). That which is ordained by

rta fills the whole world, but the particular manifestations of rta are in

those processes of nature which always remain constant and arouse the idea

of regular recurrence: “By the ordinance of rta the heaven-born dawn was

lighted.” “In obedience to rta” the Ancient Ones who order the world

“made the sun to mount into the heavens,” who himself is “the burning

countenance of rta.” Around the heavens circles the year, the twelve-spoked

wheel of rta that never ages. Agni is called the offspring of rta. In the

doings of man, rta operates as moral law, which ordains truth and the

straight way. “Whoso follows rta, finds a fair and thornless path to walk in.”

[349] In so far as they represent a magical repetition or re-enactment of

cosmic events, rta also figures in religious rites. As the rivers flow in

obedience to rta and the crimson dawn is set ablaze, so “under the harness

82 of rta” is the sacrifice kindled; on the path of rta, Agni offers sacrifice

  to the gods. “Free from magic, I invoke the gods; with rta I do my

  work, and shape my thought,” says the sacrificer. Although rta does not

  appear personified in the Vedas, according to Bergaigne

83 a suggestion of concrete existence undoubtedly attaches to it. Since rta

  expresses the direction of events, there are “paths of rta,” “charioteers

84 of rta,” “ships of rta,” and on occasion the gods appear as parallels. For

  instance, the same is said of rta as of Varuna, the sky-god. Mitra also,

  the ancient sun-god, is brought into relation with rta. Of Agni it is

  said: “Thou shalt become Varuna, if thou strivest after rta.”

85 The gods are the guardians of rta.86 Here are some of the most important associations:

Rta is Mitra, for Mitra is Brahman and rta is Brahman.

87

By giving the cow to the Brahmans, one gains all the worlds, for in her is

contained rta, Brahman, and tapas also.

88

Prajapati is named the first-born of rta

89

The gods followed the laws of rta.

90

He who has seen the hidden one (Agni), draws nigh to the streams of rta.

91

O wise one of rta, know rta! Bore for rta’s many streams.

92

[350] The “boring” refers to the worship of Agni, to whom this hymn is

dedicated. (Agni is here called “the red bull of rta.”) In the worship of

Agni, the fire obtained by boring is  used as a magic symbol of the

regeneration of life. Boring for the streams of rta obviously has the same

significance; the streams

of life rise to the surface again, libido is freed from its bonds. 93 The effect

produced by the ritual fire-boring, or by the recital of hymns, is naturally

regarded by believers as the magical effect of the object; in reality it is an

“enchantment” of the subject, an intensification of vital feeling, an increase

and release of life force, a restoration of psychic potential:

Though he [Agni] slinks away, the prayer goes straight to him. They [the

prayers] have led forth the flowing streams of rta.

94

[351] The revival of vital feeling, of this sense of streaming energy, is in

general compared to a spring gushing from its source, to the melting of the

iron-bound ice of winter in springtime, or to the breaking of a long drought by

rain.

95 The following passage takes up this theme:

The lowing milch-cows of rta were overflowing, their udders  full. The

streams, imploring from afar the favour of the gods, have broken through the

midst of the rock with their floods.

96

The imagery clearly suggests a state of energic tension, a damming up oflibido and its release. Rta appears here as the bestower of blessing in the

form of “lowing milch cows” and as the ultimate source of the released

energy.

[352] The aforementioned image of rain as a release of libido is borne out

in the following passage:

The mists fly, the clouds thunder. When he who is swollen with the milk

of rta is led on the straight path of rta, Aryaman, Mitra, and Varuna who

wanders over the earth, fill the leathern sack (= cloud) in the womb of the

lower (world?). 97

It is Agni, swollen with the milk of rta, who is likened to the lightning that

bursts forth from the massed clouds heavy with rain. Here again rta appears

as the actual source of energy, whence Agni also is born,  as  expressly

mentioned in  the Vedic Hymns.

98

They have greeted with shouts the streams of rta, which were hidden at the

birthplace of the god, at his seat. There did he  drink when he dwelt

dispersed in the womb of the waters.

99

[353] This confirms what we have said about rta as the source of libido

where the god dwells and whence he is  brought forth in the sacred

ceremonies. Agni is the positive manifestation of the latent libido; he is

accomplisher or fulfiller of rta, its “charioteer”; he harnesses the two

long-maned red mares of rta.

100 He even holds rta like a horse, by the bridle.

101 He brings the gods to mankind, their power and blessing; they represent

    definite psychological states in which the vital feelings and energies

    flow with greater freedom and joy. Nietzsche has captured this state in

    his verses:

You with your fiery lances Shatter the ice-bound soul of me, Till with high

hope it advances

Rushing and roaring into the sea.

102

[354] The following invocation echoes this theme:

May the divine gates, the increasers of rta, open themselves

… that the gods may come forth. May Night and Dawn … the young mothers

of rta, sit down together on the sacrificial grass.

103The analogy with the sunrise is unmistakable. Rta appears as the sun, since

it is from night and dawn that the young sun is born.

[355] There is no need, I think, of further examples to show that the concept

of rta is a libido-symbol like sun, wind, etc. Only, rta is less concretistic and

contains the abstract element of fixed direction and regularity, the idea of a

predetermined,  ordered path or process. It is, therefore, a kind of

philosophical libido symbol that can be directly compared with the Stoic

concept of heimarmene. For the Stoics heimarmene had the significance of

creative, primal heat, and at the same time it was a  predetermined, regular

process (hence its other meaning: “compulsion of the stars”).

104 Libido as psychic energy naturally has these attributes  too; the

concept of energy necessarily includes the idea of a regulated process, since

a process always flows from a higher potential to a lower. It is the same

with the libido concept, which signifies nothing more than the energy of the

life process. Its laws are the laws of vital energy. Libido as an energy

concept is a quantitative formula for the phenomena of  life, which are

naturally of varying intensity. Like physical energy, libido passes through

every conceivable transformation; we find ample evidence of this in the

fantasies of the unconscious and in myths. These fantasies are primarily self-

representations of energic transformation  processes, which follow their

specific laws and keep to a definite “path.” This path is the line or curve

representing the optimal discharge of energy and the corresponding result

in work. Hence it is simply the expression of flowing and self-manifesting

energy. The path is rta, the right way, the flow of vital energy or libido, the

predetermined course along  which  a  constantly self-renewing current is

directed. This path is also fate, in so far as a man’s fate depends on his

psychology. It is the path of our destiny and of the law of our being.

[356] It would be quite wrong to assert that such a direction or tendency is

nothing more than naturalism, meaning a  complete surrender to one’s

instincts. This presupposes that the instincts have a constant “downward”

tendency, and that  naturalism amounts to an unethical sliding down an

inclined plane. I have nothing against such an interpretation of naturalism,

but I am bound to observe that the man who is left to his own devices, and

has therefore every opportunity for sliding downwards, as for instance the

primitive, not only has a moral code but one which in the severity of its

demands is often considerably more exacting than our civilized morality. It

makes no difference if good and evil mean one thing for the primitive andanother for us; his naturalism leads to law-giving—that is the chief point.

Morality is not a misconception invented by some vaunting Moses on

Sinai, but something inherent in the laws of life and fashioned like a house or

a ship or any other cultural instrument. The natural flow of libido, this same

middle path, means complete obedience to the fundamental laws of human

nature,  and there can positively be no higher moral principle than

harmony with natural laws that guide the libido in the direction of life’s

optimum. The vital optimum is not to be  found in crude egoism, for

fundamentally man is so  constituted that the pleasure he gives to his

neighbour is something essential to him. Nor can the optimum be reached by

an unbridled craving for individualistic supremacy, because the collective

element in man is so powerful that his longing for fellowship would destroy

all pleasure in naked egoism. The optimum can be reached only through

obedience to the tidal laws of the libido, by which systole alternates with

diastole—laws which bring pleasure and the necessary  limitations of

pleasure, and also set us those individual life  tasks without whose

accomplishment the vital optimum can never be attained.

[357] If the attainment of the middle path consisted in a mere surrender

to instinct, as the bewailers of “naturalism”  suppose, the profoundest

philosophical speculation that the  human mind has ever known would

have no raison d’être. But, as we study the philosophy of the Upanishads,

the impression grows on us that the attainment of this path is not exactly the

simplest of tasks. Our Western superciliousness in the face of these Indian

insights is a mark of our barbarian nature, which has not the remotest

inkling of their extraordinary depth and astonishing psychological accuracy.

We are still so uneducated that we actually need laws from without, and a

task-master or Father above, to show us what is good and the right thing to

do. And because we are still such barbarians, any trust in the laws of

human nature seems to us a dangerous and unethical naturalism. Why is

this? Because under the barbarian’s thin veneer of culture the wild beast

lurks in readiness, amply justifying his fear. But the beast is not tamed by

locking it up in a cage. There is no morality without freedom. When the

barbarian lets loose the beast within him, that is not freedom but bondage.

Barbarism must first be vanquished before freedom can be won. This

happens, in principle, when the basic root and driving force of morality are

felt by the individual as constituents of his own nature and not as external

restrictions. How else is man to  attain this realization but through theconflict of opposites?        THE UNITING SYMBOL IN CHINESE

                                PHILOSOPHY

[358] The idea of a middle way between the opposites is to be found also in

China, in the form of tao. The concept of tao is usually associated with the

name of the philosopher Lao-tzu, born 604 B.C. But this concept is older

than the  philosophy of Lao-tzu. It is bound up with the ancient folk

religion of Taoism, the “way of Heaven,” a concept corresponding to the

Vedic rta. The meanings of tao are as follows: way, method, principle,

natural force or life force, the regulated processes of nature, the idea of the

world, the prime cause of all phenomena, the right, the good, the moral

order. Some translators even translate it as God, not without  some

justification, it seems to me, since tao, like rta, has a tinge of substantiality.

[359] I will first give a number of passages from the Tao Te Ching, Lao-tzu’s

classic:

Was Tao the child of something else? We cannot tell.

But as a substanceless image it existed before the Ancestor.

105

There was something formless yet complete, That existed before heaven and

earth; Without sound, without substance, Dependent on nothing, unchanging,

All pervading, unfailing,

One may think of it as the mother of all things under heaven. Its true name we

do not know;

“Way” is the name that we give it.

106

[360] In order to characterize its essential quality, Lao-tzu likens it to water:

The highest good is like that of water. The goodness of water is that it

benefits the ten thousand creatures; yet itself does not scramble, but is

content with the [low] places that all men disdain. It is this that makes

water so near to the Way.

107

The idea of a “potential” could not be better expressed. He that is without

desire sees its essence,

He that clings to desire sees only its outward form.

108

[361] The affinity with the fundamental Brahmanic ideas is unmistakable,

though this does not necessarily imply direct  contact. Lao-tzu was anentirely original thinker, and the primordial image underlying rta-brahman-

atman and tao is as universal as man, appearing in every age and among all

peoples as a primitive conception of energy, or “soul force,” or however else

it may be called.

He who knows the Always-so has room in him for everything;

He who has room in him for everything is without prejudice. To be without

prejudice is to be kingly;

To be kingly is to be of heaven; To be of heaven is to be in Tao.

Tao is forever, and he that possesses it, Though his body ceases, is not

destroyed.

109

[362] Knowledge of tao therefore has the same redeeming and uplifting

effect as the knowledge of brahman. Man becomes one with tao, with the

unending durée créatrice (if we may compare this concept of Bergson’s

with its older congener), for tao is also the stream of time. It is irrational,

inconceivable:

Tao is a thing impalpable, incommensurable.

110

For though all creatures under heaven are the products of [Tao as] Being,

Being itself is the product of [Tao as] Not-Being.

111

Tao is hidden and nameless.

112

It is obviously an irrational union of opposites, a symbol of what is and is

not.

The Valley Spirit never dies;

It is named the mysterious Female. And the door of the mysterious Female

Is the base from which heaven and earth sprang.

113

[363] Tao is the creative process, begetting as the father and bringing

forth as the mother. It is the beginning and end of all creatures.

He whose actions are in harmony with Tao becomes one with

Tao.

114

Therefore the perfected sage liberates himself from the opposites, having

seen through their connection with one  another and their alternation.

Therefore it is said:When your work is done, then withdraw. Such is heaven’s way.

115

He [the perfected sage] cannot either be drawn into friendship or repelled,

Cannot be benefited, cannot be harmed, Cannot be either raised or humbled.

116

[364] Being one with tao resembles the state of infancy: Can you keep the

unquiet physical soul from straying, hold

fast to the Unity, and never quit it?

Can you, when concentrating your breath, make it soft like that of a little

child?

117

He who knows the male, yet cleaves to what is female, Becomes like a ravine,

receiving all things under heaven; And being such a ravine,

He knows all the time a power that he never calls upon in vain.

This is returning to the state of infancy.

118

The impunity of that which is fraught with this power May be likened to that

of an infant.

119

[365] This psychological attitude is, as we know, an essential condition

for obtaining the kingdom of heaven, and  this in its turn—all rational

interpretations notwithstanding—is the central, irrational symbol whence the

redeeming effect comes. The Christian symbol merely has a more social

character  than  the  related  conceptions of  the East.  These  are  directly

connected with age-old dynamistic ideas of a magical power emanating from

people and things or—at a higher level of development—from gods or a

divine principle.

[366] According to the central concepts of Taoism, tao is divided into a

fundamental pair of opposites, yang and yin. Yang signifies warmth, light,

maleness; yin is cold, darkness, femaleness. Yang is also heaven, yin earth.

From the yang force arises shen, the celestial portion of the human soul, and

from the yin force comes kwei, the earthly part. As a microcosm, man is a

reconciler of the opposites. Heaven, man, and earth form the three chief

elements of the world, the san-tsai.

[367] The picture thus presented is an altogether primitive idea which we

find in similar forms elsewhere, as for instance in the West African myth

where Obatala and Odudua, the first parents (heaven and earth), lie togetherin a calabash until a son, man, arises between them. Hence man as a

microcosm uniting the world opposites is the equivalent of an irrational

symbol that unites the psychological opposites. This primordial image of

man is in keeping with Schiller’s definition of the symbol as “living form.”

[368] The division of the psyche into a shen (or hwan) soul and a kwei (or

p’o) soul is a great psychological truth. This Chinese conception is echoed

in the well-known passage from Faust:

Two souls, alas, are housed within my breast, And each will wrestle for the

mastery there. The one has passion’s craving crude for love, And hugs a

world where sweet the senses rage; The other longs for pastures fair above,

Leaving the murk for lofty heritage.

120

[369] The existence of two mutually antagonistic tendencies, both striving

to drag man into extreme attitudes and entangle him in the world, whether

on the material or spiritual level, sets him at variance with himself and

accordingly demands the existence of a counterweight. This is the “irrational

third,” tao. Hence the sage’s anxious endeavour to live in harmony with

tao, lest he fall into the conflict of opposites. Since tao is irrational, it is

not  something that can be got by the will, as Lao-tzu repeatedly

emphasizes. This lends particular significance to another  specifically

Chinese concept, wu-wei. Wu-wei means “not-doing” (which is not to be

confused with “doing  nothing”). Our rationalistic “doing,” which is the

greatness as well as the evil of our time, does not lead to tao.

[370] The aim of Taoist ethics, then, is to find deliverance from the cosmic

tension of opposites by a return to tao. In this  connection we must also

remember the “sage of Omi,” Nakae Toju,

121 an outstanding Japanese philosopher of the seventeenth century. Basing

himself on the teaching of the Chu-hi school,  which had migrated from

China, he established two principles, ri and ki. Ri is the world soul, ki is the

world stuff. Ri and ki are, however, the same because they are both attributes

of God and therefore exist only in him and through him. God is their union.

Equally, the soul embraces both ri and ki. Toju says of God: “As the

essence of the world, God embraces the world, but at the same time he is in

our midst and even in our bodies.” For him God is a universal self, while

the individual self is the “heaven” within us, something supra-sensible and

divine called ryochi. Ryochi is “God  within us” and dwells in every

individual. It is the true self. Toju distinguishes a true from a false self. Thefalse self is an acquired personality compounded of perverted beliefs. We

might define this false self as the persona, that general idea of ourselves

which we have built up from experiencing our effect upon the world around

us and its effect upon us. The persona is, in Schopenhauer’s words, how

one appears to oneself and the world, but not what one is. What one is, is

one’s individual self, Toju’s “true self” or ryochi. Ryochi is also called

“being alone” or “knowing alone,” clearly because it is a condition related to

the essence of the self, beyond all  personal judgments conditioned by

external experience. Toju conceives ryochi as the summum bonum, as “bliss”

(brahman is bliss, ananda). It is the light which pervades the world—a

further parallel with brahman, according to Inouye. It is love for mankind,

immortal, all-knowing, good. Evil comes from  the will (shades of

Schopenhauer!). Ryochi is the self-regulating function, the mediator and

uniter of the opposites, ri and ki; it is in fullest accord with the Indian idea of

the “wise old man who dwells in the heart.” Or as Wang Yang-ming, the

Chinese father of Japanese philosophy, says: “In every heart there dwells a

sejin (sage). Only, we do not believe it firmly enough, and therefore the

whole has remained buried.”

122

                                          * * *

[371] From

123 this point of view it is not so difficult to see what the primordial

image was that helped to solve the problem in Wagner’s Parsifal. Here

the suffering is caused by the tension of opposites represented by the Grail

and the power of Klingsor, who has taken possession of the holy spear.

Under the spell of Klingsor is Kundry, symbolizing the instinctive life-

force or libido that Amfortas lacks. Parsifal rescues the libido from the

state of restless, compulsive instinctuality, in the first place because he does

not succumb to Kundry, and in the second because he does not possess the

Grail. Amfortas has the Grail and suffers for it, because he lacks libido.

Parsifal has nothing of either, he is nirdvandva, free from the opposites, and

is therefore the redeemer, the bestower of healing and renewed vitality, who

unites the bright, heavenly,  feminine symbol of the Grail with the dark,

earthly, masculine symbol of the spear. The death of Kundry may be taken 

as  the  liberation of libido  from  its  naturalistic,  undomesticated form (cf.

the “bull’s shape,” par. 350, n. 93), which falls away as a lifeless husk,

while the energy bursts forth as a new stream of life in the glowing of theGrail.

[372] By his renunciation of the opposites (unwilling though this was, at

least in part), Parsifal caused a blockage of libido that created a new potential

and thus made a new  manifestation of energy possible. The undeniable

sexual symbolism might easily lead to the one-sided interpretation that the

union of spear and Grail merely signifies a release of sexuality. The fate of

Amfortas shows, however, that sexuality is not the point. On the contrary, it

was his relapse into a nature-bound, brutish attitude that was the cause of his

suffering and brought about the loss of his power. His seduction by Kundry

was a symbolic act, showing that it was not sexuality that dealt him his

wound so much as an attitude  of nature-bound compulsion, a supine

submission to the biological urge. This attitude expresses the supremacy of

the animal part of our psyche. The sacrificial wound that is destined for the

beast strikes the man who is overcome by the beast—for the sake of man’s

further development. The fundamental problem, as I have pointed out  in

Symbols of Transformation, is not sexuality per se, but the domestication of

libido, which concerns sexuality only so far  as it is one of the most

important and most dangerous forms of libidinal expression.

[373] If, in the case of Amfortas and the union of spear and Grail, only the

sexual problem is discerned, we get entangled in an insoluble contradiction,

since the thing that harms is also the thing that heals. Such a paradox is

true and permissible only when one sees the opposites as united on a higher

plane, when one understands that it is not a question of sexuality, either in

this form or in that, but purely a question of the attitude by which every

activity, including the sexual, is regulated. Once again I must emphasize

that the practical  problem in analytical psychology lies deeper than

sexuality and its repression. The latter point of view is no doubt very

valuable in explaining the infantile and therefore morbid part of the psyche,

but as an explanatory principle for the whole of  the psyche it is quite

inadequate. What lies behind sexuality or the power instinct is the attitude

to sexuality or to power. In so far as an attitude is not merely an intuitive

(i.e.,  unconscious and spontaneous) phenomenon but also a  conscious

function, it is, in the main, a view of life. Our  conception of all

problematical things is enormously influenced, sometimes consciously but

more often unconsciously, by certain collective ideas that condition our

mentality. These collective ideas are intimately bound up with the view of life

and the world of the past centuries or epochs.  Whether or not we areconscious of this dependence has  nothing to do with it, since we are

influenced by these ideas through the very air we breathe. Collective ideas

always have  a religious character, and a philosophical idea becomes

collective only when it expresses a primordial image. Their  religious

character derives from the fact that they express the  realities of the

collective unconscious and are thus able to release its latent energies. The

great problems of life, including of course sex, are always related to the

primordial  images of the collective unconscious. These images are

balancing or compensating factors that correspond to the problems which life

confronts us with in reality.

[374] This is no matter for astonishment, since these images are deposits of

thousands of years of experience of the  struggle for  existence and for

adaptation. Every great experience in life, every profound conflict, evokes

the  accumulated treasure of these images and brings about their  inner

constellation. But they become accessible to consciousness only when the

individual possesses so much self-awareness and power of understanding

that he also reflects on what he experiences instead of just living it blindly.

In the latter event he actually lives the myth and the  symbol without

knowing it.        THE RELATIVITY OF THE SYMBOL        THE WORSHIP OF WOMAN AND THE

                    WORSHIP OF THE SOUL

[375] The Christian principle which unites the opposites is the worship of

God, in Buddhism it is the worship of the self (self-development), while in

Spitteler and Goethe it is the worship of the soul symbolized by the

worship of woman.  Implicit in this categorization is the modern

individualistic principle on the one hand, and on the other a primitive poly-

daemonism which assigns to every race, every tribe, every family, every

individual its specific religious principle.

[376] The medieval background of Faust has a quite special significance

because there actually was a medieval element that presided over the birth

of modern individualism. It began, it seems to me, with the worship of

woman, which  strengthened the man’s soul very considerably as a

psychological factor, since the worship of woman meant worship of the

soul. This is nowhere more beautifully and  perfectly expressed than in

Dante’s Divine Comedy.

[377] Dante is the spiritual knight of his lady; for her sake he embarks on

the adventure of the lower and upper worlds. In this heroic endeavour her

image is exalted into the heavenly, mystical figure of the Mother of God—a

figure  that  has detached itself from the object and become the

personification of a purely psychological factor, or rather, of  those

unconscious contents whose personification I have termed the anima. Canto

XXXIII of the Paradiso expresses this culminating point of Dante’s psychic

development in the prayer of St. Bernard:

O Virgin Mother, daughter of thy Son, Humbler and more exalted than all

others, Predestined object of the eternal will! Thou gavest such nobility to

man

That He who made mankind did not disdain To make Himself a creature of

His making.

Verses 22–27, 29–33, 37–39 also allude to this development:

This man, who from the nethermost abyss Of all the universe, as far as here,

Has seen the spiritual existences,

Now asks thy grace, so thou wilt grant him strength That he may with his eyes

uplift himself

Still higher toward the ultimate salvation.

…I… proffer to thee

All my prayers—and pray they may suffice— That thou wilt scatter from him

every cloud Of his mortality, with thine own prayers,

So that the bliss supreme may be revealed.

…

May thy protection quell his human passions! Lo, Beatrice and many a

blessed soul

Entreat thee, with clasped hands, to grant my wish!

124

[378] The very fact that  Dante speaks here through the mouth of St.

Bernard is an indication of the transformation and exaltation of his own

being. The same transformation also happens to Faust, who ascends from

Gretchen to Helen and from Helen to the Mother of God; his nature is

altered by  repeated figurative deaths (Boy Charioteer, homunculus,

Euphorion), until finally he attains the highest goal as Doctor Marianus. In

that form Faust utters his prayer to the Virgin Mother:

Pavilioned in the heaven’s blue, Queen on high of all the world, For the holy

sight I sue,

Of the mystery unfurled. Sanction what in man may move Feelings tender and

austere,

And with glow of sacred love Lifts him to thy presence near. Souls

unconquerable rise

If, sublime, thou will it;

Sinks that storm in peaceful wise If thy pity still it.

Virgin, pure in heavenly sheen, Mother, throned supernal, Highest birth, our

chosen Queen, Godhead’s peer eternal.

…

O contrite hearts, seek with your eyes The visage of salvation;

Blissful in that gaze, arise, Through glad regeneration. Now may every pulse

of good Seek to serve before thy face, Virgin, Queen of Motherhood,

Keep us, Goddess, in thy grace.

125

[379] We might also mention in this connection the symbolic attributes of the

Virgin in the Litany of Loreto:

Mater amabilis Lovable Mother

Mater admirabilis Wonderful Mother Mater boni consilii Mother of good

counsel Speculum justitiae Mirror of justiceSedes sapientiae Seat of wisdom

Causa nostrae laetitiae Cause of our gladness Vas spirituale Vessel of the

spirit

Vas honorabile Vessel of honour

Vas insigne devotionis Noble vessel of devotion Rosa mystica Mystical rose

Turris Davidica Tower of David

Turris eburnea Tower of ivory

Domus aurea House of gold

Foederis arca Ark of the covenant

Janua coeli       Gate of heaven

Stella matutina     Morning star

                                          126

[380] These attributes reveal the functional significance of  the Virgin

Mother image: they show how the soul-image (anima) affects the conscious

attitude. She appears as a vessel of devotion, a source of wisdom and renewal.

[381] We find this characteristic transition from the worship of woman to

the worship of the soul in an early Christian document, the Shepherd of

Hermas, who flourished about A.D. 140. This book, written in Greek,

consists of a  number of visions and revelations describing the

consolidation of the new faith. The book, long regarded as canonical, was

nevertheless rejected by the Muratori Canon. It begins as follows:

The man who reared me sold me to a certain Rhoda in Rome. After many

years, I made her acquaintance again and began to love her as a sister. One

day I saw her bathing in the Tiber, and gave her my hand and helped her

out of the water. When I saw her beauty I thought in my heart: “How happy

I would be if I had a wife of such beauty and distinction.” This was my

only thought, and no other, no, not one.

127

[382] This experience was the starting-point for the visionary episode that

followed. Hermas had apparently served Rhoda as a slave; then, as often

happened, he obtained his freedom, and met her again later, when, probably

as much from gratitude as from delight, a feeling of love stirred in his heart,

though so far as he was aware it had merely the character of brotherly love.

Hermas was a Christian, and moreover, as the text subsequently reveals, he

was at that time already the father of a family, circumstances which would

readily explain the repression of the erotic element. Yet the  peculiar

situation, doubtless provocative of many problems, was all the more likelyto bring the erotic wish to consciousness. It is, in fact, expressed quite

clearly in the thought that he would have liked Rhoda for a wife, though, as

Hermas is at pains to emphasize, it is confined to this simple statement since

anything more explicit and more direct instantly fell under a moral ban and

was repressed. It is abundantly clear from what follows that this repressed

libido wrought a powerful transformation in his unconscious, for it imbued

the soul-image with life and brought about a spontaneous manifestation:

128

After a certain time, as I journeyed unto Cumae, praising God’s creation

in its immensity, beauty, and power, I grew heavy with sleep. And a spirit

caught me up, and led me away through a pathless region where a man may

not go. For it was a place full of crevices and torn by water-courses. I made

my passage over the river and came upon even ground, where I  threw

myself upon my knees, and prayed to God, confessing my sins. While I thus

prayed, the heavens opened and I beheld that lady for whom I yearned, who

greeted me from heaven and said: “Hail to thee, Hermas!” While my

eyes dwelt upon her, I spake, saying: “Mistress, what doest thou there?”

And she answered: “I was taken up, in order to charge thee with thy sins

before the Lord.” I said unto her: “Dost

thou now accuse me?” “No,” said she, “yet hearken now unto the words I

shall speak unto thee. For God, who dwelleth in heaven, and hath created

the existing out of the non-existing, and hath magnified it and brought it to

increase for the sake of His Holy Church, is wroth with thee, because thou

has sinned against me.” I answered and spake unto her: “How have I

sinned against thee? When and where spake I ever an evil word unto

thee? Have I not looked upon thee as a goddess? Have I not ever treated

thee like a sister? Wherefore, O lady, dost thou falsely charge me with such

evil and unclean things?” She smiled and said unto me: “The desire of

sin arose in thy heart. Or is it not indeed a sin in thine eyes for a just man to

cherish a sinful desire in his heart? Verily is it a sin,” said she, “and a great

one. For the just man striveth after what is just.”

[383] Solitary wanderings are, as we know, conducive to daydreaming and

reverie. Presumably Hermas, on his way to Cumae, was thinking of his

mistress; while thus engaged, the repressed erotic fantasy gradually pulled

his libido down into the unconscious. Sleep overcame him, as a result of this

lowering of the intensity of consciousness, and he fell into a somnambulant

or ecstatic state, which itself was nothing but a particularly intense fantasythat completely captivated his conscious mind. It is significant that what

then came to him was not an erotic fantasy; instead he is transported as it

were to another land, represented in fantasy as the crossing of a river and

a journey through a pathless country. The unconscious appears to him as an

upper world in which events take place and men move about exactly as in

the real world. His mistress appears before him not in an erotic fantasy but

in “divine” form, seeming

to him like a goddess in heaven. The repressed erotic  impression has

activated the latent primordial image of the goddess, i.e., the archetypal

soul-image. The erotic  impression has evidently become united in the

collective unconscious with archaic residues which have preserved from time

immemorial the imprint of vivid impressions of the  nature of woman—

woman as mother and woman as desirable  maid. Such impressions have

immense power, as they release forces, both in the child and in the adult

man, which fully merit the attribute “divine” i.e., something irresistible

and  absolutely compelling. The recognition of these forces as  daemonic

powers can hardly be due to moral repression, but rather to a self-regulation

of the psychic organism which  seeks by this change of front to guard

against loss of equilibrium. For if, in face of the overwhelming might of

passion, which puts one human being wholly at the mercy of another, the

psyche succeeds in building up a counterposition so that, at the height of

passion, the boundlessly desired object is unveiled as an idol and man is

forced to his knees before the divine image, then the psyche has delivered

him from the curse of the object’s spell. He is restored to himself again and,

flung back on himself, finds himself once more between gods and men,

following his own path and subject to his own laws. The awful fear that

haunts the primitive, his terror of everything impressive, which he at once

senses as magic, as though it were charged with magical power, protects

him in a purposive way against that most dreaded of all possibilities, loss of

soul, with its inevitable sequel of sickness and death.

[384] Loss of soul amounts to a tearing loose of part of one’s nature; it is

the disappearance and emancipation of a  complex, which thereupon

becomes a tyrannical usurper of

consciousness, oppressing the whole man. It throws him off course and

drives him to actions whose blind one-sidedness inevitably leads to self-

destruction. Primitives are notoriously  subject to such phenomena as

running amok, going berserk, possession, and the like. The recognition ofthe daemonic character of passion is an effective safeguard, for it at once

deprives the object of its strongest spell, relegating its source to the world of

demons, i.e., to the unconscious, whence the  force of passion actually

springs. Exorcistic rites, whose aim is to bring back

the soul and release it from enchantment, are similarly effective in causing

the libido to flow back into the unconscious.

[385] This mechanism obviously worked in the case of  Hermas. The

transformation of Rhoda into a divine mistress deprived the actual object of

her provocative and destructive power and brought Hermas under the law of

his own soul and its collective determinants. Thanks to his abilities and

connections, Hermas no doubt  had a considerable share in the  spiritual

movements of his age. At that very time his brother  Pius occupied the

episcopal see at Rome. Hermas, therefore,  was probably qualified to

collaborate in the great task of his time to a greater degree than he, as a

former slave, may have consciously realized. No able mind could for long

have withstood the contemporary task of spreading Christianity, unless of

course the barriers and peculiarities of race assigned him a different function

in the great process of spiritual  transformation. Just as the external

conditions of life force a man to perform a social function, so the collective

determinants of the psyche impel him to socialize ideas and convictions. By

transforming a possible social faux pas into the service of his soul after

having been wounded by the dart

of passion, Hermas was led to accomplish a social task of a spiritual nature,

which for that time was surely of no small importance.

[386] In order to fit him for this task, it was clearly necessary that his soul

should destroy the last possibility of an erotic attachment to the object, as

this would have meant  dishonesty towards himself. By consciously

denying any erotic wish, Hermas merely demonstrated that it would be

more agreeable for him if the erotic wish did not exist, but it by no means

proved that he actually had no erotic intentions and fantasies. Therefore his

sovereign lady, the soul, mercilessly revealed to him the existence  of his

sin, thus  releasing him from his secret bondage to the object. As a

“vessel of devotion” she took over the passion that was on the point of being

fruitlessly lavished upon her. The last vestige of this passion had to be

eradicated if the contemporary task  was to be accomplished, and this

consisted in delivering man  from sensual bondage, from the state of

primitive participation mystique. For the man of that age this bondage hadbecome intolerable. The spiritual function had to be differentiated in order to

restore the psychic equilibrium.

All philosophical attempts to do this by achieving “equanimity,” most of

which concentrated on the Stoic doctrine, came to grief because of their

rationalism. Reason  can give a man equilibrium only if his reason is

already an equilibrating organ.  But  for how many  individuals and  at what

periods of history has it been that? As a rule, a man needs the opposite of

his actual condition to force him to find his place in the middle. For the

sake of mere reason he can  never forgo the sensuous appeal of the

immediate situation. Against the power and delight of the temporal he must

set the joy of the eternal, and against the passion of the sensual the ecstasy

of the spiritual. The undeniable reality of the one must be matched by the

compelling power of the other.

[387] Through insight into the actual existence of his erotic desire, Hermas

was able to acknowledge this metaphysical reality. The sensual libido that

had previously clung to the concrete object now passed to his soul-image

and invested it with the reality which the object had claimed exclusively for

itself. Consequently his soul could speak to good effect and successfully

enforce her demands.

[388] After his conversation with Rhoda, her image  vanishes and the

heavens close. In her stead there now appears an “old woman in shining

garments,” who informs Hermas that his erotic desire is a sinful and foolish

defiance of a venerable spirit, but that God is angry with him not so much

on that account as because he tolerates the sins of his family. In this adroit

fashion the libido is drawn away entirely from the erotic desire and in a

flash is directed to the social task. An especial refinement is that the soul has

discarded the image of Rhoda and taken on the appearance of an old woman,

thus allowing the erotic element to recede into the background. It is later

revealed to Hermas that this old woman is the Church; the concrete and

personal has resolved itself into an abstraction, and the idea acquires a reality

it had never before possessed. The old woman then reads to him from a

mysterious book attacking heathens and apostates, but whose exact meaning

he is unable to grasp. Subsequently we  learn that the book sets forth a

mission. Thus his sovereign lady presents him with his task, which as her

knight he is pledged to accomplish. Nor is the trial of virtue lacking. For,

not long after, Hermas has a vision  in which the old woman reappears,

promising to return about the fifth hour in order to explain the revelation.Whereupon Hermas betook himself into the country to the appointed place,

where he found a couch of ivory, set with a pillow and a cover of fine linen.

As I beheld these things lying there, I was sore amazed, and a quaking fell

upon me and my hair stood on end, and a dreadful fear befell me, because I

was alone in that place. But when I came once more to myself, I remembered

the glory of God and took new courage; I knelt down and again confessed

my sins unto God, as I had done before. Then she drew near with six young

men, the which also I had seen before, and stood beside me and listened

while I prayed and confessed my sins unto God. And she touched me and

said: “Hermas, have done with all thy prayers and the reciting of thy sins.

Pray also for righteousness, whereby thou mayest bear some of it with thee

to thy house.” And she raised me up by the hand and led me to the couch,

and said unto the young men: “Go and build!” And when the youths were

gone and we were alone, she said unto me: “Sit thee here!” I said unto

her: “Mistress, let the aged first be seated.” She said: “Do as I said unto thee

and be thou seated.” But, when I made as though to seat myself upon her

right hand, she motioned me with a gesture of the hand to be seated upon

her left.

As I wondered thereat, and was troubled, that I might not sit upon the right

side, she said unto me: “Why art thou grieved, Hermas? The seat upon the

right is for those who are already well-pleasing to God and have suffered for

the Name. But to thee there lacketh much before thou canst sit with them.

Yet remain as heretofore in thy simplicity, and thou shalt surely sit with

them, and thus shall it be for all who shall have accomplished the work

which those wrought, and endured what they suffered.”

129

[389] In this situation, it would have been very easy for Hermas to give

way to an erotic misunderstanding. The rendezvous has about it the feeling

of a trysting-place in a “beautiful and sequestered spot,” as he puts it. The

rich couch waiting there is a fatal reminder of Eros, so that the terror

which overcame Hermas at the sight of it is quite understandable. Clearly he

must fight vigorously against these erotic associations lest he fall into a

mood far from holy. He does not appear to have recognized the temptation

for what it was, unless perhaps it is tacitly admitted in the description of his

terror, a touch of honesty that came more easily to the man of that time than

to the man of today. For in that age man was more closely in touch with

his own nature than we are, and was therefore in a position to perceive hisnatural reactions directly and to recognize what they were. In the case of

Hermas, the confession of his sins may very well have been prompted by

unholy sensations. At all events, the ensuing question as to whether he

shall sit on the right hand or the left leads to a moral reprimand from his

mistress. For although signs  coming from the left were regarded as

favourable in the Roman auguries, the left side, for both the Greeks and

the Romans, was on the whole inauspicious, as the double meaning of the

word “sinister” shows. But the question raised here of left and right has

nothing to do with popular superstitions and is clearly  of Biblical origin, 

referring  to Matthew 25:33: “And he shall set the sheep on his right hand,

but the  goats  on the  left.” Because of their  guileless  and  gentle nature,

sheep are an allegory of the good, while the unruly and lascivious nature of

goats makes them an image of evil. By assigning him a seat on the left, his

mistress tactfully reveals to him her understanding of his psychology.

[390] When Hermas has taken his seat on her left, rather sadly, as he

records, his mistress shows him a visionary scene which unrolls itself before

his eyes. He beholds how the youths, assisted by ten thousand other men,

build a mighty tower whose stones fit together without seams. This seamless

tower, of indestructible solidity, signifies the Church, so Hermas is given to

understand. His mistress is the Church, and so is the tower. We have seen

already in the Litany of Loreto that the Virgin is named “tower of David”

and “tower of ivory.” The same or a similar association seems to be made

here. The tower undoubtedly has the meaning of something  solid and

secure, as in Psalm 61:4: “For thou hast been a shelter for me, and a

strong tower from the enemy.” Any resemblance to the tower of Babel

would involve an intense inner contradiction and must be excluded, but there

may nevertheless be echoes of it, since Hermas, in company with every

other thoughtful mind of that epoch, must have suffered  much from the

depressing spectacle of the ceaseless schisms and heretical disputes of the

early Church. Such an impression may even have been his main reason for

writing these confessions, an inference  supported by the fact that the

mysterious book that was revealed to him inveighed against heathens and

apostates. The same confusion of tongues that frustrated the building of the

tower of Babel almost completely dominated the Church in  the early

centuries, demanding desperate efforts on the part of the faithful to overcome

the chaos. Since Christendom at that time was far from being one flock under

one shepherd, it was  only natural that Hermas should long for the“shepherd,” the poimen, as well as for some solid and stable structure, the

“tower,” that would unite in one inviolable whole the elements gathered

from the four winds, the mountains and seas.

[391] Earth-bound desire, sensuality  in all its forms, attachment to the

lures of this world, and the incessant dissipation of psychic energy in the

world’s prodigal variety, are the main obstacle to the development of a

coherent and purposive attitude. Hence the elimination of this obstacle must

have been one of the most important tasks of the time. It is therefore not

surprising that, in the Shepherd of Hermas, it is the mastering of this task

that is unfolded before our eyes. We have already seen how the original

erotic stimulus and the  energy it released were canalized into the

personification of  the unconscious complex, becoming the figure of

Ecclesia,  the old  woman, whose visionary appearance demonstrates the

spontaneity of the underlying complex. We learn, moreover, that the old

woman now turns into a tower, since the tower is also the Church. This

transformation is unexpected, because the connection between the tower

and the old woman is not immediately apparent. But the attributes of the

Virgin in the Litany of Loreto will put us on the right track, for there we

find, as already mentioned, the tower associated with the Virgin Mother.

This attribute has its source in the Song of Songs 4:4: “Thy neck is like

the tower of David builded for an armoury,” and 7:4: “Thy neck is a tower

of ivory.” Similarly 8:10: “I am a wall, and my breasts like towers.”

[392] The Song of Songs, as we know, was originally a  love poem,

perhaps a wedding song, which was denied canonical recognition even by

Jewish scholars until very late. Mystical interpretation, however, has always

loved  to  conceive the bride as Israel and the bridegroom as Jehovah,

impelled by a sound instinct to turn even erotic feelings into a relationship

between God and the chosen people. Christianity appropriated the Song of

Songs for the same reason, interpreting the bridegroom as Christ and the

bride as the Church. To the psychology of the Middle Ages this analogy

had an extraordinary appeal, and it inspired the quite unabashed  Christ-

eroticism of the Christian mystics, some of the best examples of which

are supplied by Mechtild of Magdeburg.  The Litany of Loreto was

conceived in this spirit. It derived certain attributes of the Virgin directly

from the Song of Songs, as in the case of the tower symbol. The rose, too,

was used as one of her attributes even at the time of the Greek Fathers,

together with the lily, which likewise appear in the Song of Songs (2:1): “Iam the rose of Sharon, and the lily of the valleys.” Images much used in the

medieval hymns are  the “enclosed garden” and the “sealed fountain”

(Song of Songs 4:12: “A garden inclosed is my sister, my spouse; a spring

shut up, a fountain sealed”). The unmistakably erotic nature of these images

was explicitly accepted as such by the Fathers. Thus St. Ambrose interprets

the “enclosed garden” as virginity.

130 In the same way, he

131 compares Mary with the ark of bulrushes in which Moses was found:

By the ark of bulrushes is meant the Blessed Virgin. Therefore his mother

prepared the ark of bulrushes wherein  Moses was placed, because the

wisdom of God, which is the Son of God, chose blessed Mary the virgin and

formed in her womb a man to whom he might become joined in unity of

person.

132

[393] St. Augustine employs the simile (frequently used by later writers) of

the thalamus, bridal chamber, for Mary, again in an expressly anatomical

sense: “He chose for himself a  chaste bridal chamber, where the

bridegroom was joined to the bride,”

133 and: “He issued forth from the bridal chamber, that is  from the

virginal womb.”

134

[394] The interpretation of vas as the womb may therefore  be taken as

certain when St. Ambrose says in confirmation of St. Augustine: “Not of

earth but of heaven did he choose for himself this vessel, through which he

should descend to sanctify the temple of shame.”

135 The designation (vessel) is not uncommon with the Greek Fathers.

    Here again there is probably an allusion to the Song of Songs, for

    although the designation vas does not appear in the Vulgate text, we

    find instead the image of the goblet and of drinking (7:2): “Thy navel

    is like a round goblet, which wanteth not liquor; thy belly is like a

    heap of wheat set about with lilies.” The meaning of the first sentence

    has a parallel in the Meisterlieder der Kolmarer Handschrift, where

    Mary is compared with the widow’s cruse of oil (I Kings:17: 9ff.):

    “… Zarephath in the land of Zidon, whither Elijah was sent to a widow

    who should feed him; my body is fitly compared with hers, for God sent

    the prophet unto me, to change for us our time of famine.”136 With regard to the second, St. Ambrose says: “In the womb of the

    virgin grace increased like a heap of wheat and the flowers of the lily,

    even as it generated the grain of wheat and the lily.”


137 In Catholic sources

138 very far-fetched passages are drawn into this vessel symbolism, as for

    instance Song of Songs 1:1 (DV): “Let him kiss me with the kiss of his

    mouth: for thy breasts are better than wine,” and even Exodus 16:33:

    “Take a pot, and put an omer full of manna therein, and lay it up

    before the Lord, to be kept for your generations.”

[395] These associations are so contrived that they argue against rather

than for the Biblical origin of the vessel symbolism. In favour of an extra-

Biblical source is the fact that the medieval hymns to Mary brazenly

borrowed their imagery from everywhere, so that everything that was in any

way precious became associated with her. The fact that the vessel symbol

is very old—it stems from the third to fourth  century—is no argument

against its secular origin, since even the Fathers had a weakness for non-

Biblical, pagan imagery; for instance Tertullian,

139

Augustine,

140 and others compared the Virgin with the undefiled earth  and the

    unploughed field, not without a sidelong glance at the  Kore of the

      mysteries.

141 Such comparisons were based on pagan models, as Cumont has shown

    to be the case with the ascension of Elijah  in the early medieval

    illustrated manuscripts, which keep closely to the Mithraic prototype.

    In many of its rites the Church followed the pagan model, not least

    in making the birth of Christ coincide with the birth of the sol invictus,

    the invincible sun. St. Jerome compares the Virgin with the sun as the

    mother of the light.

[396] These non-Biblical allegories can have their source only in pagan

conceptions still current at that time. It is  therefore only just, when

considering the vessel symbol, to  call to mind the well-known and

widespread Gnostic symbolism of the vessel. A great many incised gems

have been preserved from that time which bear the symbol of a pitcher

with remarkable winged bands, at once recalling the  uterus with theligamenta lata. This vessel is called the “vase of sins,”

142 
    in contrast  with  the  hymns  to  Mary  in  which she  is extolled as the

    “vessel of virtue.” King


143 contests the former interpretation as arbitrary and agrees with Köhler

144 that the cameo-image (principally Egyptian) refers to the pots on the

      water-wheels that drew up water from the Nile to irrigate the fields;

    this would also explain the peculiar bands which clearly served for

    fastening the pot to the water-wheel. The fertilizing function of the pot

    was, as King notes, expressed as the “fecundation of Isis by the seed

    of Osiris.” Often there is on the vessel a winnowing basket, probably

    with reference to the “mystical winnowing basket of  Iakchos,” or

    λîκνoν, the figurative birthplace of the grain of wheat, symbolizing

    fertility.

145 There used to be a Greek marriage ceremony in which a winnowing

    basket filled with fruit was placed on the head of the bride, an obvious

    fertility charm.

[397] This interpretation of the vessel is supported by the ancient Egyptian

view that everything originated from the primal water, Nu or Nut, who

was also identified with the Nile or the ocean. Nu is written with three

pots, three water signs, and the sign for heaven. A hymn to Ptah-Tenen

says:

“Maker of grain, which cometh forth from him in his name Nu the Aged,

who maketh fertile the watery mass of heaven, and maketh to come forth the

water on the mountains to give life to men and women.”

146 Wallis Budge drew my attention to the fact that the uterus symbolism

    exists today in the southern hinterland of Egypt in the form of rain and

    fertility charms. Occasionally it still happens that the natives in the

    bush kill a woman and take out her uterus for use in magical rites.

147

[398] When one considers how strongly the Church  Fathers were

influenced by Gnostic ideas in spite of their resistance to these heresies,

148 it is not inconceivable that we have in the symbolism of the vessel a

    pagan relic that proved adaptable to Christianity, and this is all the

    more likely as the worship of Mary was itself a vestige of paganism

    which secured for the Christian  Church the heritage of the Magna    Mater, Isis, and other  mother goddesses. The image of the vas

    Sapientiae, vessel of  wisdom, likewise recalls its Gnostic prototype,

    Sophia.

[399] Official Christianity, therefore, absorbed certain Gnostic elements that

manifested themselves in the worship of woman and found a place for them

in an intensified worship of Mary. I have selected the Litany of Loreto as

an  example of this process of assimilation from a wealth of  equally

interesting material. The assimilation of these  elements to the Christian

symbol nipped in the bud the psychic culture of the man; for his soul,

previously reflected in the image of the chosen mistress, lost its individual

form of expression through this absorption. Consequently, any possibility of

an individual differentiation of the soul was lost

when it became repressed in the collective worship. Such losses generally

have unfortunate

consequences, and in this case they soon made themselves felt. Since the

psychic relation to woman was expressed in the collective worship of Mary,

the image of woman lost a value to which human beings had a natural right.

This value could find its natural expression only through individual choice,

and it sank into the unconscious when the individual form of expression

was replaced by a collective one. In the unconscious the image of woman

received an energy charge that activated the archaic and infantile dominants.

And since all unconscious contents, when activated by dissociated libido,

are projected upon external objects, the devaluation of the real woman was

compensated by daemonic traits. She no longer appeared as an object of

love, but as a persecutor or witch. The consequence of increasing Mariolatry

was the witch hunt, that indelible blot on the later Middle Ages.

[400] But this was not the only consequence. The splitting  off and

repression of a valuable progressive tendency resulted in a quite general

activation of the unconscious. This activation could find no satisfying

expression in collective  Christian symbols, for an adequate expression

always takes an individual form. Thus the way was paved for heresies and

schisms, against which the only defence available to the  Christian

consciousness was fanaticism. The frenzied horror of the Inquisition was the

product of over-compensated doubt,  which came surging up from the

unconscious and finally gave rise to one of the greatest schisms of the

Church—the Reformation.

[401] If I have dwelt rather longer on the symbolism of the vessel than myreaders might have expected, I have done so

for a definite reason, because I wanted to elucidate the  psychological

relations between the worship of woman and the legend of the Grail, which

was so essentially characteristic  of the early Middle Ages. The central

religious idea in this legend, of which there are numerous variants, is the

holy vessel, which, it must be obvious to everyone, is a thoroughly non-

Christian image, whose origin is to be sought in extra-canonical sources.

149 From the material I have cited, it seems to me a

genuine relic of Gnosticism, which either survived the extermination of

heresies because of a secret tradition, or  owed its revival to an

unconscious reaction against the domination of official Christianity. The

survival or unconscious revivification of the vessel symbol is indicative of a

strengthening of the feminine principle in the masculine psychology of that

time. Its symbolization in an enigmatic image must be interpreted as a

spiritualization of the  eroticism aroused by the worship of woman. But

spiritualization always means the retention of a certain amount of libido,

which would otherwise be immediately squandered in sexuality. Experience

shows that when the  libido is retained, one part of it flows into the

spiritualized expression, while the remainder sinks into the unconscious

and activates images that correspond to it, in this case the vessel symbol.

The symbol lives through the restraint imposed upon certain forms of

libido, and in turn serves to restrain these forms. The dissolution of the

symbol means a streaming off of libido along the direct path, or at any rate

an almost irresistible urge for its direct application. But the living symbol

exorcises this danger. A symbol loses its  magical or, if you prefer, its

redeeming power as soon as its liability to dissolve is recognized. To be

effective, a symbol must be by its very nature unassailable. It must be the

best

possible expression of the prevailing world-view, an unsurpassed container of

meaning; it must also be sufficiently remote from comprehension to resist all

attempts of the critical intellect to break it down; and finally, its aesthetic

form must appeal so convincingly to our feelings that no argument can

be raised against it on that score. For a certain time the Grail symbol clearly

fulfilled these requirements, and to this fact it owed its vitality, which, as

the example of Wagner shows, is still not exhausted today, even though our

age and our psychology strive unceasingly for its dissolution. 150

[402] Let us now recapitulate this rather lengthy discussion and see whatinsights have been gained. We began with the vision of Hermas, in which

he saw a tower being built. The old woman, who at first had declared

herself to be the Church, now explains that the tower is a symbol of the

Church. Her significance is thus transferred to the tower, and it is with this

that the whole remaining part of the text is concerned. For Hermas it is

only the tower that matters, and no longer the old woman, let alone Rhoda.

The detachment of libido from the real object, its concentration on the

symbol and canalization into a symbolic function, is complete. The idea of

a universal and undivided Church, expressed in the symbol of a seamless

and impregnable tower, has become an unshakable reality in the mind of

Hermas. The detachment of libido from the object transfers it into the

subject, where it activates the images lying dormant in the unconscious.

These images are archaic forms of expression which become symbols, and

these appear in their turn as equivalents of the  devalued objects. This

process is as old as mankind, for symbols may be found among the relics of

prehistoric man as well as among the most primitive human types living

today.

Symbol-formation, therefore,  must  obviously  be an extremely  important

biological function. As the symbol can come alive  only through the

devaluation of the object, it is evident that the purpose it serves is to deprive

the object of its value. If the object had an absolute value, it would be an

absolute determining factor for the subject and would abolish his freedom of

action absolutely, since even a relative freedom could not coexist with

absolute determination by the object. Absolute relation to the object is

equivalent to a complete  exteriorization of the conscious processes; it

amounts to an  identity of subject and object which would render all

cognition impossible. In a milder form this state still exists today among

primitives. The projections we so often encounter in practical analysis are

only residues of this original identity of subject and object.

[403] The elimination of cognition and conscious experience resulting from

such a state means a considerable  impairment of the capacity for

adaptation, and this weights the scales heavily against man, who is already

handicapped  by his natural  defencelessness and the helplessness of his

young. But it also produces a dangerous inferiority in the realm of affect,

because an identity of feeling with the object means, firstly, that any object

whatsoever can affect the subject to any degree, and secondly, any affect

on the part of the subject immediately includes and violates the object. Anincident in the life of a bushman may illustrate what I mean. A bushman had

a little son whom he loved with the tender monkey-love characteristic of

primitives. Psychologically, this love is completely autoerotic—that is to

say, the subject loves himself in the object. The object serves as a sort of

erotic mirror. One day the bushman came home in a rage; he had been

fishing, and had caught nothing. As usual the little fellow came running to

meet him, but his father seized hold of him and wrung his neck on the spot.

Afterwards, of course, he  mourned for the dead child with the same

unthinking abandon that had brought about his death.

[404] This is a good example of the object’s identity with a passing affect.

Obviously this kind of mentality is inimical to  any protective tribal

organization and to the propagation of the species, and must therefore be

repressed and transformed. This is the purpose the symbol serves, and to this

end it came into being. It draws libido away from the object, devalues it,

and bestows the surplus libido on the subject. This surplus exerts its effect

upon the unconscious, so that the subject finds himself placed between an

inner and an outer determinant, whence arises the possibility of choice and

relative subjective freedom.

[405] Symbols always derive from archaic residues, from racial engrams

(imprints), about whose age and origin one can  speculate much although

nothing definite can be determined. It would be quite wrong to try to derive

symbols from personal sources, for instance from repressed sexuality. Such

a repression can at most supply the amount of libido required to activate the

archaic engram. The engram, however, corresponds to an inherited mode

of functioning which owes  its existence not to centuries of sexual

repression but to the  differentiation of instinct in general. The

differentiation of instinct was and still is a biological necessity; it is not

peculiar to the human species but manifests itself equally in the sexual

atrophy of the worker-bee.

[406] I have used the vessel symbolism as an illustration of the way symbols

are derived from archaic conceptions. Just as we found the primitive notion

of the uterus at the root of this  symbol, we may conjecture a similar

derivation in the case of the tower. The tower belongs in all probability to the

category of phallic symbols in which the history of symbolism abounds.

The fact that the tower, presumably symbolizing erection, appears at the

very moment when Hermas has to repress his erotic fantasies at the sight of

the alluring couch is  not surprising. We have seen that other symbolicattributes of the Virgin and the Church are unquestionably erotic in origin, as

already attested by their derivation from the Song of Songs, and that they

were expressly so interpreted by the Church Fathers. The tower symbol in

the Litany of Loreto has the same source and may therefore have a similar

underlying meaning. The attribute “ivory” is undoubtedly erotic in origin,

since it is an allusion to the tint and texture of the skin (Song of Songs 5:14:

“His belly is as bright ivory”). But the tower itself is also found in an

unmistakably erotic context in 8:10: “I am a wall, and my breasts like

towers,” which obviously refers to  the  jutting-out breasts  with their  full  

and  elastic consistency. “His legs are as pillars of marble” (5:15), “thy

neck is as a tower of ivory” (7:4), “thy nose is as the tower of Lebanon”

(7:4), are equally obvious allusions to something slender and projecting.

These attributes originate in tactile sensations which are transferred from

the organ to the object. Just as a gloomy mood seems grey, and a joyous

one bright and colourful, so also the sense of touch is influenced by 

subjective sexual sensations (in  this case the sensation of  erection) whose

qualities are transferred to the object. The erotic psychology of the Song of

Songs uses the images aroused in the subject for the purpose of enhancing

the object’s value. Ecclesiastical psychology employs these same images in

order to guide the libido towards a figurative object, while the psychology

of Hermas exalts the unconsciously activated image into an end in itself,

using it to embody ideas that were of supreme importance for the minds of

that time, namely, the consolidation and organization of the  newly won

Christian attitude and view of the world.THE RELATIVITY OF THE GOD-CONCEPT IN

                        MEISTER ECKHART

[407] The process of transformation which Hermas experienced represents

on a small scale what took place on a large scale in the early medieval

psychology: a new revelation of woman and the development of the feminine

symbol of the Grail. Hermas saw Rhoda in a new light, and the libido thus

set free transformed itself under his hands into the fulfilment of his social

task.

[408] It is, I think, characteristic of our psychology that we find on the

threshold of the new age two figures who were  destined to exert an

immense influence on the hearts and minds of the younger  generation: 

Wagner,  the prophet  of love, whose music runs the whole gamut of

feeling from Tristan down to incestuous passion, then up again from Tristan

to the sublime spirituality of Parsifal; and Nietzsche, the prophet of power

and of the triumphant will for  individuality. Wagner, in his last and

loftiest utterance, harked back to the Grail legend, as Goethe did to Dante,

but Nietzsche seized on the idea of a master caste and a master morality,

an idea embodied in many a fair-haired hero and knight of the Middle

Ages. Wagner broke the bonds that fettered love, Nietzsche shattered the

“tables of values” that cramp individuality. Both strove after similar goals

while at the same time creating irremediable discord; for where love is,

power cannot prevail, and where power prevails, love cannot reign.

[409] The fact that three of the greatest minds of Germany should fasten on

early medieval psychology in their most important works is proof, it seems

to me, that that age has left behind a question which still remains to be

answered. It may be well, therefore, to examine this question a little more

closely. I have the impression that the mysterious something that inspired

the knightly orders (the Templars, for instance), and that seems to have

found expression in the Grail legend, may possibly have been the germ of a

new orientation to life, in other words, a nascent symbol. The non-Christian

or  Gnostic character of the Grail symbol takes us back to the  early

Christian heresies, those germinating points in which a  whole world of

audacious and brilliant ideas lay hidden. In  Gnosticism we see man’s

unconscious psychology in full flower, almost perverse in its luxuriance; it

contained the very thing that most strongly resisted the regula fidei, that

Promethean and creative spirit which will bow only to the individual souland to no  collective ruling. Although in crude form, we find in

Gnosticism what was lacking in the centuries that followed: a belief in the

efficacy of individual revelation and individual knowledge. This belief was

rooted in the proud feeling of man’s affinity with the gods, subject to no

human law, and so overmastering that it may even subdue the gods by the

sheer power of Gnosis. In Gnosis are to be found the beginnings of the path

that led to the intuitions of German mysticism, so  important

psychologically, which came to flower at the time of which we are speaking.

[410] The question now before us focuses our attention on  the greatest

thinker of that age, Meister Eckhart. Just as signs of a new orientation are

apparent in chivalry, so, in Eckhart, we are confronted with new ideas,

ideas having the same psychic orientation that impelled Dante to follow the

image of Beatrice into the underworld of the unconscious and that inspired

the singers who sang the lore of the Grail.

[411] Nothing is known, unfortunately, of Eckhart’s  personal life that

would explain how he was led to his  knowledge of the soul. But the

meditative air with which he says in his discourse on repentance, “And

still today one seldom finds that people come to great things without they

first go somewhat astray,”

151 permits the inference that he wrote from personal experience. Strangely

appealing is Eckhart’s sense of an inner affinity with God, when contrasted

with the Christian sense of sin. We feel ourselves transported back into the

spacious atmosphere  of the Upanishads. Eckhart  must have experienced a

quite extraordinary enhancement of the value of the soul, i.e., of his own

inner being, that enabled him to rise to a purely psychological and

relativistic conception of God and of his relation to man. This discovery and

painstaking exposition of the relativity of God to man and the soul seem to

me one of the most important landmarks on the way to a psychological

understanding of religious phenomena, serving at the same time to liberate

the religious function from the cramping limitations of intellectual criticism,

though this criticism, of course, must not be denied its dues.

[412] We now come to the main theme of this chapter—the relativity of the

symbol. The “relativity of God,” as I understand it, denotes a point of view

that does not conceive of God as “absolute,” i.e., wholly “cut off” from

man and existing outside and beyond all human conditions, but as in a

certain sense dependent on him; it also implies a reciprocal and essential

relation between man and God, whereby man  can be understood as afunction of God, and God as a psychological function of man. From the

empirical  standpoint  of analytical psychology, the God-image is the

symbolic  expression of a particular psychic state, or function, which is

characterized by its absolute ascendency over the will of the subject, and

can therefore bring about or enforce actions and achievements that could

never be done by conscious effort. This overpowering impetus to action (so

far as the God-function manifests itself in acts), or this inspiration that

transcends conscious understanding, has its source in an accumulation of

energy in the unconscious. The accumulated libido activates images lying

dormant in the collective unconscious, among them the God-image, that

engram or imprint which from the beginning of time has been the collective

expression of the most overwhelmingly powerful influences exerted on the

conscious mind by unconscious concentrations of libido.

[413] Hence, for our psychology, which as a science must confine itself to

empirical data within the limits set by cognition, God is not even relative,

but a function of the  unconscious—the manifestation of a dissociated

quantum of  libido that has activated the God-image. From the

metaphysical point of view God is, of course, absolute, existing in himself.

This implies his complete detachment  from the unconscious, which

means, psychologically, a complete unawareness of the fact that God’s

action springs from one’s own inner being. The relativity of God, on the

other hand, means that a not inconsiderable portion of the unconscious

processes is registered, at least indirectly, as a  psychological content.

Naturally this insight is possible only when more attention than usual is paid

to the psyche, with the consequence that the contents of the unconscious are

withdrawn from projection into objects and become  endowed with a

conscious quality that makes them appear as belonging to the subject and as

subjectively conditioned.

[414] This was what happened with the mystics, though it was not the first

time that the idea of God’s relativity had appeared. It is found in principle

and in the very nature of things among primitives. Almost everywhere on

the lower human levels the idea of God has a purely dynamic character; God

is a divine force, a power related to health, to the soul, to medicine, to riches,

to the chief, a power that can be captured  by certain procedures and

employed for the making of things needful for the life and well-being of

man, and also to produce magical or baneful effects. The primitive feels

this power as much within him as outside him; it is as much his own lifeforce as it is the “medicine” in his amulet, or the mana emanating from

his chief. Here we have the first  demonstrable conception of an all-

pervading spiritual force. Psychologically, the efficacy of the fetish, or the

prestige of the medicine-man, is an unconscious subjective evaluation of

those objects. Their power resides in the libido which is  present in the

subject’s unconscious, and it is perceived in the object because whenever

unconscious contents are activated they appear in projection.

[415] The relativity of God in medieval mysticism is,  therefore, a

regression to a primitive condition. In contrast,  the  related  Eastern

conceptions of the individual and

supra-individual atman are not so much a regression to the primitive as a

continuous development out of the primitive in a typically Eastern way that

still manages to preserve the  efficacy of the primitive principle. The

regression to the primitive is not surprising, in view of the fact that every

vital form of religion organizes one or the other primitive tendency in its

ceremonials or its ethics, thereby securing for itself  those secret

instinctive forces that conduce to the perfecting of human nature in the

religious process. This reversion  to the  primitive,  or,  as in  India,  the

uninterrupted connection with it, keeps man in touch with Mother Earth, the

prime source of all power. Seen from the heights  of a differentiated point  

of view, whether rational or ethical, these instinctive forces are “impure.”

But life itself flows from springs both clear and  muddy. Hence all

excessive “purity” lacks vitality. A constant  striving for clarity and

differentiation means a proportionate  loss of vital intensity, precisely

because the muddy elements are excluded. Every renewal of life needs the

muddy as well as the clear. This was evidently perceived by the great

relativist Meister Eckhart when he said:

For this reason God is willing to bear the brunt of sins and often winks at

them, mostly sending them to those whom he has destined for great things.

Behold! Who was dearer and nearer to our Lord than the apostles? Not one

of them but fell into mortal sin; all were mortal sinners. In the Old Testament

and in the New he has shown this to be true of those who afterwards

were far the dearest to him; and still today one seldom finds that people

come to great things without they first go somewhat astray.

152

[416] Both  on account of his  psychological perspicacity  and his deep

religious feeling and thought, Meister Eckhart  was the most brilliantexponent of that critical movement  within the Church which began

towards the end of the thirteenth century. I would like to quote a few of his

sayings to illustrate his relativistic conception of God:

For man is truly God, and God is truly man.

153

Whereas he who has not God as such an inner possession, but with every

means must fetch him from without, in this thing or in that, where he is then

sought for in vain, in all manner of works, people, or places; verily such a

man has him not, and easily something comes to trouble him. And it is not

only evil company that troubles him, but also the good, not only the street,

but also the church, not only vile words and deeds, but the good as well. For

the hindrance lies within himself, because in him God has not yet become

the world. Were God that to him, then all would be well and good with

him in every place and with all people, always possessing God.

154

[417] This passage is of particular psychological interest, as it exemplifies

something of the primitive idea of God outlined above. “Fetching God from

without” is the equivalent of the primitive view that tondi

155 can be got from outside. With Eckhart, it may be merely a figure of

speech, but the original meaning nevertheless glimmers through. At any rate

it is clear that Eckhart understands God as a psychological value. This is

proved by the words “and easily something comes to trouble him.” For,

when God is outside, he is necessarily projected into objects, with the

result that all objects acquire a surplus value. But whenever this happens, the

object exerts an overpowering influence over the subject, holding him in

slavish dependence. Eckhart is evidently referring to this subjection to the

object, which makes the world appear in the  role of God, i.e., as an

absolutely determining factor. Hence he says that for such a person “God

has not yet become the world,” since for him the world has taken the place

of God. The subject has not succeeded in detaching and introverting the

surplus value from the object, thus turning it into an inner possession. Were

he to possess it in himself, he would have  God (this same value)

continually as an object, so that God would have become the world. In the

same passage Eckhart says:

He that is right in his feeling is right in any place and in any company, but

if he is wrong he finds nothing right wherever or with whom he may be. For

a man of right feeling has God with him.156

A man who has this value in himself is everywhere at ease; he  is not

dependent on objects—not for ever needing and hoping to get from the object

what he lacks himself.

[418] From all this it should be sufficiently clear that, for Eckhart, God is

a psychological or, to be more accurate, a psycho-dynamic state.

… by this kingdom of God we understand the soul, for the soul is of like

nature with the Godhead. Hence all that has been said here of the kingdom

of God, how God is himself the kingdom, may be said with equal truth of

the soul. St.

John says, “All things were made by him.” This is to be understood of

the soul, for the soul is all things. The soul is all things because she is an

image of God, and as such she is also the kingdom of God. … So much,

says one Master, is God in the soul, that his whole divine nature depends

upon her. It is a higher state for God to be in the soul than for the soul to be

in God. The soul is not blissful because she is in  God, she is blissful

because God is in her. Rely upon it, God himself is blissful in the soul.

157

[419] Looked at historically, the soul, that many-faceted  and much-

interpreted concept, refers to a psychological content that must possess a

certain measure of autonomy within the limits of consciousness. If this

were not so, man  would never have hit on the idea of attributing an

independent existence to the soul, as though it were some objectively

perceptible thing. It must be a content in which spontaneity is inherent, and

hence also partial unconsciousness, as with every autonomous complex. The

primitive, as we know,  usually has several souls—several autonomous

complexes with a high degree of spontaneity, so that they appear as

having a separate existence (as in certain mental disorders). On a higher

level the number of souls decreases, until at the highest level of culture the

soul resolves itself into the  subject’s general awareness of his psychic

activities and exists only as a term for the totality of psychic processes. This

absorption of the soul into consciousness is just as much a characteristic

of Eastern as it is of Western culture. In Buddhism everything is dissolved

into consciousness; even the samskaras, the unconscious formative forces,

must be transformed through religious self-development.

[420] As against this historical evolution of the idea of the soul, analytical

psychology opposes the view that the soul does not coincide with thetotality of the psychic functions. We define the soul on the one hand as

the relation to the unconscious, and on the other as a personification of

unconscious contents. From the civilized standpoint it may  seem

deplorable that personifications of unconscious contents still exist, just as a

man with a differentiated consciousness might well lament the existence of

contents that are still  unconscious. But since analytical psychology is

concerned with man as he is and not with man as he would like to be, we

have to admit that those same phenomena which impel the primitive to

speak of “souls” still go on happening, just as there are still countless

people among civilized nations who believe in ghosts. We may believe as

much as we please in the doctrine of the “unity of the ego,” according to

which there can be no such things as autonomous complexes, but Nature

herself does not bother in the least about our abstract theories.

[421]  If the “soul” is a personification of unconscious  contents, then,

according to our previous definition, God too is an unconscious content, a

personification in so far as he is thought of as personal, and an image or

expression of something in so far as he is thought of as dynamic. God and

the soul are essentially the same when regarded as personifications of an

unconscious content. Meister Eckhart’s  view, therefore, is purely

psychological. So long as the soul,  he says,  is  only in  God,  she is  not

blissful. If by  “blissful” one  understands a state of intense vitality, it

follows from the passage quoted earlier that this state does not exist so long

as the dynamic principle “God,” the libido, is projected upon objects. For,

so long as God, the highest value, is not in the  soul, it is somewhere

outside. God must be withdrawn from objects and brought into the soul, and

this is a “higher state” in which God himself is “blissful.” Psychologically,

this means that when the libido invested in God, i.e., the surplus value that

has been projected, is recognized as a projection, 158 the object loses its

overpowering significance, and the surplus value consequently accrues to

the individual, giving rise to a feeling of intense vitality, a new potential.

God, life at its most intense, then resides in the soul, in the unconscious. But

this does not mean that God has become completely unconscious in the

sense that all idea of him vanishes from consciousness. It is as though the

supreme value were shifted elsewhere, so that it is now found inside and

not outside. Objects are no longer autonomous factors,  but God has

become an autonomous psychic complex. An  autonomous complex,

however, is always only partially conscious, since it is associated with theego only in limited degree, and never to such an extent that the ego could

wholly comprehend it, in which case it would no longer be  autonomous.

Henceforth the determining factor is no longer the overvalued object, but

the unconscious. The determining influences are now felt as coming from

within oneself, and this feeling produces a oneness of being, a relation

between  conscious  and  unconscious,  in  which  of  course  the  unconscious

predominates.

[422] We must now ask ourselves, whence comes this “blissful” feeling, this

ecstasy of love?

159 In this Brahman-like state of ananda, with the supreme value lying in

the unconscious, there is a drop in the conscious potential, the unconscious

becomes the determining factor, and the ego almost entirely disappears. It

is a state strongly reminiscent of that of the child on the one hand, and of

the primitive on the other, who is likewise influenced in the highest degree by

the unconscious. We can safely say that the  restoration of the earlier

paradisal state is the cause of this blissfulness. But we have still to find

out why this original state is so peculiarly blissful. The feeling of bliss

accompanies all those moments when one feels borne along by the current

of life, when what was dammed up can flow off without restraint, when

there is no need to do this thing or that thing with a conscious effort in order

to find a way out or to achieve a result. We have all known situations or

moods  when “things go of themselves,” when we no longer need to

manufacture all sorts of wearisome conditions for our joy or pleasure. The

time of childhood is the unforgettable emblem  of this joy, which,

unperturbed by things without, pours in a  warm flood from within.

“Childlikeness” is therefore a  symbol of that unique inner condition on

which “blissfulness”  depends. To be like a child means to possess a

treasury of accumulated libido which can constantly stream forth. The

libido of the child flows into things; in this way he gains the world, then by

degrees loses himself in the world (to use the language of religion) through a

gradual over-valuation of  things. The growing dependence on things

entails the  necessity of sacrifice, i.e., the withdrawal of libido, the

severance of ties. The intuitive teachings of religion seek by this means to

gather the energy together again; indeed, religion portrays this process of

re-collection in its symbols. Actually, the over-valuation of the object as

compared with the low value of the subject produces a retrograde current that

would bring the libido quite naturally back to the subject were it not for theobstructing power of consciousness. Everywhere among primitives we find

religious practice harmonizing with nature, because the primitive is able to

follow his instinct  without difficulty, now in one  direction and now in

another. His religious practices enable him to recreate the magical power he

needs, or to recover the soul that was lost to him during the night.

[423] The aim of the great religions is expressed in the injunction “not

of this world,” and this implies the inward movement of libido into the

unconscious. Its withdrawal and introversion create in the unconscious a

concentration of libido which is symbolized as the “treasure,” as in the

parables of the “pearl of great price” and the “treasure in the field.” Eckhart

interprets the latter as follows:

Christ says, “The kingdom of heaven is like a treasure hid in a field.” This

field is the soul, wherein lies hidden the treasure of the divine kingdom. In

the soul, therefore, are God and all creatures blessed.

160

[424] This interpretation agrees with our psychological argument: the soul

is a personification of the unconscious, where lies the treasure, the libido

which is immersed in introversion and is allegorized as God’s kingdom.

This amounts to a permanent union with God, a living in his kingdom, in that

state where a preponderance of libido lies in  the unconscious and

determines conscious life. The libido concentrated in the unconscious was

formerly invested in objects, and this made the world seem all-powerful.

God was then “outside,” but now he works from within, as the hidden

treasure conceived as God’s kingdom. If, then, Eckhart  reaches the

conclusion that the soul is itself God’s kingdom, it is conceived as a function

of relation to God, and God would be the power working within the soul

and perceived by it. Eckhart even calls the soul the image of God.

[425] It is evident from the ethnological and historical material that the soul

is a content that belongs partly to the subject and partly to the world of

spirits, i.e., the unconscious. Hence the soul always has an earthly as well

as a rather ghostly quality. It is the same with magical power, the divine

force of primitives, whereas on the higher levels of culture God is entirely

separate from man and is exalted to the heights of pure ideality. But the

soul never loses its intermediate position. It must therefore be regarded as a

function of relation between the subject and the inaccessible depths of the

unconscious. The determining force (God) operating from these depths is

reflected by the soul, that is, it creates symbols and images, and is itselfonly an image. By means of these images the soul conveys the forces of the

unconscious to consciousness; it is both receiver and transmitter, an organ

for perceiving unconscious contents. What it perceives are symbols. But

symbols are shaped energies, determining ideas whose affective power is

just as great as their spiritual value. When, says Eckhart, the soul is in God

it is not “blissful,” for when this organ of perception is overwhelmed by

the divine dynamis it is by no means a happy state. But when God is in the

soul, i.e., when the soul becomes a vessel for the unconscious and makes

itself an image or symbol of it, this is a truly happy state. The happy state is

a creative state, as we see from the following noble words:

If any should ask me, Wherefore do we pray, wherefore do  we fast,

wherefore do we do all manner of good works, wherefore are we baptized,

wherefore did God become man, I would answer, So that God may be born

in the soul and the soul again in God. Therefore were the Holy Scriptures

written. Therefore did God create the whole world, that God might be born

in the soul and the soul again in God. The innermost nature of all grain is

wheat, and of all metal, gold, and of all birth, Man!

161

[426] Here Eckhart states bluntly that God is dependent on the soul, and at

the same time, that the soul is the birthplace of God. This latter sentence

can readily be understood in the light of our previous reflections. The organ

of perception, the soul, apprehends the contents of the unconscious, and, as

the creative function, gives birth to its dynamis in the form of a symbol.

162 The soul gives birth to images that from the rational standpoint of

      consciousness are assumed to be worthless. And so they are, in the

    sense that they cannot immediately be turned to account in the

    objective world. The first possibility of making use of them is artistic,

    if one is in any way gifted in that direction;

163 a second is philosophical speculation;

164 a third is quasi-religious, leading to heresy and the founding of sects;

    and a fourth way of employing the dynamis of these images is to

    squander it in every form of  licentiousness. As we noted at the

    beginning (par. 25), the  latter two modes of application were

    especially apparent in the Encratitic (ascetic) and Antitactic (anarchic)

    schools of Gnosticism.

[427] The conscious realization of these images is, however, of indirect

value from the point of view of adaptation to reality, in that one’s relationto the surrounding  world is thereby freed from admixtures of fantasy.

Nevertheless, their main value lies in promoting the subject’s happiness and

well-being, irrespective of external  circumstances. To be adapted is

certainly an ideal, but adaptation is not always possible. There are situations

in which the only adaptation is patient endurance. This form of  passive

adaptation is made easier by an elaboration of the fantasy-images. I say

“elaboration” because at first the fantasies are merely raw material of

doubtful value. They  have to be worked on and put in a form best

calculated to yield the maximum benefit. This is a matter of technique,

which it would not be appropriate to discuss here. I will only  say, for

clarity’s sake, that there are two methods of treatment: 1. the reductive,

and 2. the synthetic. The former  traces everything back to primitive

instincts, the latter develops the material into a process for differentiating

the  personality. The two methods are complementary, for  reduction to

instinct leads back to reality, indeed to an over-valuation of reality and

hence to the necessity of sacrifice. The synthetic method elaborates the

symbolic fantasies resulting from  the introversion of  libido through

sacrifice. This produces a new attitude to the world, whose very difference

offers a new potential. I have termed this transition to a new attitude the

transcendent function.

165 In the regenerated attitude the libido that was formerly sunk in the

    unconscious emerges in the form of some positive achievement. It is

    equivalent to a renewal of life, which Eckhart symbolizes by

God’s birth. Conversely, when the libido is withdrawn from  external

objects and sinks into the unconscious, the soul is born again in God. This

state, as he rightly observes, is not a blissful one,

166 because it is a negative act, a turning away from life and a descent to

    the deus absconditus, who possesses qualities  very different from

    those of the God who shines by day.

[428] Eckhart speaks of God’s birth as a continual process. As a matter of

fact, the process in question is a psychological  one that unconsciously

repeats itself almost continually, though we are conscious of it only when it

swings towards the extreme. Goethe’s idea of a systole and diastole seems

to have hit the mark intuitively. It may well be a question of a vital rhythm,

of fluctuations of vital forces, which as a rule go on unconsciously. This

may also explain why the existing terminology for such a process is in the

main either religious or mythological, since these formulas refer primarilyto unconscious psychological facts and not, as the scientific interpreters of

myths often assert, to the phases of the moon  or other meteorological

phenomena. And because it is pre-eminently a question of unconscious

processes, we have  the greatest difficulty, as scientists, in extricating

ourselves at least so far from the language of metaphor as to reach the

level of metaphor used by other sciences. Reverence for the great mysteries

of Nature, which the language of religion seeks to express in symbols

hallowed by their antiquity, profound significance, and beauty, will not

suffer from the extension of psychology to this domain, to which science

has hitherto found no access. We only shift the symbols back a  little,

shedding a little light on their darker reaches, but without succumbing to

the erroneous notion that we have created anything more than merely a new

symbol for the same enigma that perplexed all ages before us. Our science

is a language of metaphor too, but in practice it works better than the old

mythological hypothesis, which used concretisms as a means of expression,

and not, as we do, concepts.

By being created, the soul created God, for he did not exist until the soul

was made. A little while since and I declared, I am the cause that God is

God! God is gotten of the soul, his Godhead he has of himself.

167

God comes into being and passes away.

168

Because all creatures declare him, God comes into being. While yet I

abode in the ground and the depths of Godhead, in its flood and source,

none asked me whither I went or what I did; none was there who could

have questioned me. But when I flowed forth, all creatures declared God.

… And why did they not declare the Godhead? All that is in Godhead is

one, and of that there is nothing to declare. Only God does; Godhead does

nothing, there is nothing it can do, and never has it looked for anything to

do. God and Godhead are as different as doing and non-doing. When I come

home again in God, I do nothing more in myself, so this my breaking

through is much more excellent than my first going out. For truly it is I

who bring all creatures out of their own into my mind and make them one

in me. When I come back into the ground and the depths of Godhead, into

its flood and source, none asks me whence I came or whither I went. None

missed me. God passes away.

169[429] We see from these passages that Eckhart distinguishes between God

and Godhead. Godhead is All,  neither knowing nor possessing itself,

whereas God is a function of the soul, just as the soul is a function of

Godhead.

Godhead is obviously all-pervading creative power or, in  psychological

terms, self-generating creative instinct, that  neither knows nor possesses

itself, comparable to Schopenhauer’s universal Will. But God appears as

issuing forth from Godhead and the soul. Like every creature, the soul

“declares” him: he exists in so far as the soul distinguishes itself from

the unconscious and perceives its dynamis, and he ceases to exist as soon

as the soul is immersed in the “flood and source” of unconscious dynamis.

Thus Eckhart says:

When I flowed out from God, all things declared, “God is!”  Now this

cannot make me blessed, for thereby I acknowledge myself a creature. But in

my breaking through I stand empty in the will of God, and empty also of

God’s will, and of all his works, even of God himself—then I am more than

all creatures, then I am neither God nor creature: I am what I was, and

that I shall remain, now and ever more! Then I receive a thrust which

carries me above all angels. By this thrust I become so rich that God cannot

suffice me, despite all that he is as God and all his godly works; for in this

breakthrough I receive what God and I have in common. I am what I was, I

neither increase nor diminish, for I am the unmoved mover that moves all

things. Here God can find no more place in man, for man by his emptiness

has won back that which he eternally was and ever shall remain.

170

[430] The “flowing out” means a realization of the unconscious content and

the unconscious dynamis in the form of an idea born of the soul. This is an

act of conscious differentiation from the unconscious dynamis, a separation

of the ego as subject from God (= dynamis) as object. By this act

God “becomes.” But when the “breakthrough” abolishes this separation by

cutting the ego off from the world, and the ego again becomes identical with

the unconscious dynamis, God disappears as an object and dwindles into a

subject which is no longer distinguishable from the ego. In other words

the ego, as a late product of differentiation, is reunited with the dynamic

All-oneness (the participation mystique of  primitives). This is the

immersion in the “flood and source.” The numerous analogies with Eastern

ideas are immediately apparent, and they have been elaborated by writersmore  qualified than myself. In the absence of direct transmission  this

parallelism proves that Eckhart was thinking from the  depths of the

collective psyche which is common to East and  West. This universal

foundation, for which no common  historical background can be made

answerable, underlies the primitive mentality with its energic conception of

God.

[431] The return to primeval nature and mystic regression to the psychic

conditions of prehistory are common to all religions in which the impelling

dynamis has not yet petrified  into an abstract idea but is still a living

experience, no matter  whether this be expressed in ceremonies of

identification with the totem among the Australian aborigines

171 or in the ecstasies of the Christian mystics. As a result of this retrograde

process the original state of identity with God is re-established and a new

potential is produced. However improbable such a state may be, it is a

profoundly impressive  experience which, by  revivifying the individual’s

relation to God as an object, creates the world anew.

[432] In speaking of the relativity of the God-symbol, we would be failing

in our duty if we omitted to mention that solitary poet whose tragic fate it

was to find no relation either to his own times or to his own inner vision:

Angelus Silesius. 172 What Eckhart laboured to express with a great effort

of  thought, and often in barely intelligible language, Angelus  Silesius

sings in touchingly intimate verses, which portray the relativity of God with

naïve simplicity. His verses speak for themselves:

I know that without me God can no moment live; Were I to die, then He No

longer could survive. God cannot without me A single worm create; Did I not

share with Him Destruction were its fate. I am as great as God, And He is

small like me; He cannot be above,

Nor I below Him be. In me is God a fire

And I in Him its glow; In common is our life, Apart we cannot grow.

God loves me more than Self My love doth give His weight, Whate’er He

gives to me

I must reciprocate.

He’s God and man to me, To Him I’m both indeed; His thirst I satisfy,

He helps me in my need. This God, who feels for us, Is to us what we will;

And woe to us, if we Our part do not fulfil. God is whate’er He is, I am what I

must be;

If you know one, in sooth, You know both Him and me. I am not outsideGod,

Nor leave I Him afar;

I am His grace and light, And He my guiding star. I am the vine, which He

Doth plant and cherish most; The fruit which grows from me Is God, the Holy

Ghost.

I am God’s child, His son, And He too is my child; We are the two in one,

Both son and father mild. To illuminate my God

The sunshine I must be; My beams must radiate

His calm and boundless sea.

173

[433] It would be absurd to suppose that such audacious ideas as these and

Meister Eckhart’s are nothing but figments of conscious speculation. Such

thoughts are always  profoundly significant historical phenomena, borne

along on  the unconscious currents of the collective psyche. Below the

threshold of consciousness, thousands of other nameless ones  are ranged

behind them with similar thoughts and feelings, ready to open the gates of

a new age. In these bold ideas we hear the voice of the collective psyche,

which with imperturbable assurance and the finality of a natural law brings

about spiritual transformation and renewal. The  unconscious currents

reached the surface at the time of the  Reformation. The Reformation

largely did away with the  Church as the dispenser of salvation and

established once more the personal relation to God. The culminating point

in the objectification of the God-concept had now been passed, and from

then on it became more and more subjective. The logical consequence of this

subjectifying  process is a splitting up into sects, and its most extreme

outcome is individualism, representing a new form of detachment from

the world,  the immediate danger  of which is  re-submersion in the

unconscious dynamis. The cult of the  “blond beast” stems from this

development, besides much else that distinguishes our age from others. But

whenever this submersion in instinct occurs, it is compensated by a growing

resistance to the chaos of sheer dynamism, by a need for form and order.

Diving down into the maelstrom, the soul must create the symbol that

captures and expresses this dynamism. It is  this  process  in the collective

psyche that is felt or intuited by poets and artists whose main source of

creativity is their  perception of unconscious contents, and whose

intellectual horizon is wide enough to discern the crucial problems of the

age, or at least their outward aspects.THE NATURE OF THE UNITING SYMBOL IN

                                  SPITTELER

[434] Spitteler’s Prometheus marks  a psychological turning  point: it

illustrates the splitting apart of pairs of opposites that were once united.

Prometheus, the artist, the servant of the soul, disappears from the world of

men; while society itself,  in obedience to a soulless moral routine, is

delivered over to Behemoth, symbolizing the inimical, the destructive effect

of an obsolete ideal. At the right moment Pandora, the soul, creates the

saving jewel in the unconscious, but it does not benefit mankind because

men fail to appreciate  it. The change  for the better comes about only

through the intervention of  Prometheus, who through insight and

understanding brings first a few, and then many, individuals to their senses.

It can hardly be doubted that this work of Spitteler’s has its roots in the

intimate life of its creator. But if it consisted only in a poetic elaboration

of purely personal experiences, it would  lack general validity and

permanent value. It achieves both because it is not merely personal but is

concerned with Spitteler’s own experience of the collective problems of our

time. On its first appearance it was bound to meet with the  apathetic

indifference of the public, for in any age the vast majority of men are

called upon to preserve and praise the status quo, thus helping to bring about

the disastrous consequences which the creative spirit had sought to avert.

[435] One important question still remains to be discussed, and that is the

nature of this jewel, or symbol of renewed life, which the poet senses will

bring joy and deliverance. We  have already documented the “divine”

nature of the jewel, and this clearly means that it contains possibilities for a

new release of energy, for freeing the libido bound in the unconscious.

The symbol always says: in some such form as this a new manifestation of

life will become possible, a release from bondage and world-weariness. The

libido that is freed from the unconscious by means of the symbol appears as

a rejuvenated god, or actually as a new god; in Christianity, for instance,

Jehovah is transformed into a loving Father with a higher and more spiritual

morality. The motif of the god’s renewal is universal and may be assumed

to be familiar to most readers. Speaking of the redeeming power of the

jewel, Pandora says: “I have heard of a race of men, full of sorrow and

deserving of pity, and I have thought of a gift with which, if you graciously

approve, I may assuage or solace their many sufferings.”174 The leaves of the tree that shelters the “wonder-child” sing: “For here

is the presence, and here is bliss, and here is grace.”

175

[436] The message of the wonder-child is love and joy, a paradisal state

just as it was at the birth of Christ; while the greeting by the sun-goddess

176 and the miracle that all men, however far away, became “good” and

    were blessed at the moment of this birth

177 are attributes to the birth of the Buddha. From the “divine blessing” I

    will excerpt only this one significant passage: “May every man meet

    again those images he once beheld as a child in the shimmering dream of

    the future.”

178 This is an affirmation that childhood fantasies strive for fulfilment; the

    images are not lost, but come again in ripe manhood and should be

    fulfilled. As Old Kule says in Barlach’s Der tote Tag:

When I lie here at night, and the pillows of darkness weigh me down, at

times there presses about me a light that resounds, visible to my eyes and

audible to my ears; and there about my bed stand the lovely forms of a

better future. Stiff they are as yet, but of a radiant beauty, still sleeping; but

he who shall awaken them would make for the world a fairer face. He

would be a hero who could do that. … They stand not in the  sun and

nowhere are they lit by the sun. But sometime they shall and must come

forth from the night. What a master-work that would be, to raise them up to

the sun! There they would live.

179

[437] Epimetheus, too, as we shall see, longs for the image, the jewel; in his

discourse on the statue of Herakles (the  hero!) he says: “This is the

meaning of the statue … that a jewel shall ripen over our heads, a jewel we

must win.”

180 But when the jewel is rejected by Epimetheus and is brought to the

priests, they sing in just the same strain as Epimetheus did when he longed

for it: “O come, O God, with thy grace,” only to repudiate and revile in the

very next instant the heavenly jewel that is offered them. The verses of the

hymn sung by the priests can easily be recognized as the Protestant hymn:

Living Spirit, once again

Come, Thou true eternal God! Nor thy power descend in vain, Make us ever

Thine abode;

So shall Spirit, joy and light Dwell in us, where all was night.…

Spirit Thou of strength and power, Thou new Spirit God hath given, Aid us in

temptation’s hour,

Make us perfect Thou for heaven. Arm us in the battle field,

Leave us never there to yield.

181

[438] This hymn bears out our earlier argument. It is wholly in keeping

with the rationalistic nature of Epimethean creatures that the same priests

who sing this hymn should reject the new spirit of life, the new symbol.

Reason must always seek the solution in some rational, consistent, logical

way, which is certainly justifiable enough in all normal situations but is

entirely  inadequate when it comes to the really great and decisive

questions. It is incapable of creating the symbol, because the  symbol is

irrational. When the rational way proves to be a cul de sac—as it always

does after a time—the solution comes from the side it was least expected.

(“Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth?”

182) Such is the psychological law underlying the Messianic prophecies, for

instance. The prophecies themselves are  projections of events

foreshadowed in the unconscious.  Because the solution is irrational, the

coming of the Saviour is  associated with an irrational and impossible

condition: the pregnancy of a virgin (Isaiah 7:14). This prophecy, like many

another, can be taken in two ways, as in Macbeth (IV, 1):

Macbeth shall never vanquished be until Great Birnam wood to high

Dunsinane hill Shall come against him.

[439] The birth of the Saviour, the redeeming symbol, occurs just when one

is least expecting it, and in the most improbable of places. Thus Isaiah says

(53: 1–3):

Who hath believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?

For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a

dry ground: he hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him,

there is no beauty that we should desire him.

He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with

grief; and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we

esteemed him not.

[440] Not only does the redeeming power come from the  place where

nothing is expected, it also appears in a form that has nothing to recommend

it from the Epimethean point of view. Spitteler can hardly have borrowedconsciously from the Bible when describing the rejection of the symbol, or

we would note it in his words. It is more likely that he drew on the same

depths from which prophets and creative artists call  up the redeeming

symbol.

[441] The coming of the Saviour signifies a union of opposites:

The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with

the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a little

child shall lead them.

And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together:

and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.

And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned

child shall put his hand on the cockatrice’ den.

183

[442] The nature of the redeeming symbol is that of a child 184 (the

“wonder-child” of Spitteler)—childlikeness or lack of prior assumptions is

of the very essence of the symbol and its function. This childlike attitude

necessarily brings with it another guiding principle in place of self-will

and rational intentions, as overwhelmingly powerful in effect as it is divine.

Since it is of an irrational nature, the new guiding principle appears in

miraculous form:

For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given; and the government

shall be on his shoulder; and his name shall be  called Wonderful,

Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace.

185

[443] These honorific titles reproduce the essential  qualities of the

redeeming symbol. Its “divine” effect comes from the irresistible dynamis of

the unconscious. The saviour  is always a figure endowed with magical

power who makes the impossible possible. The symbol is the middle way

along  which the opposites flow together in a new movement, like a

watercourse bringing fertility after a long drought. The  tension that

precedes solution is likened in Isaiah to pregnancy:

Like as a woman with child, that draweth near the time of her delivery, is in

pain, and crieth out in her pangs, so we have been in thy sight, O Lord.

We have been with child, we have been in pain, we have as it were brought

forth wind; we have not wrought any deliverance in the earth; neither have

the inhabitants of the world fallen.

Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise.186

[444] Through the act of deliverance what was inert and dead comes to

life; in psychological terms, the functions that  have lain fallow and

unfertile, and were unused, repressed, undervalued, despised, etc., suddenly

burst forth and begin to live. It is precisely the least valued function that

enables life, which was threatened with extinction by the differentiated

function, to continue.

187 This motif recurs in the New Testament idea of the απoκαçάστασιζ

πάντων, restitution of all things (Acts 3:21), which is a more highly

developed form of that worldwide version of the hero myth where the hero,

on his exit from the belly of the whale, brings with him not only his parents

but the whole company of those previously swallowed by the monster—

what Frobenius calls the “universal slipping out.” 188 The connection with

the hero myth is preserved in Isaiah three verses later:

In that day the Lord with his sore and great and strong sword shall punish

leviathan the piercing serpent, even leviathan that crooked serpent; and he

shall slay the dragon that is in the sea.

189

[445] With the birth of the symbol, the regression of libido  into the

unconscious ceases. Regression is converted into progression, the blockage

starts to flow again, and the lure of the maternal abyss is broken. When Old

Kule in Barlach’s Der tote Tag says that he who awakened the sleeping

images  would be a hero, the mother replies: “He must first bury his

mother.”

190 I have fully documented the motif of the “mother dragon” in my earlier

    work,

191 so I may spare myself a repetition of it here. The blossoming of new

    life and fruitfulness where all was arid before is described in Isaiah

    35:5ff.:

Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be

unstopped.

Then shall the lame man leap up as an hart, and the tongue of the dumb sing:

for in the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the desert.

And the parched ground shall become a pool, and the thirsty land springs of

water: in the habitations of dragons, where each lay, shall be grass with

reeds and rushes.

And an highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called the wayof holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it. And this shall be unto you a

straight way, so that fools shall not err therein.

The redeeming symbol is a highway, a way upon which life  can move

forward without torment and compulsion.

[446] Hölderlin says in “Patmos”: Near is God

And hard to apprehend. But where danger is, there Arises salvation also.

That sounds as though the nearness of God were a danger, i.e., as though

the concentration of libido in the unconscious were a danger to conscious

life. And indeed this is so, for the more the libido is invested—or, to be

more accurate, invests itself—in the unconscious, the greater becomes its

influence  or potency: all the rejected, disused, outlived functional

possibilities that have been lost for generations come to life  again and

begin to exert an ever-increasing influence on the conscious mind, despite

its desperate struggles to gain insight into what is happening. The saving

factor is the symbol, which embraces both conscious and unconscious and

unites them. For while the consciously disposable libido gets gradually

used up in the differentiated function and is replenished more and more

slowly and with increasing  difficulty, the symptoms of inner disunity

multiply and there is a growing danger of inundation and destruction by

the unconscious contents, but all the time the symbol is developing that is

destined to resolve the conflict. The symbol, however, is so intimately

bound up with the dangerous and menacing aspect of the unconscious that

it is easily mistaken for it, or its appearance may actually call forth evil

and destructive tendencies. At all events the appearance of the redeeming 

symbol is  closely connected  with destruction and devastation. If the old

were not ripe for death, nothing new would appear; and if the old were

not injuriously blocking the way for the new, it could not and need not be

rooted out.

[447]  This natural combination of psychological opposites  is found in

Isaiah, where we are told that a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, who

shall be called Immanuel (7:14). Significantly, Immanuel (the redeeming

symbol) means “God with us,” i.e., union with the latent dynamis of the

unconscious. The verses which immediately follow show what this union

portends:

For before the child shall know to refuse the evil and choose the good, the

land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her kings.

And the Lord said to me, Take thee a great book, and write in itwith a man’s pen: Hasten to take the spoils, quickly take the prey.

192… And I went to the prophetess, and she conceived, and bore a son.

And the Lord said to me: Call his name, Hasten to take the spoils, quickly

take the prey. For before the child  know how to cry, My father, My

mother, the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria shall be taken away

before the king of Assyria.

Forasmuch as this people refuseth the waters of Shiloah that go softly …

behold the Lord will bring upon them the waters of the river, strong and

many, even the king of Assyria, and all his glory; and he shall come up

over all his channels, and go over all his banks, and he shall pass through

Judah; he shall overflow and go over, and he shall reach even to the neck;

and the stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth  of thy land, O

Immanuel.

193

[448] I have shown in my earlier work

194 that the birth of the god is threatened by the dragon, by the danger of

    inundation, and infanticide. Psychologically,  this means that the

    latent dynamis of the unconscious may burst forth and overwhelm

      consciousness. For Isaiah the danger is the foreign king, who rules

    over a powerful and

hostile country. The problem for him is not, of course, psychological, but

concrete because of its complete  projection. With Spitteler, on the

contrary, the problem is a  psychological one from the start, and hence

detached from the object, but it is none the less expressed in a form that

closely resembles Isaiah’s, even though it may not have been consciously

borrowed.

[449] The birth of the saviour is equivalent to a great catastrophe, because a

new and powerful life springs up just where there had seemed to be no life

and no power and no possibility of further development. It comes streaming

out of the unconscious, from that unknown part of the psyche which is

treated as nothing by all rationalists. From this discredited and rejected region

comes the new afflux of energy, the renewal of life. But what is this

discredited and rejected source of vitality? It consists of all those psychic

contents that were repressed because of their incompatibility with conscious

values—everything hateful, immoral, wrong, unsuitable, useless, etc., which

means everything  that at one time  or another appeared so to the

individual concerned. The danger now is that when these things reappear ina new and wonderful guise, they may make such an impact on him that he

will forget or repudiate all his former values. What he once despised now

becomes the supreme principle, and what was  once truth now becomes

error. This reversal of values is similar to the devastation of a country by

floods.

[450] Thus, in Spitteler, Pandora’s heavenly gift brings evil to the country

and its inhabitants, just as in the classical myth diseases streamed forth to

ravage the land when Pandora  opened her box. To understand why this

should be so we must examine the nature of the symbol. The first to find the

jewel were the peasants, as the shepherds were the first to greet the Saviour.

They turned it about in their hands, “until in the end  they were utterly

dumbfounded by its bizarre, immoral, illicit appearance.”

195 When they brought it to Epimetheus to examine, his  conscience

    (which he kept in a wardrobe) sprang to the floor and hid itself under

    the bed in great alarm, “with impossible suspicions.”

Like a crab goggling wickedly and malevolently brandishing its crooked

claws, Conscience peered out from under the bed, and the nearer Epimetheus

pushed the image, the further Conscience shrank back with gesticulations of

disgust. And so it sulked there silently, uttering not a word or syllable, in

spite of all the king’s entreaties and petitions and inducements.

196

[451] Conscience, evidently, found the new symbol acutely distasteful. The

king, therefore, bade the peasants bear the jewel to the priests.

But hardly had Hiphil-Hophal [the high priest] glanced at the face of the

image than he shuddered with disgust, and  crossing his arms over his

forehead as though to ward off a  blow, he shouted: “Away with this

mockery! For it is opposed to God and carnal is its heart and insolence

flashes from its eyes.”

197

[452] The peasants then brought the jewel to the academy,  but the

professors found it lacked “feeling and soul, and  moreover it wanted in

gravity, and above all had no guiding thought.”

198 In the end the goldsmith found the jewel to be spurious and of common

stuff. On the marketplace, where the peasants tried to get rid of it, the police

descended on the image and cried out:

Is there no heart in your body and no conscience in your soul? How dare you

expose before the eyes of all this stark,  shameless, wanton piece ofnakedness? … And now, away with you at once! And woe betide you if

the sight of it has polluted our innocent children and lily-white wives!

199

[453] The symbol is described by the poet as bizarre,  immoral, illicit,

outraging our moral feelings and our ideas of the spiritual and divine; it

appeals to sensuality, is wanton, and liable to endanger public morals by

provoking sexual  fantasies. These attributes define something that is

blatantly opposed to our moral values and aesthetic judgment because it

lacks the higher feeling-values, and the absence of a  “guiding thought”

suggests the irrationality of its intellectual content. The verdict “opposed to

God” might equally well be “anti-Christian,” since this episode is set neither

in antiquity nor in the East. By reason of its attributes, the symbol stands for

the inferior functions, for psychic contents that are not  acknowledged.

Although it is nowhere stated, it is obvious that the “image” is of a naked

human body—a “living form.” It expresses the complete freedom to be what

one is, and also the duty to be what one is. It is a symbol of man as he might

be, the perfection of moral and aesthetic beauty, moulded by nature and not

by some artificial ideal. To hold such an image before the eyes of present-

day man can have no other effect than to release everything in him that lies

captive and unlived.  If only half of him is  civilized  and the other half

barbarian, all his barbarism will be aroused, for a man’s hatred is always

concentrated on the thing that makes him conscious of his bad qualities.

Hence the fate of the jewel was sealed the moment it appeared in the world.

The dumb shepherd lad who first found it was half cudgelled to death by

the enraged peasants, who in the end “hurled” the jewel into the street. Thus

the redeeming symbol runs its brief but typical course. The parallel with the

Passion is unmistakable, and the jewel’s saviour-nature is further borne out

by the fact that it appears only once every thousand years. The appearance of

a saviour, a Saoshyant, or a Buddha is a rare phenomenon.

[454] The end of the jewel is mysterious: it falls into the hands of a

wandering Jew. “It was not a Jew of this world, and his clothes seemed to

us exceedingly strange.”

200 This peculiar Jew can only be Ahasuerus, who did not accept the

    actual Redeemer, and now, as it were, steals his image. The story of

    Ahasuerus is a late Christian legend, which cannot be traced back

    earlier than the thirteenth century.

201 Psychologically, it sprang from a component of the personality or a    charge of libido that could find no outlet in the Christian attitude to

    life and the world and was therefore repressed. The Jews were always a

    symbol for this, hence the persecution mania against the Jews in the

    Middle Ages. The idea of ritual murder is a projection, in acute

    form, of the rejection of the Redeemer, for one always sees the mote

    in one’s own eye as the beam in one’s brother’s. The ritual murder

    idea also plays a part in Spitteler’s story—the Jew steals the wonder-

    child from heaven. It is a mythologized  projection of a dim

    realization that the workings of the  Redeemer are constantly being

    frustrated by the presence of  an unredeemed element in the

    unconscious. This unredeemed,  untamed, barbarian element, which

    can only be held on a chain and cannot be allowed to run free, is

    projected upon those who have never accepted Christianity. There is an

    unconscious awareness of this intractable element whose existence we

    don’t like to admit—hence the projection. In reality it is a part of

    ourselves that has contrived to escape the  Christian process of

      domestication. The restlessness of the  wandering Jew is a

      concretization of this unredeemed state.

[455] The unredeemed element at once attracts to itself the new light, the

energy of the new symbol. This is another way of expressing what we said

earlier (pars. 449ff.) about the effect the symbol has on the psyche as a

whole. It arouses all the repressed and unacknowledged contents, just as it

provoked the “guardians of the marketplace” in Spitteler; and it has the same

effect on Hiphil-Hophal, who, because of his unconscious resistance to his

own religion, immediately emphasizes the ungodliness and carnality of the

new symbol. The affect displayed in the rejection of the jewel equals the

amount of repressed libido. With the moral degradation of the pure gift of

heaven and its conversion into the lurid fantasies of the priests and police

the ritual murder is complete. The  appearance of the symbol has,

nevertheless, not been entirely valueless. Although not accepted in its pure

form, it is devoured by the archaic and undifferentiated forces of the

unconscious (symbolized by Behemoth), assiduously  supported  by

conscious morality and  ideas of  beauty.  Thereupon the enantiodromia

begins, the transformation of the hitherto valued into the worthless, and of

the former good into the bad.

[456] The kingdom of the good, ruled over by Epimetheus, had long been at

enmity with the kingdom of Behemoth.202 Behemoth and Leviathan are the two famous monsters of Jehovah from

    the Book of Job, symbolizing his mighty strength. As crude animal

    symbols they represent similar psychological forces in human nature.

203 Jehovah declaims (Job 40:10ff., DV):

Behold Behemoth whom I made with thee. He eateth grass like an ox.

His strength is in his loins, and his force in the navel of his belly.

He setteth up his tail like a cedar: the sinews of his testicles are wrapped

together.

204

His bones are like pipes of brass, his gristle like plates of iron.

He is the beginning of the ways of God …

[457] One should read these words attentively. This sheer dynamis is “the

beginning of the ways of God,” that is, of  Jehovah, who in the New

Testament sloughs off this form and ceases to be a nature-god. This means,

psychologically, that  the animal side of the libido stored up in the

unconscious is permanently held in check by the Christian attitude; one half

of God is repressed, or written down to man’s debit account,  and is

ultimately consigned to the domain of the devil. Hence,  when the

unconscious dynamis starts welling up and “the ways of God” begin, God

appears in the form of Behemoth.

205 One might even say that God presents himself in the devil’s shape.

These moral evaluations are optical illusions, however: the life force is

beyond moral judgment. Meister Eckhart says:

So if I say God is good, it is not true: I am good, God is not good. I go

further: I am better than God! For only what is good can become better,

and only what is better can become the best. God is not good, therefore he

cannot become better; and since he cannot become better he cannot become

the best. These three: good, better, best, are infinitely remote from God,

who is above all.

206

[458] The immediate effect of the redeeming symbol is the  union of

opposites: the ideal realm of Epimetheus becomes one with the kingdom

of Behemoth. That is to say, moral consciousness enters into a dangerous

alliance with the  unconscious contents and the libido associated with

them. The “divine children,” the highest values of humanity without which

man would be an animal, are now entrusted to the care of Epimetheus. But

the union with his unconscious opposite  brings with it the danger ofdevastation and inundation—the values of consciousness are liable to be

swamped by the  unconscious dynamis. Had the jewel, the symbol of

natural morality and beauty, been accepted at its face value instead of serving

merely to stir up all the filthiness in the background of our “moral” culture,

the divine children would not have been imperilled despite the alliance

with Behemoth, for  Epimetheus would always have been able to

discriminate between the valuable and the worthless. But because the symbol

appeared unacceptable to his onesided, rationalistic,  warped mentality,

every standard of value fails. When the union of opposites nevertheless

takes place on a higher plane,  the danger of inundation and destruction

necessarily follows because, characteristically, the antagonistic

tendencies get smuggled in under the cover of “correct ideas.” Even the evil

and pernicious can be rationalized and made to look aesthetic. Thus the

conscious values are exchanged for sheer instinctuality and stupidity—one

after another, the divine children are handed over to Behemoth. They are

devoured by savage, barbarian tendencies that were formerly unconscious;

hence Behemoth and Leviathan set up an invisible whale as a symbol of

their power, while the corresponding symbol of the Epimethean realm is

the bird. The whale, a denizen of the deep, is a well-known symbol of the

devouring unconscious;

207 the bird, an inhabitant of the bright realm of the air, is a symbol of

      conscious thought,

208 of the (winged) ideal, and of the Holy Ghost (dove).

[459] The final extinction of the good is prevented by the intervention of

Prometheus. He delivers Messias, the last of the divine children, from the

power of his enemy. Messias becomes heir to the divine kingdom, while

Prometheus and Epimetheus, the personifications of the divided opposites,

now united, withdraw to the seclusion of their “native valley.”  Both are

relieved of sovereignty—Epimetheus because he was forced to renounce it,

Prometheus because he never  strove for it. In psychological  terms,

introversion and extraversion cease to dominate as exclusive principles,

and consequently the psychic dissociation also ceases. In their stead a new

function appears, symbolized by the divine child Messias, who had long lain

sleeping. Messias is the mediator, the symbol of a new attitude in which the

opposites are united. He is a child, a boy, the puer aeternus of the ancient

prototype, heralding the rebirth and restitution (apocatastasis) of all that is

lost. What Pandora brought to earth in the form of an image, and, beingrejected of men, became the cause of their undoing, is fulfilled in him. This

combination of symbols is frequently met with in analytical practice: a

symbol emerging in dreams is rejected for the very reasons  we have

described, and even provokes an antagonistic reaction corresponding to

the invasion of Behemoth. As a result of this conflict, the personality is

levelled down to the basic characteristics that have been present since birth,

and that keep the mature personality in touch with the childhood sources of

energy. But as Spitteler shows, the great danger is that instead of the symbol

being accepted, the archaic instincts it arouses will be rationalized and put at

the disposal of the traditional ways of thinking.

[460] The English mystic William Blake says: “These two classes of men

are always upon earth … the Prolific and the Devouring. … Religion is an

endeavour to reconcile the two.” 209 With these words of Blake, which

summarize so simply the fundamental ideas of Spitteler and the whole of

our  previous discussion, I would like to close this chapter. If I  have

unduly expanded it, it was because I wanted to do full  justice to the

profusion of stimulating ideas that Spitteler offers us in Prometheus and

Epimetheus, just as Schiller did in his Letters. I have, so far as possible,

confined myself to  essentials; indeed, I have had to pass over a large

number of  problems which would have to be considered in a

comprehensive exposition of the material.                                          VI


THE TYPE PROBLEM IN


PSYCHOPATHOLOGY

[461] We now  come to the work  of  a psychiatrist who made an attempt to

single out two types from among the  bewildering variety of mental

disturbances that are generally grouped under the heading “psychopathic

inferiority.” This very extensive group includes all psychopathic borderline

states that cannot be reckoned among the psychoses proper; that is, all the

neuroses and all degenerative states such as intellectual, moral, affective,

and other psychic inferiorities.

[462] This attempt was made by Otto Gross, who in 1902 published a

theoretical study entitled Die zerebrale Sekundärfunktion. It was the basic

hypothesis of this work that led him to the conception of two psychological

types.

1 Although the empirical material discussed by him is taken  from the

  domain of psychopathic inferiority, there is no reason why the insights

  gained should not be carried over into  the wider field of normal

  psychology. The unbalanced  psychic state gives the investigator an

  almost exaggeratedly clear view of certain psychic phenomena which,

very often, can only be dimly perceived within the limits of the normal.

The abnormal state sometimes acts like a magnifying glass.  Gross

  himself, in his final chapter, also extends his  conclusions to a wider

  domain, as we shall see.

[463] By the “secondary function” Gross understands a cerebral cell-process

that comes into action after the “primary function” has taken place. The

primary function would correspond to the actual performance of the cell,

namely, the production of a positive psychic process, for example an idea.

This performance is an energic process, presumably a  discharge of

chemical tension; in other words, it is a process of chemical decomposition.

After this acute discharge, which Gross calls the primary  function, the

secondary function comes into action. It is a  process of recovery, a

rebuilding through assimilation. This function will require for its operation a

longer or shorter  period depending on the intensity of the preceding

discharge of energy. During this time the condition of the cell has altered; it

is now in a state of stimulation, and this cannot remain without influenceon the subsequent psychic processes. Processes that are especially highly-

toned and charged with affect require an especially intense discharge of

energy, and hence an especially prolonged period of recovery governed by

the secondary function. The effect of the secondary function on the psychic

process in general consists,  according to Gross, in its specific and

demonstrable influence  on the subsequent course of association, in the

sense that it restricts the choice of associations to the “theme” or “leading

idea” represented by the primary function. And indeed, in my  own

experimental work (which was corroborated by several of my pupils), I

was able to demonstrate statistically that perseveration followed in the

train of ideas with a high feeling-tone.

2 My pupil Eberschweiler, in an investigation of language components,

3 has demonstrated this same phenomenon in assonances and agglutinations.

Further,  we  know  from  experiences  in  pathology how frequently

  perseverations occur in the case of severe cerebral lesions, apoplexies,

  tumours, atrophic and other degenerative states. Such perseverations may

well be ascribed to this retarded process of recovery. Gross’ hypothesis

thus has much to recommend it.

[464] It is therefore only natural to ask whether there may  not be

individuals, or even types, in whom the period of recovery, the secondary

function, lasts longer than in others, and if so, whether certain characteristic

psychologies may not  be traceable to this. A short secondary function,

clearly, will influence far fewer consecutive associations in a given period of

time than a long one. Hence the primary function can operate much more

frequently. The psychological picture in such a case would show a constant

and rapidly renewed  readiness for action and reaction, a kind of

distractibility, a tendency to

superficial associations and a lack of deeper, more concise ones, and a

certain incoherence so far as an association is expected to be significant.

On the other hand many new themes will crowd up in a given unit of time,

though not at all intense or clearly focussed, so that heterogeneous ideas

of varying value appear on the same niveau, thus giving the impression

of a “levelling of ideas” (Wernicke). This rapid  succession of primary

functions necessarily precludes any real experience of the affective value of

the ideas per se, with the result that the affectivity cannot be anything other

than superficial. But, at the same time, this makes rapid adaptations and

changes of attitude possible. The actual  thought-process, or process ofabstraction, naturally suffers when the secondary function is curtailed in

this way, since abstraction requires a sustained contemplation of several

initial ideas and their after-effects, and therefore a longer  secondary

function. Without this, there can be no intensification and abstraction of an

idea or group of ideas.

[465]  The rapid recovery of the primary function produces  a higher

reactivity, extensive rather than intensive, leading to a prompt grasp of the

immediate present in its superficial  aspects, though not of its deeper

meanings. A person of this type gives the impression of having an uncritical

or unprejudiced attitude; we are struck by his readiness to oblige and by his

understanding, or again we may find in him an unaccountable lack of

consideration, tactlessness, and even brutality. That too facile gliding over

the deeper meanings evokes the impression of blindness to everything not

lying immediately on the surface. His quick reactivity has the appearance of

presence of mind, of audacity to the point of foolhardiness, which from

lack of criticism actually turns out to be an inability to realize danger. His

rapidity of action looks like decisiveness; more often than not it is just

blind impulse. Interference in other people’s affairs is taken as a matter of

course, and this comes all the more easily because of his ignorance of the

emotional value of an idea or action and its effect on his fellow men. The

ever renewed readiness for action has an adverse effect on the assimilation of

perceptions and experiences; as a rule, memory is considerably impaired,

because, in general, the associations that can be most readily be reproduced

are those that have become massively interlinked with others. Those that are

relatively isolated become quickly submerged; for this reason it is infinitely

more difficult to remember a series of meaningless, disconnected words than

a poem. Excitability  and an enthusiasm that soon fades are further

characteristics of this type, also a certain  lack of taste  due to the rapid

succession  of  heterogeneous  contents  and  a  failure  to  appreciate their

differing emotional values. His thinking has  more the character of a

representation and orderly arrangement of contents than that of abstraction

and synthesis.

[466] In describing this type with a short secondary  function I have

followed Gross in all essentials, here and there trans-scribing it in terms

of normal psychology. Gross  calls this type “inferiority with shallow

consciousness.” If the  excessively crass features are toned down to the

normal, we get an overall picture in which the reader will easily recognizeJordan’s “less emotional” type, i.e., the extravert. Gross deserves full credit

for being the first to set up a simple and consistent hypothesis to account for

this type.

[467] Gross calls the opposite type “inferiority with  contracted

consciousness.” In this type the secondary function is particularly intense

and prolonged. It therefore influences the consecutive associations to a

higher degree than in the other type. We may also suppose an intensified

primary  function, and hence a more extensive and complete  cell-

performance than with the extravert. A prolonged and  intensified

secondary function would be the natural consequence of this. As a result of

this prolongation, the after-effect of the initial idea persists for a longer

period. From this we get what Gross calls a “contractive effect”: the choice

of associations follows the path of the initial idea, resulting in a fuller

realization or approfondissement of the  “theme.” The idea has a lasting

influence, the impression goes deep. One disadvantage of this is that the

associations are restricted to a narrow range, so that thinking loses much of

its variety and richness. Nevertheless, the contractive effect aids synthesis,

since the elements that have to be combined remain constellated long enough

to make their abstraction possible. This restriction to one theme enriches

the associations that  cluster round it and consolidates one particular

complex of  ideas, but at the same time the complex is shut  off from

everything extraneous and finds itself in isolation, a  phenomenon which

Gross (borrowing from Wernicke) calls  “sejunction.” One result of the

sejunction of the complex is a  multiplication of groups of ideas (or

complexes) that have no connection with one another or only quite a loose

one. Outwardly such a condition shows itself as a disharmonious or, as

Gross calls it, a “sejunctive” personality. The isolated complexes exist side

by side without any reciprocal influence;  they do not interact, mutually

balancing and correcting each other. Though firmly knit in themselves, with

a logical  structure, they are deprived of the correcting influence of

complexes with a different orientation. Hence it may easily happen that a

particularly strong and therefore particularly isolated and uninfluenceable

complex becomes an “over-valued idea,”

4 a dominant that defies all criticism and enjoys complete autonomy, until

it finally becomes an all-controlling factor manifesting itself as “spleen.”

In pathological cases it turns into an obsessive or paranoid idea, absolutely

  unshakable, that rules the individual’s entire life. His whole mentality is  subverted, becoming “deranged.” This conception of the  growth of a

  paranoid idea may also explain why, during the  early stages, it can

sometimes be corrected by suitable psychotherapeutic procedures which

bring it into connection with other complexes that have a broadening and

balancing influence.

5 Paranoiacs are very wary of associating disconnected complexes. They

feel things have to remain neatly separated,  the bridges between the

complexes are broken down as much as possible by an over-precise and

rigid formulation of the  content of the complex. Gross calls this

  tendency “fear of association.”

6

[468] The rigid inner cohesion of such a complex hampers all attempts to

influence it from outside. The attempt is successful only when it is able to

bind the complex to another complex as firmly and logically as it is bound

in itself. The multiplication of insufficiently connected complexes naturally

results in  rigid seclusion from the outside world and a corresponding

accumulation of libido within. Hence we regularly find an extraordinary

concentration on inner processes, either on  physical sensations or on

intellectual processes, depending on  whether  the subject  belongs to  the

sensation or to the thinking type. The personality seems inhibited, absorbed

or distracted, “sunk in thought,” intellectually lopsided, or hypochondriacal.

In every case there is only a meagre participation in external life and a

distinct tendency to solitude and fear of other people, often compensated

by a special love of animals or plants. To make up for this, the inner

processes are particularly active, because from time to  time complexes

which hitherto had little or no connection  with one another suddenly

“collide,” thereby stimulating the primary function to intense activity which,

in its turn, releases a prolonged secondary function that amalgamates the

two complexes. One might think that all complexes would at some time or

other collide in this way, thus producing a general  uniformity and

cohesion of psychic contents. Naturally, this wholesome result could only

come about if in the meantime all change in external life were arrested. But

since this is not  possible,  fresh  stimuli  continually  arrive  and  initiate

secondary functions, which intersect and confuse the inner  lines.

Accordingly this type has a decided tendency to fight  shy of external

stimuli, to keep out of the way of change, to stop the steady flow of life

until all is amalgamated within. Pathological cases show this tendency too;they hold aloof from everything and try to lead the life of a recluse. But

only in mild cases will the remedy be found in this way. In all severe

ones, the only remedy is to reduce the intensity of the primary function, but

this is a chapter in itself, and one which we have already touched on in our

discussion of Schiller’s Letters.

[469] It is clear that this type is distinguished by quite peculiar phenomena in

the realm of affect. We have seen how the subject realizes the associations set

in motion by the initial idea. He carries out a full and coherent association

of the material relevant to the theme, i.e., he associates all material that is

not already linked to other complexes. When a stimulus hits on a complex,

the result is either a violent explosion of affect, or, if the isolation of the

complex is complete, it is entirely negative. But should realization take

place, all the affective values are unleashed; there is a strong emotional

reaction with a prolonged after-effect. Very often this cannot be seen from

outside, but it bores in all the deeper. The emotional reverberations prey

on the subject’s mind and make him incapable of responding to new stimuli

until the emotion has  faded away. An accumulation of stimuli becomes

unbearable,  so he wards them off with violent defence reactions.

Whenever there is a marked accumulation of complexes, a chronic attitude

of defence usually develops, deepening into mistrust and in pathological

cases into persecution mania.

[470] The sudden explosions, alternating with defensiveness and periods of

taciturnity, can give the personality such a bizarre appearance that such

people become an enigma to everyone in their vicinity. Their absorption in

themselves leaves them at a loss when presence of mind or swift action is

demanded. Embarrassing situations often arise from which there seems no

way out—one reason  the more for shunning society. Moreover the

occasional outbursts of affect play havoc with their relations to others, and,

because of their embarrassment and helplessness, they feel incapable of

retrieving the situation. This awkwardness in adapting leads to all sorts of

unfortunate experiences which inevitably produce a feeling of inferiority or

bitterness, and even of hatred that is readily directed at those who were the

actual or supposed authors of their misfortunes. Their affective inner life

is very intense, and the manifold emotional reverberations linger on as an

extremely fine gradation and  perception of feeling-tones. They have a

peculiar emotional sensitivity, revealing itself to the outside world as a

marked timidity and uneasiness in the face of emotional stimuli, and in allsituations that might evoke them. This touchiness is directed primarily

against the emotional conditions in their  environment. All brusque

expressions of opinion, emotional  declarations, playing on the feelings,

etc., are avoided from the start, prompted by the subject’s fear of his own

emotion, which in turn might start off a reverberating impression he might

not be able to master. This sensitivity may easily develop over the years into

melancholy, due to the feeling of  being  cut  off  from  life.  In  fact, Gross

considers melancholy to be especially characteristic of this type.

7 He also emphasizes that the realization of affective values easily leads to

  emotional judgments, to “taking things too seriously.” The prominence

given in this picture to inner processes and the emotional life at once

  reveals the introvert.  Gross’s description is much fuller than Jordan’s

sketch of the “impassioned type,” though the latter, in its main features,

must be identical with the type described by Gross.

[471] In chapter V of his book Gross observes that, within the limits of the

normal, both types of inferiority represent physiological differences of

individuality. The shallow extensive or the narrow intensive consciousness is

therefore a difference of character.

8 According to Gross, the type with a shallow consciousness is essentially

  practical, because of his rapid adaptation to circumstances. His inner life

does not predominate, having no part to play in the formation of the

“great ideational complexes.” “They are energetic propagandists for their

own personality, and, on a higher level, they also work for the great

ideas handed down from the past.”

9 Gross asserts that the emotional life of this type is primitive, though at a

higher level it becomes organized through “the taking over of ready-

made ideals from outside.” In this way,  Gross says, his activity  can

  become “heroic,” but “it is always banal.” “Heroic” and “banal” scarcely

seem compatible with one another. But Gross shows us at once what he

  means: in this type the connection between the erotic complex and the

other complexes of ideas, whether aesthetic, ethical, philosophical, or

  religious, which make up the contents of  consciousness, is not

  sufficiently developed. Freud would say that the erotic complex has been

  repressed. For Gross the  marked presence of this connection is the

  “authentic sign of a  superior nature” (p. 61). It requires for its

  development a prolonged secondary function, because a synthesis of the

contents can be achieved only through approfondissement and  their  prolonged retention in consciousness. The taking over of  conventional

ideals may force sexuality into socially useful paths, but it “never rises

above the level of triviality.” This somewhat harsh judgment becomes

  explicable in the light of the extraverted character: the extravert orients

  himself exclusively by external data, so that his psychic activity consists

mainly in his preoccupation with such things. Hence little or nothing is left

over for the ordering of his inner life. It has to submit as a matter of

course to determinants accepted from without. Under these circumstances,

no connection between the more highly and the less developed functions

can take place, for this demands a great expense of time and trouble; it is

a lengthy and difficult labour of self-education which cannot possibly be

  achieved without  introversion. But the extravert lacks both time and

inclination for this; moreover he is hampered by the same unconcealed

  distrust of his inner world which the introvert feels for the outer world.

[472] One should not imagine, however, that the introvert, thanks to his

greater synthetizing capacity and ability to  realize affective values, is

thereby equipped to complete the  synthesis of his own individuality

without further ado—in  other words, to establish once and for all a

harmonious connection between the higher and lower functions. I prefer

this formulation to Gross’s, which maintains that it is solely a question of

sexuality, for it seems to me that other instincts besides sex are involved.

Sexuality is of course a very frequent form of expression for crude and

untamed instincts, but so too is the striving for power in all its manifold

aspects. Gross coined the term “sejunctive personality” for the introvert in

order to emphasize the peculiar difficulty this type has in integrating his

complexes. His synthetizing capacity merely serves in the first place to

build up complexes that, so far as possible, are isolated from each other.

But such complexes positively hinder the development of a higher unity.

Thus the sexual complex, or the egoistic striving for power, or the search

for pleasure, remains just as isolated and unconnected with other complexes

in the introvert as in the extravert. I remember the case of an introverted,

highly  intellectual neurotic who spent his time alternating between  the

loftiest flights of transcendental idealism and the most squalid suburban

brothels, without any conscious admission of a moral or aesthetic conflict.

The two things were utterly  distinct as though belonging to different

spheres. The result, naturally, was an acute compulsion neurosis.

[473] We must bear this criticism in mind when following Gross’s accountof the type with intensive consciousness.

Intensive  consciousness is, as Gross says, “the foundation of the

introspective individuality.” Because of the strong contractive effect, external

stimuli are always regarded from the standpoint of some idea. Instead of the

impulse towards practical life there is a “drive for inwardness.” “Things

are  conceived not as individual phenomena but as partial ideas or

components of the great ideational complexes.” This view accords with

what we said earlier in our discussion of the  nominalist and realist

standpoints and the Platonic, Megarian, and Cynic schools in antiquity. It is

easy to see from Gross’s argument what the difference is between the two

standpoints: the [extraverted] man with the short secondary function has

many loosely connected primary functions operating in a given space of

time, so that he is struck more particularly by the individual phenomenon.

For him universals are only names lacking reality. But for the [introverted]

man with the prolonged secondary function, the inner facts, abstractions,

ideas, or universals always occupy the foreground; for him they are the

only true realities, to which he must relate all individual phenomena. He is

therefore by nature a realist (in  the Scholastic sense). Since, for the

introvert, the way he thinks about things always takes precedence over the

perception of externals, he is inclined to be a relativist.

10 Harmony in his surroundings gives him especial pleasure; 11 it reflects

  his own inner urge to harmonize his isolated complexes. He avoids all

    “uninhibited behaviour” because it might easily lead to disturbing

  stimuli (explosions of affect must of course be excepted). His social

  savoir faire is poor because of his absorption in his inner life. The

    predominance of his own ideas prevents him from taking over the ideas

  or ideals of others. The intense inner elaboration of the complexes gives

  them a pronounced individual character. “The emotional life is

  frequently of no use socially, but is always individual.”

12

[474] We must subject this statement to a thorough  criticism, for it

contains a problem which, in my experience,  always gives rise to the

greatest misunderstandings between the types. The introverted intellectual,

whom Gross obviously has in mind here, outwardly shows as little feeling

as possible, he entertains logically correct views and tries to do the right

things in the first place because he has a natural distaste for any display of

feeling and in the second because he is fearful lest by incorrect behaviourhe should arouse disturbing stimuli, the affects of his fellow men. He is

afraid of disagreeable affects in others because he credits others with his own

sensitiveness; furthermore, he is always distressed by the quickness and

volatility of the extravert. He bottles up his feeling inside him, so that it

sometimes swells into a passion of which he is only too painfully aware. His

tormenting emotions are well known to him. He compares them with the

feelings displayed by  others, principally, of course, with those of the

extraverted feeling type, and finds that his “feelings” are quite different

from those of other men. Hence he gets round to thinking that his feelings

(or, more correctly, emotions) are unique or, as Gross says, “individual.” It

is natural that they should differ from the feelings of the extraverted feeling

type, because the latter are a differentiated instrument of adaptation and

therefore lack the “genuine passion” which characterizes the deeper feelings

of the introverted thinking type. But passion, as an elemental instinctive

force, possesses little that is individual—it is something common to all men.

Only what is  differentiated can be individual. In the case of intense

emotions, type differences are instantly obliterated in the “human-all-too-

human.” In my view, the extraverted feeling type has really the chief claim

to individualized feeling, because his feelings are differentiated; but he

falls into the same delusion in regard to his thinking. He has thoughts that

torment him. He compares them with the thoughts expressed by the other

people around him, chiefly those of the  introverted thinking type. He

discovers that his thoughts have  little in common with them; he may

therefore regard them as individual and himself, perhaps, as an original

thinker, or he may repress his thoughts altogether, since no one else thinks

the same. In reality they are thoughts which everybody has but are seldom

uttered. In my view, therefore, Gross’s statement springs from a subjective

delusion, though one that is the general rule.

[475] “The heightened contractive power enables one to get  absorbed in

things to which no immediate vital interest is attached.”

13 Here Gross hits on an essential feature of the introverted mentality: the

introvert delights in elaborating his thoughts for their own sake, regardless of

external reality. This is both an  advantage and a danger. It is a great

advantage to be able to develop a thought into an abstraction, freed from the

confines of the senses. The danger is that it will be removed altogether from

the sphere of practical applicability and lose its vital value. The introvert

is always in danger of getting too far away from life and of viewingthings too much under their symbolic aspect. This is also stressed by Gross.

The extravert is in no better plight, though for him matters are different. He

has the capacity to curtail the secondary function to such an extent that he

experiences practically nothing but a succession  of positive primary

functions: he is nowhere attached to anything, but soars above reality in a

kind of intoxication; things are no longer seen as they are but are used

merely as stimulants. This capacity is an advantage in that it enables him

to manoeuvre himself out of many difficult situations (“he who hesitates

is lost”), but, since it so often leads to inextricable chaos, it finally ends in

catastrophe.

[476] From the extraverted type Gross derives what he calls the “civilizing

genius,” and from the introverted type the “cultural genius.” The former he

equates with “practical achievement,” the latter with “abstract invention.” In

the end Gross expresses his conviction that our age stands in especial need of

the contracted, intensive consciousness, in contrast to former ages when

consciousness was shallower and more extensive. “We delight in the ideal,

the profound, the symbolic. Through simplicity to harmony—that is the art

of the highest culture.”

14

[477] Gross wrote these words in 1902. And now? If one were to express

an opinion at all, one would have to say that  we obviously need both

civilization and culture,

15 a shortening of the secondary function for the one, and its prolongation

  for the other. We cannot create one without the other, and we must

  admit, unfortunately, that modern humanity lacks both. Where there is

  too much of the one there is too little of the other, if we want to put it

  more cautiously. The continual harping on progress has by now become

  rather suspect.

[478] In conclusion I would like to remark that Gross’s views coincide

substantially with my own. Even my terms  “extraversion” and

“introversion” are justified in the light of his conceptions. It only remains

for us to make a critical examination of Gross’s basic hypothesis, the

concept of the secondary function.

[479] It is always a risky business to frame physiological  or  “organic”

hypotheses with respect to psychological processes.  There was a regular

mania for this at the time of the great successes in brain research, and the

hypothesis that the pseudopodia of the brain-cells withdrew during sleep isby no means the most absurd of those that were taken seriously and deemed

worthy of “scientific” discussion. People were quite justified in speaking of

a veritable “brain mythology.” I have no desire to treat Gross’s hypothesis

as another “brain myth”—its empirical value is too great for that. It is an

excellent working hypothesis, and one that has received due recognition in

other quarters as well. The concept of the secondary function is as simple as

it is ingenious. It enables one to reduce a very large number of complex

psychic phenomena to a satisfying formula—phenomena  whose  diversity

would have resisted simple reduction and classification under any other

hypothesis. It is indeed such a happy one that, as always, one is tempted to

overestimate its range of application. This, unfortunately, is rather limited.

We will entirely disregard the fact that the hypothesis in itself is only a

postulate, since no one has ever seen a secondary function of the brain

cells, and no one could demonstrate how and why it has in principle the

same contractive effect on subsequent associations as the primary function,

which is by definition essentially different from the secondary function.

There is a  further fact which in  my opinion carries even greater weight: the

psychological attitude in one and the same individual can change its habits in

a very short space of time. But if the duration of the secondary function has a

physiological or organic character, it must surely be regarded as more or less

constant. It could not then be subject to sudden change, for such changes

are never observed in a physiological or organic character, pathological

changes excepted. But, as I have pointed out more than once, introversion

and extraversion are not traits of character at all but mechanisms, which can,

as it  were, be switched on or off at will. Only from their habitual

predominance do the corresponding characters develop. The  predilection

one way or the other no doubt depends on the inborn disposition, but this

is not always the decisive factor. I  have frequently found environmental

influences to be just as important. In one case in my experience, it even

happened that a man with markedly extravert behaviour, while living in close

proximity to an introvert, changed his attitude and became quite introverted

when he later came into contact with a pronounced extraverted personality. I

have repeatedly observed how quickly personal influences can alter the

duration of the secondary function even in a well-defined type, and how

the previous condition re-establishes itself as soon as the alien influence is

removed.

[480] With such experiences in mind, we should, I think,  direct ourattention more to the nature of the primary function. Gross himself lays

stress on the special prolongation of the secondary function in the wake of

strongly feeling-toned ideas,

16 thus showing its dependence on the primary function. There is, in fact,

  no plausible reason why one should base a  theory of types on the

  duration of the secondary function; it could be based just as well on

  the intensity of the primary function, since the duration of the secondary

  function is obviously dependent on the intensity of the cell-performance

  and on the expenditure of energy. It might be objected that the duration of

  the secondary function depends on the rapidity of cell recovery, and that

  there are individuals with especially prompt cerebral assimilation as

  opposed to others who are less favoured. In that case the brain of the

  extravert must possess a greater capacity for cell recovery than that of

  the introvert. But such a very improbable assumption lacks all proof.

  What is known to us of the actual causes of the prolonged secondary

  function is limited to the fact that, leaving pathological conditions aside,

  the special intensity of the primary function results, quite logically, in a

    prolongation  of the secondary function. That being so, the real

  problem would lie with the primary function and might be resolved

  into the question: how comes it that in one person the primary function is

  intense, while in another it is weak? By shifting the problem to the

  primary function, we have to account for its varying intensity, which does

  indeed alter very rapidly. It is my belief that this  is an energic

    phenomenon, dependent on a general attitude.

[481] The intensity of the primary function seems to me  directly

dependent on the degree of tension in the propensity to act. If the psychic

tension is high, the primary function will be particularly intense and will

produce corresponding results. When with increasing  fatigue the tension  

slackens, distractibility and superficiality of association appear, and finally

“flight of ideas,” a condition characterized by a weak primary and a short

secondary function. The general psychic  tension (if we discount

physiological causes, such as relaxation, etc.) is dependent on extremely

complex factors, such as mood, attention, expectancy, etc., that is to say,

on  value judgments which in their turn are the resultants of all  the

antecedent psychic processes. By these judgments I mean not only logical

judgments but also judgments of feeling. Technically, the general tension

could be expressed in the energic sense as libido, but in its psychologicalrelation to consciousness we must express it in terms of value. An intense

primary function is a manifestation of libido, i.e., it is a highly charged

energic process. But it is also a psychological value; hence we term the

trains of association resulting from it valuable in contrast to those which

are the result of a weak contractive effect, and these are valueless because

of their superficiality.

[482] A tense attitude is in general characteristic of the introvert, while a

relaxed, easy attitude distinguishes the extravert.

17 Exceptions, however, are frequent, even in one and the  same

  individual. Give an introvert a thoroughly congenial,  harmonious

  milieu, and he relaxes into complete extraversion, so that one begins to

  wonder whether one may not be dealing with an extravert. But put an

  extravert in a dark and silent room, where all his repressed complexes

  can gnaw at him, and he will get into such a state of tension that he will

  jump at the slightest stimulus. The changing situations of life can have the

  same effect of momentarily reversing the type, but the basic

attitude is not as a rule permanently altered. In spite of  occasional

extraversion the introvert remains what he was before, and the extravert

likewise.

[483] To sum up: the primary function is in my view more important than

the secondary. The intensity of the primary function is the decisive factor.

It depends on the general  psychic tension, i.e., on the amount of

accumulated, disposable libido. The factors determining this accumulation

are the complex resultants of all the antecedent psychic  states—mood,

attention, affect, expectancy, etc. Introversion is characterized by general

tension, an intense primary function and a correspondingly long secondary

function; extraversion by general relaxation, a weak primary function and a

correspondingly short secondary function.                                        VII      THE TYPE PROBLEM IN AESTHETICS

[484] It stands to reason that every province of the human mind directly or

indirectly concerned with psychology will have its contribution to make to

the problem under discussion.  Now that we have listened to the

philosopher, the poet, the observer of men and the physician, let us hear

what the aesthetician has to say.

[485] Aesthetics by its very nature is applied psychology and has to do

not only with the aesthetic qualities of things but also—and perhaps even

more—with the psychological  question of  the  aesthetic attitude. A

fundamental problem like the contrast between introversion and extraversion

could not long escape the attention of the aesthetician, because the way in

which art and beauty are sensed by different individuals differs so widely

that one could not fail to be struck by it.  Aside from the numerous

individual peculiarities of attitude, some of them more or less unique, there

are two basic  antithetical forms which Worringer has described as

abstraction and empathy (Einfühlung).

1 His definition of empathy derives principally from Lipps.  For Lipps,

empathy is “the objectification of myself in an  object distinct from

myself, no matter whether the thing objectified merits the name ‘feeling’

or not.” “By apperceiving an object, I experience, as though issuing from it

or inherent in it as something apperceived, an impulse towards a particular

mode of inner behaviour. This has the appearance of being communicated

to me by the object.”

2 Jodl interprets it as follows:

The sensuous image produced by the artist not only serves to bring to our

minds kindred experiences by the laws of association. Since it is subject to

the general law of externalization

3 and appears as something outside ourselves, we simultaneously project

into it the inner processes it evokes in  us, thereby endowing it with

  aesthetic animation  [Beseelung]—a term that may be preferred to

  Einfühlung because, in this introjection of one’s own inner state into the

image, it is not feeling alone that is involved, but inner processes of all

kinds.

4

[486] Wundt reckons  empathy among  the  elementary  processes of

assimilation.5 It is therefore a kind of perceptive process, characterized by the fact that,

  through feeling, some essential psychic content  is projected into the

object, so that the object is assimilated to the subject and coalesces with

him to such an extent that he feels himself, as it were, in the object. This

  happens when the projected content is associated to a higher degree with

the  subject than with the object. He does not, however, feel  himself

projected into the object; rather, the “empathized”  object appears

  animated to him, as though it were speaking to him of its own accord. It

  should be noted that in itself projection is usually an unconscious process

not under conscious control. On the other hand it is possible to imitate the

  projection consciously by means of a conditional

sentence—for instance, “if you were my father”—thus bringing about the

situation of empathy. As a rule, the  projection transfers unconscious

contents into the object, for  which reason empathy is also termed

“transference” (Freud) in analytical psychology. Empathy, therefore, is a

form of extraversion.

[487] Worringer defines the aesthetic experience of empathy as follows:

“Aesthetic enjoyment is objectified self-enjoyment.”

6 Consequently, only a form one can empathize with is beautiful. Lipps

says: “Only so far as this empathy extends are forms beautiful. Their

  beauty is simply my ideal having free play in them.”

7 According to this, any form one cannot empathize with would be ugly.

But here the theory of empathy reaches its limitations, for, as Worringer

points out, there are art-forms to which the empathetic attitude cannot be

applied. Specifically, one might mention the oriental and exotic art-forms

as examples. In the West, long tradition has established “natural beauty

and verisimilitude” as the criterion of beauty in art, since this is the

  criterion and essential character of Graeco-Roman and occidental art in

  general (with the exception of certain stylized medieval forms).

[488] Since antiquity, our general attitude to art has always been empathetic,

and  for  this reason  we  designate as beautiful  only those things we can

empathize with. If the art-form is opposed to life, if it is inorganic or

abstract, we cannot feel our own life in it. “What I feel myself into is life in

general,” says Lipps. We can empathize only with organic form—form that

is true to nature and has the will to live. And yet another  art-principle

undoubtedly exists, a style that is opposed to life, that denies the will to live,

but nevertheless lays a claim to beauty. When art produces life-denying,inorganic, abstract forms, there can no longer be any question of the will

to create arising out of the need for empathy; it is rather a need that is

directly opposed to empathy—in other words, a tendency to suppress life.

Worringer says: “This counter-pole to the need for empathy appears to us to

be the urge to abstraction.”

8 As to the psychology of this urge to abstraction, Worringer continues:

Now, what are the psychic preconditions for the urge to abstraction? Among

those peoples where it exists we must look for them in their feeling about

the  world, in  their  psychic  attitude  towards the cosmos. Whereas the

precondition for the urge to empathy is a happy pantheistic relationship of

confidence between man and the phenomena of the external world, the urge

to abstraction is the outcome of a great inner uneasiness inspired in man by

these phenomena, and its religious counterpart is the strongly transcendental

colouring  of all ideas. We might describe this state as an immense

spiritual dread of space. When Tibullus says, primum in mundo fecit deus

timorem [the first thing God made in the world was fear],

9 this same feeling of fear may also be assumed to be the root of artistic

  creation.

10

[489] It is indeed true that empathy presupposes a subjective attitude of

confidence, or trustfulness towards the object. It is a readiness to meet the

object halfway, a  subjective assimilation that brings about a good

understanding between subject and object, or at least simulates it. A passive

object allows itself to be assimilated subjectively, but its real qualities are in

no way altered in the process; they are merely veiled, and may even be

violated, because of the transference. Empathy can create similarities and

seemingly common qualities which have no real existence in themselves. It

is understandable, therefore, that  the possibility of another kind of

aesthetic relation to the object must also exist, an attitude that does not go to

meet the object halfway, but rather withdraws from it and seeks to secure

itself against the influence of the object by creating in the subject a psychic

activity whose function it is to neutralize the effect of the object.

[490] Empathy presupposes that the object is, as it were, empty, and seeks

to imbue it with life. Abstraction, on the other hand, presupposes that the

object is alive and active, and seeks to withdraw from its influence. The

abstracting attitude is centripetal, i.e., introverting. Worringer’s conception of

abstraction therefore corresponds to the introverted attitude. It is significantthat Worringer describes the influence of the object as fear or dread. The

abstracting attitude endows the object with a threatening or injurious quality

against which it has to defend itself. This seemingly a priori quality is

doubtless a projection, but a negative one. We must therefore suppose that

abstraction is preceded by an unconscious act of projection which transfers

negative contents to the object.

[491] Since empathy, like abstraction, is a conscious act, and since the

latter is preceded by an unconscious projection,  we may reasonably ask

whether an unconscious act may not also precede empathy. As the essence

of empathy is the  projection  of subjective contents,  it follows that  the

preceding  unconscious act must be the opposite—a neutralizing of the

object that renders it inoperative. In this way the object is emptied, so to

speak, robbed of its spontaneous activity, and  thus made a suitable

receptacle for subjective contents. The empathizing subject wants to feel

his own life in the object; hence the independence of the object and the

difference between it and the subject must not be too great. As a result of the

unconscious act that precedes empathy, the sovereignty of the object is

depotentiated, or rather it is overcompensated, because the  subject

immediately gains ascendency over the object. This  can only happen

unconsciously, through an unconscious fantasy that either devalues and

depotentiates the object or enhances the value and importance of the subject.

Only in this way can that difference of potential arise which empathy needs

in order to convey subjective contents into the object.

[492] The man with the abstracting attitude finds himself in a frighteningly

animated world that seeks to overpower and smother him. He therefore

withdraws into himself, in order to think up a saving formula calculated to

enhance his subjective value at least to the point where he can hold his own

against the influence of the object. The man with the empathetic attitude

finds himself, on the contrary, in a world that needs his subjective feeling

to give it life and soul. He animates it with himself, full of trust; but the

other retreats mistrustfully before the daemonism of objects, and builds up

a protective anti-world composed of abstractions.

[493] If we recall what was said in the preceding chapter, it is easy to see

that empathy corresponds to the mechanism of extraversion, and abstraction

to that of introversion. “The great inner uneasiness inspired in man by the

phenomena of the external world” is nothing other than the introvert’s fear

of all stimuli and change, occasioned by his deeper sensitivity and powers ofrealization. His abstractions serve the avowed  purpose of confining the

irregular and changeable within fixed limits. It goes without saying that this

essentially magical procedure is found in full flower in the art of primitives,

whose geometrical patterns have a magical rather than an aesthetic value.

Worringer rightly says of Oriental art:

Tormented by the confusion and flux of the phenomenal world, these people

were dominated by an immense need for  repose. The enjoyment they

sought in art consisted not so much in immersing themselves in the things

of the outside world and finding pleasure there, as in raising the individual

object out of its arbitrary and seemingly fortuitous existence, immortalizing

it by approximation to abstract forms, and so finding a point of repose

amid the ceaseless flux of appearances.

11

These abstract, regular forms are not merely the highest, they are the only

forms in which man may find repose in face of the monstrous confusion of

the world.

12

[494] As Worringer says, it is precisely the Oriental  art-forms and

religions that display this abstracting attitude to the world. To the Oriental,

therefore, the world must appear very different from what it does to the

Occidental, who animates it with his empathy. For the Oriental, the object

is imbued with life from the start and has ascendency over him; therefore he

withdraws into a world of abstraction. For an illuminating insight into the

Oriental attitude, we may turn to the “Fire Sermon” of the Buddha:

All is on fire. The eye and all the senses are on fire, with the fire of passion,

the fire of hate, the fire of delusion; the fire is kindled by birth, old age, and

death, by pain and lamentation, by sorrow, suffering, and despair. … The

whole world is in flames, the whole world is wrapped in smoke, the

whole world is consumed by fire, the whole world trembles.

13

[495] It is this fearful and sorrowful vision of the world that forces the

Buddhist into his abstracting attitude, just as, according to legend, a similar

impression started the Buddha on his life’s quest. The dynamic animation of

the object as the impelling cause of abstraction is strikingly expressed in

the  Buddha’s symbolic language. This animation does not come  from

empathy, but from an unconscious projection that actually exists a priori.

The term “projection” hardly conveys the real meaning of this phenomenon.Projection is really an act that happens, and not a condition existing a priori,

which is what we are obviously dealing with here. It seems to me that

Lévy-Bruhl’s participation mystique is more descriptive of this condition,

since it aptly formulates the primordial relation of the primitive to the

object. His objects have a dynamic animation, they are charged with soul-

stuff or soul-force (and not always possessed of souls, as the animist theory

supposes), so that they have a direct psychic effect upon him, producing

what is practically a dynamic  identification with the object. In certain

primitive languages articles of personal use have a gender denoting “alive”

(the suffix of animation). With the abstracting attitude it is much the same, for

here too the object is alive and autonomous from the beginning and in no

need of empathy; on the contrary, it has such a powerful effect that the

subject is forced into introversion. Its strong libido investment comes from

its participation mystique with the  subject’s own unconscious. This is

clearly expressed in the words of the Buddha: the universal fire is identical

with the fire of libido, with the subject’s burning passion, which appears to

him as an object because it is not differentiated into a disposable function.

[496] Abstraction thus seems to be a function that is at war with the original

state of participation mystique. Its purpose is to break the object’s hold on

the subject. It leads on the one hand to the creation of art-forms, and on

the other to knowledge of the object. Empathy too is as much an organ of

artistic creation as of cognition. But it functions on a quite different level

from abstraction. Just as the latter is based on the magical significance and

power of the object, the basis of empathy is the magical significance of the

subject, who gains  power over the object by means of mystical

identification.  The primitive is in a similar position: he is magically

influenced by the power of the fetish, yet at the same time he is the magician

and accumulator of magical power who charges the fetish with potency.

An example of this is the churinga rite of the Australian aborigines.

14

[497] The unconscious depotentiation that precedes the act of empathy gives

the object a permanently lower value, as in the case of abstraction. Since the

unconscious contents of the empathetic type are identical with the object

and make it appear inanimate,

15 empathy is needed in order to cognize the nature of the object. One

  might speak in this case of a continual unconscious abstraction which

    “depsychizes” the object. All  abstraction has this effect: it kills the    independent activity of the object in so far as this is magically related to

  the psyche of the subject. The abstracting type does it quite consciously,

  as a defence against the magical influence of the object. The inertness

  of objects also explains the trustful relationship of the empathetic type

  to the world; there is nothing that could exert a hostile influence or

  oppress him, since he alone gives the object life and soul, though to his

  conscious mind the converse would seem to be true. For the abstracting

  type, on the other hand, the world is filled with potent and dangerous

  objects that inspire him with fear and a consciousness of his own

    impotence; he withdraws from any too intimate contact with the world,

  in order to weave those thoughts and formulas with which he hopes to

  gain the upper hand. His psychology, therefore, is that of the under-dog,

  whereas the empathetic type faces the world with confidence—its inert

  objects hold no terrors for him. Naturally this sketch is schematic and

  makes no pretence to be a complete picture of the introverted  or

  extraverted attitude; it merely emphasizes certain nuances  which,

    nevertheless, are not without significance.

[498] Just as the empathetic type is really taking an unconscious delight in

himself through the object, so, without knowing it, the abstracting type is

really reflecting himself when he reflects on the impressions which objects

make upon him. For what the one projects into the object is himself, his

own unconscious contents, and what the other thinks about his impression

of the object is really his thoughts about his own feelings, which appear to

him projected upon the object.

It is evident, therefore, that both empathy and abstraction are needed for any

real appreciation of the object as well as for artistic creation. Both are

always present in every individual, though in most cases they are unequally

differentiated.

[499] In Worringer’s view the common root of these two basic forms of

aesthetic experience is “self-alienation”—the need to get outside oneself.

Through abstraction and “in the contemplation of something immutable and

necessary, we seek deliverance from the hazards of being human, from the

seeming arbitrariness of ordinary organic existence.”

16 Faced with the bewildering profusion of animate objects, we create an

    abstraction, an abstract universal image which conjures the welter of

    impressions into a fixed form. This image has the magical significance

  of a defence against the chaotic flux of experience. The abstracting type