                                        Cover                                        Title


            Complete Works of Carl Jung:


  Psychological Types, Psychiatric Studies,


Essays on Analytical Psychology & others

 


                                Carl Jung                                COPY RIGHT

 
 
 

                                    Published by

            GRAPEVINE INDIA PUBLISHERS PVT LTD

                            www.grapevineindia.com

                                  Delhi | Mumbai

              email: grapevineindiapublishers@gmail.com

                              Ordering Information:

      Quantity sales: Special discounts are available on quantity

          purchases by corporations, associations, and others.

                  For details, reach out to the publisher.

                First published by Grapevine India 2024

                          Copyright © Grapevine 2024

                                All rights reserved

 
 
 

                                 CONTENTS

 

                                      COVER

                                        TITLE

                                COPY RIGHT

 

                      PSYCHOLOGICAL TYPES

                        PSYCHIATRIC STUDIES

                  ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY

 
 

                 PSYCHOLOGICAL TYPES

                         EDITORIAL NOTE

Jung was engaged in the preparatory work for Psychological Types during

his so-called “fallow period,” from 1913 to 1917 or 1918, a time of intense

preoccupation with the images of  his own unconscious, which he

describes in the sixth and  seventh chapters of Memories, Dreams,

Reflections. As he wrote: “This work sprang originally from my need to

define the ways in which my outlook differed from Freud’s and Adler’s.

In attempting to answer this question, I came across the problem of types;

for it is one’s psychological type which from the outset determines and

limits a person’s judgment. My book, therefore, was an effort to deal with

the relationship of the individual to the world, to people and things. It

discussed the various aspects of consciousness, the various attitudes the

conscious mind might take toward the world, and  thus constitutes a

psychology of consciousness regarded from what might be called a clinical

angle.”Psychologische Typen was published by Rascher Verlag, of Zurich,

in 1921. It was translated into English by H. G. Baynes (1882–1943), who

during 1919–22 was Jung’s assistant in Zurich and subsequently became one

of the most  prominent British analytical  psychologists. His translation,

subtitled “The Psychology of Individuation,” was published in 1923 by

Kegan Paul in London and Harcourt, Brace in New York. Some 22,000

copies of the Baynes version were sold. Translations have also appeared in

Dutch, French, Greek, Italian, Japanese, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish,

* and Swedish.

By 1950, the Swiss edition had gone through seven  reprintings (some

15,000 copies),  with little  revision.  The work was published as Band 6 in

the Gesammelte Werke in 1960; for that edition the text was slightly revised,

partly with the help of the author, quotations and references were checked

and corrected, and a definition of the “self,” formulated by Professor Jung

for the edition, was added. In the original the “self” had figured under the

concept of the ego. In accordance with the previously announced plan of the

Collected Works in English, an appendix was added containing an important

preliminary  study for the present book, a lecture delivered at the

Psychoanalytical Congress in Munich, 1913, entitled “A Contribution to the

Study of Psychological Types,” and three other short works on typology

(1925, 1928, 1936). A corrected edition of Band 6 appeared in 1967.

The present volume is one of the last to appear in the Collected Works.Owing to the continued availability of the  Baynes translation in Great

Britain and the United States, and the fact that Jung never subjected this

work to revision (other  than in minor details), the Editors have given

precedence to issuing other volumes of which translations were lacking or

inadequate.

The Gesammelte Werke version, in its second, corrected edition, is the basis

of the present translation. The paragraph  numbering of the Swiss and

English editions differs, chiefly because it is the policy of the Collected

Works to print  quotations in smaller type and not number them as

paragraphs. Furthermore, some of the very long paragraphs in the Swiss text

have been broken up. For the convenience of readers who wish to compare

passages in the two editions, a table of comparative paragraph numbers is

given in the back of this volume.

The numbers of the Definitions fail to correspond among the  various

editions, owing to the vagaries of alphabetical order.

When quoted translations contain modifications, the  indication “Cf.” is

given in the pertinent footnote. Grateful  acknowledgment is made for

permission to quote as follows: to Pantheon Books, a Division of Random

House, Inc., for Lawrence Grant White’s translation of the Divine Comedy;

to Penguin Books Ltd., for Philip Wayne’s translation of Goethe’s Faust;

to Oxford University Press, New York, and  Faber and Faber, Ltd., for

Louis MacNeice’s translation of Faust.

The Editors wish to acknowledge their gratitude to the late A.S.B. Glover,

who contributed research assistance, various  translations of Latin

quotations, and wide-ranging advice, to this as all the other volumes in the

edition.    FOREWORD TO THE FIRST SWISS


                                    EDITION

This book is the fruit of nearly twenty years’ work in the domain of

practical psychology. It grew gradually in my thoughts, taking shape from

the countless impressions and experiences of a psychiatrist in the treatment

of nervous illnesses, from intercourse with men and women of all social

levels, from my personal dealings with friend and foe alike, and, finally,

from a critique of my own psychological peculiarity.

It is not my intention to burden the reader with case material; my concern is

rather to show how the ideas I have abstracted from my practical work can

be linked up, both historically and terminologically, with an existing body

of knowledge. I have done this not so much from a need for historical

justification as from a desire to bring the experiences of a  medical

specialist out of their narrow professional setting into a more general context,

a context which will enable the educated layman to derive some profit from

them. I would never have embarked upon this amplification, which might

easily be misunderstood as an encroachment upon other spheres, were I not

convinced that the psychological views presented in this book are of wide

significance and application, and are therefore better treated in a  general

frame  of reference than left in the form of a specialized scientific

hypothesis.

With this aim in view I have confined myself to examining the ideas of

comparatively few workers in this field, and have refrained from mentioning

all that has already been said concerning our problem in general. Apart

from the fact that  even an approximately complete catalogue of the

relevant  material and opinions would far exceed my powers, such a

compilation would not make any fundamental contribution to the discussion

and development of the problem. Without regret, therefore, I have omitted

much that I have collected in the course of the years, and confined myself as

far as possible to essentials. A valuable document that was of very great help

to me has also had to be sacrificed. This is a bulky correspondence which

I exchanged with my friend Dr. Hans Schmid

1, of Basel, on the question of types. I owe a great deal of clarification to

this interchange of ideas, and much of it, though of course in altered and

greatly revised form, has gone into my book. The correspondence belongs

essentially to the preparatory stage of the work, and its inclusion wouldcreate more confusion than clarity. Nevertheless, I owe it to the labours

of my friend to express my thanks to him here.
 

C. G. JUNG

Küsnacht/Zurich

Spring, 1920

                     FOREWORD EDITION

                    TO THE SEVENTH SWISS

This new edition appears unaltered, which is not to say that the book is not

in need of further additions, improvements, and supplementary material. In

particular, the somewhat terse descriptions of the types could have been

expanded. Also, a consideration of works on typology by psychologists

since this book first appeared would have been desirable. But the present

scope of the book is already so great that it ought not to be augmented unless

urgently necessary. Moreover, there is little practical purpose in making the

problems of typology still more complicated when not even the elements

have been properly understood. Critics commonly fall into the error of

assuming that the types were, so to speak, fancy free and were  forcibly

imposed on the empirical material. In face of this  assumption I must

emphasize that my typology is the result of  many years of practical

experience—experience that remains  completely closed to the academic

psychologist. I am first and foremost a doctor and practising psychotherapist,

and all my psychological formulations are based on the experiences gained

in the hard course of my daily professional work. What I have to say in

this book, therefore, has, sentence by sentence, been tested a hundredfold in

the practical treatment of the sick and originated with them in the first place.

Naturally, these medical experiences are accessible and intelligible only to

one who is professionally concerned with  the treatment of psychic

complications. It is therefore not the fault of the layman if certain of my

statements strike him as strange, or if he thinks my typology is the product of

idyllically undisturbed hours in the study. I doubt, however, whether this

kind of ingenuousness is a qualification for competent criticism.

September 1937

C. G. JUNG  FOREWORD TO THE EIGHTH SWISS


                                    EDITION

The new edition again appears unaltered in essentials, but this time many

small, long-necessary corrections have been made in the details. Also a

new index has been compiled. I am  especially indebted to Mrs. Lena

Hurwitz-Eisner for this irksome work.

June 1949

C. G. JUNG    FOREWORD TO THE ARGENTINE


                                    EDITION

                                            1

No book that makes an essentially new contribution to knowledge enjoys

the privilege of being thoroughly understood. Perhaps it is most difficult

of all for new psychological insights to make any headway. A psychology

that is grounded on experience always touches upon personal and intimate

matters and thus arouses everything that is contradictory and unclarified in

the human psyche. If one is plunged, as I am for professional reasons, into

the chaos of psychological opinions, prejudices, and susceptibilites, one

gets a profound and indelible impression of the diversity of  individual

psychic dispositions, tendencies, and convictions, while on the other hand

one increasingly feels the need for some kind of order among the chaotic

multiplicity of points of view. This need calls for a critical orientation and

for general principles and criteria, not too specific in their formulation,

which may serve as points de repère in sorting out the empirical material.

What I have attempted in this book is essentially a critical psychology.

This fundamental tendency in my work has often been overlooked, and far

too many readers have succumbed to the error of thinking that Chapter X

(“General Description of the Types”) represents the essential content and

purpose of the book, in the sense that it provides a system of classification

and a practical guide to a good judgment of human character. Indeed, even in

medical circles the opinion has got about that

my method of treatment consists in fitting patients into this system and

giving them corresponding “advice.” This  regrettable misunderstanding

completely ignores the fact that this kind of classification is nothing but a

childish parlour game, every  bit as  futile  as the  division of mankind  

into  brachycephalics and dolichocephalics. My typology is far  rather a

critical apparatus serving to sort out and organize the welter of empirical

material, but not in any sense to stick labels on people at first sight.

It is not a physiognomy and not an anthropological system, but a critical

psychology dealing with the organization and  delimitation of psychic

processes that can be shown to be typical. For this reason I have placed the

general typology and the Definitions at the end of the book, after having

described, in chapters I to IX, the processes in question with the help ofvarious examples. I would therefore recommend the reader  who really

wants to understand my book to immerse himself first of all in chapters II

and V. He will gain more from them than from any typological terminology

superficially picked up, since this serves no other purpose than a totally

useless desire to stick on labels.

It is now my pleasant duty to express my sincerest thanks to  Madame

Victoria Ocampo for her great help in securing the publication of this book,

and to Señor Ramón de la Serna for his work of translation.

Küsnacht/Zurich

C. G. JUNG

October 1934                PSYCHOLOGICAL TYPES

Plato and Aristotle! These are not merely two systems, they are types of

two distinct human natures, which from time immemorial, under every

sort of disguise, stand more or less inimically opposed. The whole medieval

world in particular was riven by this conflict, which persists down to the

present day, and which forms the most essential content of the history of the

Christian Church. Although under other names, it is always of Plato and

Aristotle that we speak. Visionary,  mystical, Platonic natures disclose

Christian ideas and the corresponding symbols from the fathomless depths

of their souls. Practical, orderly, Aristotelian natures build out of these ideas

and symbols a fixed system, a dogma and a cult.  Finally the Church

embraces both natures, one of them entrenched in the clergy and the other

in monasticism, but both keeping up a constant feud.

—Heine, Deutschland, I                          INTRODUCTION

[1] In my practical medical work with nervous patients I have long been

struck by the fact that besides the many individual differences in human

psychology there are also typical differences. Two types especially become

clear to me; I have termed them the introverted and the extraverted types.

[2] When we consider the course of human life, we see how the fate of

one individual is determined more by the objects of his interest, while in

another it is determined more by his own inner self, by the subject. Since

we all swerve rather more towards one side or the other, we naturally tend to

understand everything in terms of our own type.

[3] I mention this circumstance at once in order to avoid  possible

misunderstandings. It will be apparent that it is one  which considerably

aggravates the difficulty of a general description of types. I must presume

unduly upon the  goodwill of the reader if I may hope to be rightly

understood. It would be relatively simple if every reader knew to which

category he belonged. But it is often very difficult to find out whether a

person belongs to one type or the other, especially in regard to oneself. In

respect of one’s own personality one’s judgment is as a rule extraordinarily

clouded. This subjective  clouding of judgment is particularly common

because in every pronounced type there is a special tendency to

compensate the one-sidedness of that type, a tendency which is biologically

purposive since it strives constantly to maintain the psychic equilibrium.

The compensation gives rise to secondary characteristics, or secondary

types, which present a picture that is extremely difficult to interpret, so

difficult that one is inclined to deny the existence of types altogether and

to believe only in individual differences.

[4] I must emphasize this difficulty in order to justify certain peculiarities in

my presentation. It might seem as if the simplest way would be to describe

two concrete cases and to dissect them side by side. But everyone possesses

both mechanisms,  extraversion as well as introversion, and only the

relative predominance of one or the other determines the type. Hence, in

order to throw the picture into the necessary relief, one would have to

retouch it rather vigorously, and this would amount to a more or less

pious fraud. Moreover, the psychological reactions of a human being are so

complicated that my powers of description would hardly suffice to draw an

absolutely correct picture. From sheer necessity, therefore, I must confinemyself to a presentation of principles which I  have abstracted from a

wealth of facts observed in many different individuals. In this there is no

question of a deductio a priori, as it might appear; it is rather a deductive

presentation of empirically gained insights. These insights will, I hope,

help to clarify a dilemma which, not only in analytical psychology but in  

other branches of  science as well, and especially in the personal relations of

human beings  with one another, has led and still continues to lead to

misunderstanding and discord. For they explain how the existence of two

distinct types is actually a fact that has long been known: a fact that in one

form or another has struck the observer of human nature or dawned upon the

brooding reflection of  the  thinker, presenting itself to  Goethe’s  intuition,

for instance, as the all-embracing principle of systole and diastole. The

names and concepts by which the  mechanisms of extraversion and

introversion have been grasped are extremely varied, and each of them is

adapted to the standpoint of the observer in question. But despite the

diversity of the formulations the fundamental idea common to  them all

constantly shines through: in one case an outward movement of interest

towards the object, and in the other a movement of interest away from the

object to the subject and his own psychological processes. In the first case

the object works like a magnet upon the tendencies of the subject; it

determines the subject to a large extent and even alienates  him from

himself. His qualities may become so transformed by assimilation to the

object that one might think it possessed  some higher and decisive

significance for him. It might  almost seem as if it were an absolute

determinant, a special purpose of life or fate that he should abandon himself

wholly to the object. But in the second case the subject is and remains the

centre of every interest. It looks, one might say, as though all the life-energy

were ultimately seeking the subject, and thus  continually prevented the

object from exercising any  overpowering influence. It is as though the

energy were flowing away from the object, and the subject were a magnet

drawing the object to itself.

[5] It is not easy to give a clear and intelligible description of this two-way

relationship to the object without running the  risk of paradoxical

formulations which would create more  confusion than clarity. But in

general one could say that the introverted standpoint is one which sets the

ego and the subjective psychological process above the object and the

objective process, or at any rate seeks to hold its ground against theobject. This attitude, therefore, gives the subject a higher value than the

object, and the object accordingly has a  lower value. It is of secondary

importance; indeed, sometimes  the object represents no more than an

outward token of a subjective content, the embodiment of an idea, the idea

being the essential thing. If it is the embodiment of a feeling, then again the

feeling is the main thing and not the object in its  own right. The

extraverted standpoint, on the contrary,  subordinates the subject to the

object, so that the object has the higher  value.  In this case the  subject  is  

of secondary importance, the subjective process appearing at times as no

more than a disturbing or superfluous appendage of objective events. It is

clear that the psychology resulting from these contrary standpoints must be

classed as two totally different orientations. The one sees everything in

terms of his own situation, the other in terms of the objective event.

[6] These contrary attitudes are in themselves no more than  correlative

mechanisms: a diastolic going out and seizing of the object, and a systolic

concentration and detachment of  energy from the object seized. Every

human being possesses both mechanisms as an expression of his natural life-

rhythm,  a rhythm which Goethe, surely not by chance, described

physiologically in terms of the heart’s activity. A rhythmical alternation of

both forms of psychic activity would perhaps correspond to the normal

course of life. But the complicated outer conditions under which we live and

the even more complicated conditions of our individual psychic make-up

seldom permit  a completely undisturbed flow of psychic energy. Outer

circumstances and inner disposition frequently favour one mechanism and

restrict or hinder the other. One mechanism will naturally predominate, and

if this condition becomes in any way chronic a type will be produced; that

is, an habitual attitude in which one mechanism predominates permanently,

although the other can never be completely suppressed since it is an integral

part of the psychic economy. Hence there can never be a pure type in the

sense that it possesses only one mechanism with the complete atrophy of

the other. A typical  attitude always means merely the relative

predominance of one mechanism.

[7] The hypothesis of introversion and extraversion allows us, first of all, to

distinguish two large groups of psychological individuals. Yet this grouping

is of such a superficial and general nature that it permits no more than this

very general distinction. Closer investigation of the individual psychologies

that fall into one group or the other will at once show great differencesbetween individuals who nevertheless  belong to the same group. If,

therefore, we wish to determine  wherein lie the differences between

individuals belonging to a  definite group, we must take a further step.

Experience has taught me that in general individuals can be distinguished not

only according to the broad distinction between introversion  and

extraversion, but also according to their basic psychological functions. For

in the same measure as outer circumstances and inner disposition cause

either introversion  or extraversion to predominate, they also favour the

predominance of one definite basic function in the individual. I have found

from experience that the basic psychological functions, that is, functions

which are genuinely as well as essentially different from other functions,

prove to be thinking, feeling, sensation, and intuition. If one of these

functions habitually predominates, a corresponding type results. I therefore

distinguish a thinking, a feeling, a sensation, and  an  intuitive type.  Each 

of  these  types  may  moreover be either introverted or extraverted,

depending on its relation to the object as we have described above. In my

preliminary work on psychological types

1 I did not carry out this differentiation, but identified the thinking type with

the introvert and the feeling type with the extravert. A deeper study of the

problem has  shown this equation to be  untenable.  In order to avoid

misunderstandings, I would ask the reader to bear in mind the differentiation I

have developed here. For the  sake of clarity, which is essential in such

complicated matters,  I have devoted the last chapter of this book to the

definition of my psychological concepts.                                            I

THE PROBLEM OF TYPES IN THE HISTORY

OF CLASSICAL AND MEDIEVAL THOUGHTPSYCHOLOGY IN THE CLASSICAL AGE: THE

          GNOSTICS, TERTULLIAN, ORIGEN

[8] So long as the historical world has existed there has always been

psychology, but an objective psychology is only of recent growth. We could

say of the science of former times that in proportion to the lack of objective

psychology there is an increase in the rate of subjectivity. Hence, though the

works of the ancients are full of psychology, only little of it  can be

described as objective psychology. This may be due in no small measure to

the peculiar character of human relationships in classical and medieval

times. The ancients  had, so to speak, an almost entirely biological

valuation of their fellow-men; this is everywhere apparent in their habits of

life and in the legislation of antiquity. The medieval man, in so far as his

value judgments found any expression at all,  had on the contrary a

metaphysical valuation of his fellows, and this had its source in the idea of

the imperishable value  of  the human soul. This metaphysical valuation,

which may be regarded as compensatory to the standpoint of antiquity, is

just as unfavourable as the biological one so far as a personal valuation is

concerned, which alone can form the basis of an objective psychology.

[9] Although not a few people think that a psychology can be written ex

cathedra, nowadays most of us are convinced that an objective psychology

must be founded above all on observation and experience. This foundation

would be ideal if only it were possible. The ideal and aim of science do

not consist in giving the most exact possible description of the facts—

science cannot compete as a recording instrument with the camera and the

gramophone—but in establishing certain  laws,  which are merely

abbreviated expressions for many diverse processes that are yet conceived

to be somehow correlated. This aim goes beyond the purely empirical by

means of the concept, which, though it may have general and proved

validity, will always be a product of the subjective  psychological

constellation of the investigator. In the making of scientific theories and

concepts many personal and accidental factors are involved. There is also a

personal equation that is psychological and not merely psychophysical. We

see colours but not wave-lengths. This well-known fact must nowhere be

taken to heart more seriously than in  psychology. The effect of the

personal equation begins already in the act of observation. One sees what

one can best see oneself. Thus, first and foremost, one sees the mote inone’s brother’s eye. No doubt the mote is there, but the beam sits in one’s

own eye—and may considerably hamper the act of seeing. I mistrust the

principle of “pure observation” in so-called objective psychology unless

one confines oneself to the eye-pieces of chronoscopes and tachistoscopes

and suchlike “psychological” apparatus. With such methods one also guards

against too  embarrassing a yield of empirical psychological facts.

But the personal equation asserts itself even more in the presentation and

communication of one’s own  observations, to say nothing of the

interpretation and abstract exposition of the empirical material. Nowhere is

the basic requirement so indispensable as in psychology that the observer

should be adequate to his object, in the sense of being able to see not

only subjectively but also objectively. The demand that he should see only

objectively is quite out of the question, for it is impossible. We must be

satisfied if he does not see too subjectively. That the subjective observation

and interpretation accord with the objective facts proves the truth of the

interpretation only in so far as the latter makes no pretence to be generally

valid, but valid only for that area of the object which is being considered.

To this extent it is just the beam in one’s own eye that enables one to detect

the mote in one’s brother’s eye. The beam in one’s own eye, as we have

said, does not prove that one’s brother has no mote in  his.  But the

impairment of one’s own vision might easily give rise to a general theory that

all motes are beams.

The recognition and taking to heart of the subjective  determination of

knowledge in general, and of psychological  knowledge in  particular, are

basic conditions for  the scientific  and impartial evaluation of  a psyche

different from that of the observing subject. These conditions are fulfilled

only when the observer is sufficiently informed about the nature and

scope of his own personality. He can, however, be sufficiently informed only

when he has in large measure freed himself from the levelling influence

of collective opinions and thereby arrived at a clear conception of his own

individuality.

The further we go back into history, the more we see  personality

disappearing beneath the wrappings of collectivity. And if we go right back

to primitive psychology, we find absolutely no trace of the concept of an

individual. Instead of individuality we find only collective relationship or

what Lévy-Bruhl calls participation mystique. The collective  attitude

hinders the recognition and evaluation of a psychology different from thesubject’s, because the mind that is collectively oriented is quite incapable of

thinking and  feeling in any other way than by projection. What we

understand by the concept “individual” is a relatively recent acquisition in

the history of the human mind and human culture. It is no wonder, therefore,

that the earlier all-powerful collective attitude prevented almost completely

an objective  psychological evaluation of individual differences, or any

scientific objectification of individual psychological  processes. It was

owing to this very lack of psychological thinking that knowledge became

“psychologized,” i.e., filled  with projected psychology. We find striking

examples of this in man’s first attempts at a philosophical explanation of

the  cosmos. The development of individuality, with the  consequent

psychological differentiation of man, goes hand in  hand with the de-

psychologizing work of objective science.

These reflections may explain why objective psychology has such a meagre

source in the material handed  down to us from antiquity. The

differentiation of the four temperaments, which we took over from the

ancients, hardly rates as a psychological typology since the temperaments

are  scarcely more than psychophysical colourings. But this lack  of

information does not mean that we can find no trace in classical literature

of the effects of the psychological pairs of opposites we are discussing.

Gnostic philosophy established three types, corresponding perhaps to  three 

of the  basic psychological functions: thinking, feeling, and sensation. The

pneumatikoi could be correlated with thinking, the psychikoi with feeling,

and the hylikoi with sensation. The inferior rating of the psychikoi was in

accord with the spirit of Gnosticism, which, unlike Christianity, insisted on

the value of knowledge. The Christian principles of love and faith kept

knowledge at a distance. In the Christian sphere the pneumatikoi would

accordingly get the lower rating, since they were distinguished merely by

the possession of Gnosis, i.e., knowledge.

Type differences should also be borne in mind when we consider the long

and perilous struggle which the Church from its earliest beginnings waged

against Gnosticism. Owing to the predominantly practical trend of early

Christianity the intellectual hardly came into his own, except when he

followed his fighting instincts by indulging in polemical apologetics. The

rule of faith was too strict and allowed no  freedom of movement.

Moreover, it was poor in positive  intellectual content. It boasted of few

ideas, and though these were of immense practical value they were a definiteobstacle to thought. The intellectual was much worse hit by the sacrificium

intellectus than the feeling type. It is therefore understandable that the

vastly superior intellectual content of  Gnosis, which in the light of our

present mental development has not lost but has considerably gained in

value, must have made the greatest possible appeal to the intellectual within

the Church. For him it held out in very truth all the temptations of this world.

Docetism in particular caused grave trouble to the Church with its contention

that Christ possessed only an  apparent body and that his whole earthly

existence and passion had been merely a semblance. In this contention the

purely intellectual element predominates at the expense of human feeling.

Perhaps the struggle with Gnosis is most vividly presented to us in two

figures who were of the utmost significance not only as Church Fathers but

as personalities. These are Tertullian and Origen, who lived towards the end

of the second century. Schultz says of them:

One organism is able to take in nourishment and assimilate it  almost

completely into its own nature; another with equal persistence eliminates

it with every sign of passionate resistance. Thus Origen on one side, and

Tertullian on the other, reacted in diametrically opposite ways to Gnosis.

Their reaction is not only characteristic of the two personalities and their

philosophical outlook; it is of fundamental significance with regard to the

position of Gnosis in the spiritual life and religious currents of that age.

1

Tertullian was born in Carthage somewhere about  A.D. 160. He was a

pagan, and he abandoned himself to the lascivious life of his city until about

his thirty-fifth year, when he became a Christian. He was the author of

numerous writings wherein his character, which is our especial interest, is

unmistakably displayed. Most clearly of all we see his  unparalleled

noble-hearted zeal, his fire, his passionate  temperament, and the

profundity of his religious understanding. He was a fanatic, brilliantly one-

sided in his defence of a recognized truth, possessed of a matchless fighting

spirit, a merciless opponent who saw victory only in the total annihilation of

his adversary, his language a flashing blade wielded with ferocious mastery.

He was the creator of the Church Latin that lasted for more than a thousand

years. It was he who coined the terminology of the early Church. “Once he

had seized upon a point of view, he had to follow it through to its ultimate

conclusion as though lashed by the legions of hell, even when right had

long since ceased to be on his side and all reasonable order lay in shredsbefore him.” 2 His impassioned thinking was so inexorable that again and

again he alienated himself from the very thing for which he had given his

heart’s blood. Accordingly his ethical code was bitterly severe. Martyrdom

he commanded to be sought and  not shunned; he permitted no second

marriage, and required the permanent veiling of persons of the female sex.

Gnosis,  which in reality is a passion for thinking and knowing, he

attacked with unrelenting fanaticism, together with philosophy and science

which differed from it so little. To him is ascribed the sublime confession:

Credo quia absurdum est (I believe because it is absurd). This does not

altogether accord with historical fact, for he merely said: “And the Son of

God died, which is immediately credible because it is absurd. And buried he

rose again, which is certain because it is impossible.”

3

Thanks to the acuteness of his mind, he saw through  the poverty of

philosophical and Gnostic knowledge, and contemptuously rejected it. He

invoked against it the testimony of his own inner world, his own inner

realities, which were one with his faith. In shaping and developing these

realities he became the creator of those abstract conceptions which still

underlie the Catholic system of today. The irrational inner reality had for him

an essentially dynamic nature; it was his principle, his foundation in face of

the world  and of all collectively valid and rational  science and

philosophy. I quote his own words:

I summon a new witness, or rather a witness more known than any written

monument, more debated than any system of life, more published abroad

than any promulgation, greater than the whole of man, yea that which

constitutes the whole of man. Approach then, O my soul, whether you be

something divine and eternal, as many philosophers believe—the less then

will you lie—or not wholly divine, because mortal, as Epicurus alone

contends—the less then ought you to lie—whether you come from heaven

or are born of earth, whether compounded of numbers or of atoms, whether

you have your beginning with the body or are later  joined to it; what

matter indeed whence you come and how you make man to be what he is,

a reasonable being, capable of perception and of knowledge. But I summon

you not, O soul, as proclaiming wisdom, trained in the schools, conversant

with libraries, fed and nourished in the academies  and pillared halls of

Athens. No, I would speak with you, O soul, as wondrous simple and

unlearned, awkward and  inexperienced, such as you are for those whopossess nothing else but you, even as you come from the alleys, from the

street-corners, and from the workshops. It is just your unknowingness that

I need.

4

The self-mutilation performed by Tertullian in the sacrificium intellectus led

him to an unqualified recognition of the irrational inner reality, the true

rock of his faith. The necessity of the religious process which he sensed in

himself

he crystallized in  the  incomparable formula anima  naturaliter

christiana (the soul is by nature Christian). With the sacrificium

intellectus philosophy and science, and hence also Gnosis, fell to

the ground. In the further course of his life the qualities I have

described became exacerbated. When the Church was driven to

compromise more and more with the masses, he revolted against

it and became a follower of the Phrygian prophet Montanus, an

ecstatic, who stood for the principle of absolute denial of the world

and complete spiritualization. In violent pamphlets he now began

to assail the policy of Pope Calixtus I, and this together with his

Montanism put him more or less outside the pale of the Church.

According to a  report of Augustine, he even quarrelled with

Montanism later and founded a sect of his own.

Tertullian is a classic example of introverted thinking. His very considerable

and keenly developed intellect was flanked by an unmistakable sensuality.

The psychological  process of development which we call specifically

Christian led him to the sacrifice, the amputation, of the most valuable

function—a mythical idea that is also found in the great and exemplary

symbol of the sacrifice of the Son of God. His most valuable organ was

the intellect and the clarity of knowledge it made possible. Through the

sacrificium intellectus the way of purely intellectual development was

closed to him; it forced him to recognize the irrational dynamism of his

soul as the foundation of his being. The  intellectuality of Gnosis, the

specifically rational stamp it gave to the dynamic phenomena of the soul,

must have been odious to him, for that was just the way he had to forsake in

order to acknowledge the principle of feeling.

In Origen we may recognize the absolute opposite of Tertullian. He wasborn in Alexandria about A.D. 185. His father was a Christian martyr. He

himself grew up in that quite unique mental atmosphere where the ideas of

East and  West mingled. With an intense yearning for knowledge he

eagerly absorbed all that was worth knowing, and accepted  everything,

whether Christian, Jewish, Hellenistic, or  Egyptian, that the teeming

intellectual world of Alexandria  offered him. The pagan philosopher

Porphyry, a pupil of Plotinus, said of him: “His outward life was that of a

Christian and against the law; but in his opinions about material things and

the Deity he thought like a Greek, and introduced Greek ideas into foreign

fables.”

5

His self-castration had taken place sometime before A.D. 211; his inner

motives for this may be guessed, but historically they are not known to

us. Personally he was of great influence, and had a winning speech. He was

constantly surrounded by pupils and a whole host of amanuenses who

gathered up the precious words that fell from the revered master’s lips.

As an author he was extraordinarily prolific and he developed into a great

teacher. In Antioch he even  delivered lectures on theology to the

Emperor’s mother Mammaea. In Caesarea he was the head of a school.

His  teaching activities were frequently interrupted by his  extensive

journeyings. He possessed an extraordinary  erudition and had an

astounding capacity for careful  investigation. He hunted up old biblical

manuscripts and earned special merit for his textual criticism. “He was a

great scholar, indeed the only true scholar the early Church possessed,”

says Harnack. In complete contrast to Tertullian,

Origen did not cut himself off from the influence of Gnosticism; on the

contrary, he even channelled it, in attenuated form, into the bosom of the

Church, or such at least was his aim. Indeed, judging by his thought and

fundamental views, he was himself almost a Christian  Gnostic. His

position in regard to faith and knowledge  is described by Harnack in the

following psychologically significant words:

The Bible is equally needful to both: the believers receive from it the

facts and commandments they need, while the Gnostics decipher thoughts

in it and gather from it the powers which guide them to the contemplation

and love of  God—whereby all material things, through spiritual

interpretation (allegorical exegesis, hermeneutics), seem to be melted into a

cosmos of ideas, until at last everything is surmounted and left behind as astepping-stone, while only this remains: the blessed and abiding relationship

of the God-created creaturely soul to God (amor et visio).

6

His theology as distinguished from Tertullian’s was  essentially

philosophical; it fitted neatly into the framework of Neoplatonic philosophy.

In Origen the two worlds of Greek philosophy and Gnosis on the one hand,

and Christian ideas on the other,  interpenetrate in a peaceful and

harmonious whole. But this  daring, perspicacious  tolerance and fair-

mindedness led Origen, too, to the fate of condemnation by the Church.

Actually the final condemnation took place only  posthumously, after

Origen as an old man had been tortured  in the persecution of the

Christians under Decius and had subsequently died from the effects of the

torture. Pope Anastasius I pronounced the condemnation in 399, and in 543

his heretical teachings were anathematized at a synod  convoked by

Justinian, which judgment was upheld by later councils.

Origen is a classic example of the extraverted type. His basic orientation

was towards the object; this showed itself in his scrupulous regard for

objective facts and their conditions, as well as in the formulation of that

supreme  principle: amor et visio Dei. The Christian process of

development encountered in Origen a type whose ultimate foundation was

the relation to the object—a relation that has always symbolically expressed

itself in sexuality and accounts for the fact that there are certain theories

today which reduce all the essential psychic functions to sexuality  too.

Castration was therefore an adequate expression of the sacrifice of the most

valuable function. It is entirely characteristic that Tertullian should perform

the sacrificium intellectus, whereas Origen was led to the sacrificium phalli,

because the Christian process demands a complete abolition of the sensual

tie to the object; in other words, it demands the sacrifice of the hitherto  

most valued function, the  dearest  possession, the strongest instinct.

Considered biologically, the sacrifice serves the interests of domestication,

but  psychologically it opens a door for new possibilities of  spiritual

development through the dissolution of old ties.

Tertullian sacrificed the intellect because it bound him  most strongly to

worldliness. He fought against Gnosis  because for him it represented a

deviation into intellectuality, which at the same time involved sensuality. In

keeping with this fact we find that in reality Gnosticism also was divided

into two schools: one school striving after a spirituality that exceeded allbounds, the other losing itself in an ethical  anarchism, an  absolute

libertinism that shrank from no lewdness and no  depravity however

atrocious and perverse. A definite  distinction was made between the

Encratites, who practised continence, and  the  Antitactae or  Antinomians, 

who  were opposed to law and order, and who in obedience to certain

doctrines sinned on principle and purposely gave themselves  up to

unbridled debauchery. To the latter school belong the  Nicolaitans,

Archontics, etc., and the aptly named Borborians. How closely the seeming

contraries lay side by side is shown by the example of the Archontics, for

this same sect was divided into an Encratite and an Antinomian school,

both of which pursued their aims logically and consistently. If anyone wants

to know what are the ethical consequences of intellectualism pushed to the

limit and carried out on a grand scale, let him study the history of Gnostic

morals. He will  then fully understand the sacrificium intellectus. These

people were also consistent in practice and carried their crazy ideas  to

absurd lengths in their actual lives.

Origen, by mutilating himself, sacrificed his sensual tie to the world. For

him, evidently, the specific danger was not the intellect but feeling and

sensation, which bound him to the object. Through castration he freed

himself from the sensuality that was coupled with Gnosticism; he could

then surrender without fear to the treasures of Gnostic thought, whereas

Tertullian through his sacrifice of the intellect turned away from Gnosis but

also reached a depth of religious feeling that we miss in Origen. “In one

way he was superior to Origen,” says Schultz, “because in his deepest soul he

lived every one of his words; it was not reason that carried him away, like

the other, but the heart. Yet in another respect

Tertullian stands far behind him, inasmuch as he, the most passionate of

all thinkers, was on the verge of rejecting knowledge altogether, for his

battle against Gnosis was  tantamount to a complete denial of human

thought.”

7

We see here how, in the Christian process, the original type has actually

become reversed: Tertullian, the acute thinker, becomes the man of feeling,

while Origen becomes  the scholar and loses himself in intellectuality.

Logically, of course, it is quite easy to put it the other way round and say

that  Tertullian had always been the man of feeling and Origen the

intellectual. Apart from the fact that the difference of type is not therebydone away with but exists as before, the reversal does not explain how it

comes that Tertullian saw his most dangerous enemy in the intellect, and

Origen in sexuality. One could say they were both deceived, adducing as

evidence the fatal outcome of both lives by way of argument. If that were

the case, one would have to assume that they both  sacrificed the less

important thing, and that both of them made a crooked bargain with fate.

That is certainly a point of view whose validity should be recognized in

principle. Are there not just such slyboots among primitives who approach

their fetish with a black hen under the arm, saying; “See, here is thy sacrifice,

a beautiful black pig.” I am, however, of the opinion that the depreciatory

method of explanation, notwithstanding the unmistakable relief which the

ordinary mortal feels in dragging down something great, is not under all

circumstances the correct one, even though it may appear  to be very

“biological.” From what we can personally know of these two great figures

in the realm of the spirit, we must say that their whole nature was so sincere

that their conversion to Christianity was neither an underhand trick nor a

fraud, but had both reality and truthfulness.

We shall not be digressing if we take this opportunity to try to grasp the

psychological meaning of this rupture of the natural course of instinct,

which is what the Christian process of sacrifice appears to be. From what

has been said it follows that conversion signifies at the same time a transition

to another attitude. This also makes it clear from what source the impelling

motive for conversion comes, and how far Tertullian was right in conceiving

the soul as naturaliter  Christiana. The natural course of instinct, like

everything in nature, follows the line of least resistance. One man is rather

more gifted here, another there; or again, adaptation to the  early

environment of childhood may demand relatively more  reserve and

reflection or relatively more empathy and participation, according to the

nature of the parents and the  circumstances. In this way a certain

preferential attitude is built up automatically, resulting in different types.

Since  every man, as a relatively stable  being, possesses all the basic

psychological functions, it would be a psychological necessity with a view

to perfect adaptation that he should also employ them in equal measure. For

there must be a reason why there are different modes of  psychological

adaptation: evidently one alone is not enough, since the object seems to be

only partially comprehended when, for example, it is something that is

merely thought or  merely felt. A one-sided (“typical”) attitude leaves adeficiency in the adaptive performance which accumulates  during the

course of life, and sooner or later this will produce  a disturbance of 

adaptation  that drives the subject toward some kind of compensation. But

the compensation can be  obtained only by means of an amputation

(sacrifice) of the hitherto one-sided attitude. This results in a temporary

accumulation of energy and an overflow into channels not  used

consciously before though lying ready unconsciously.  The adaptive

deficiency, which is the causa efficiens of the process of conversion, is

subjectively felt as a vague sense of dissatisfaction. Such an atmosphere

prevailed at the turning-point of our era. A quite astonishing need of

redemption came over mankind, and brought about that  unparalleled

efflorescence of every sort of possible and  impossible cult in ancient

Rome. Nor was there any lack of advocates of “living life to the full,” who

operated with arguments based on the science of that day instead of with

biological ones. They, too, could never be done with speculations as to

why mankind was in such a bad way. Only, the causalism of that epoch, as

compared with our science, was considerably less restricted; they could

hark back far beyond childhood to cosmogony, and numerous systems were

devised proving that what had happened in the remote abyss of time was the

source of insufferable consequences for mankind.

The sacrifice that Tertullian and Origen carried out  was drastic—too

drastic for our taste—but it was in keeping with the spirit of the age, which

was thoroughly concretistic. Because of this spirit the Gnostics took their

visions as absolutely real, or at least as relating directly to reality, and for

Tertullian the reality of his feeling was objectively valid.  The Gnostics

projected their subjective inner perception of the change of attitude into a

cosmogonic system and believed in the reality of its psychological figures.

In my book Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido

8 I left the whole question open as to the origin of the peculiar course the

libido took in the Christian process of development. I spoke of a splitting

of libido into two halves, each directed against the other. The explanation

of this is to be found in a one-sided psychological attitude so extreme that

  compensations from the unconscious became an urgent necessity. It is

  precisely the Gnostic movement in the early centuries of our era that

most clearly demonstrates the breakthrough of unconscious contents at

the moment of compensation. Christianity itself signified the collapse

and sacrifice of the cultural values of antiquity, that is, of the classical  attitude. At the present time it is hardly necessary to remark that it is a

matter of indifference whether we speak of  today or of that age two

  thousand years ago.

1. THE THEOLOGICAL DISPUTES OF THE

                              ANCIENT CHURCH

It is more than probable that the contrast of types will also be found in the

history of the schisms and heresies that were so frequent in the disputes of

the early Church. The Ebionites or Jewish Christians, who were probably

identical with the primitive Christians generally, believed in the exclusive

humanity of Christ and held him to be the son of Mary and Joseph, only

subsequently receiving his consecration through the Holy Ghost. On this

point the  Ebionites were diametrically opposed to the Docetists. The

effects of this opposition endured long after. The conflict came to light

again in an altered form—which, though  doctrinally attenuated, had an

even graver effect on Church  politics—about the year 320 in the Arian

heresy. Arius denied the formula propounded by the orthodox Church:

(of one substance with the Father), in favour of    (of like substance with the

Father). When we examine more  clearly the history of the great Arian

controversy concerning homoousia and homoiousia (the complete identity

as against the similarity of Christ’s substance with God), it seems to us that

homoiousia definitely puts the accent on the sensuous  and  humanly

perceptible, in contrast to the purely conceptual and abstract standpoint of

homoousia. In the same way it would appear to us that the revolt of the

Monophysites (who upheld the absolute unity of Christ’s nature) against the

Dyophysite  formula of the Council of Chalcedon (which upheld the

inseparable duality of Christ, his human and divine nature coexisting in

one body) once more asserted the standpoint of  the abstract and

inconceivable as against the sensuous and  naturalistic formula of the

Dyophysites.

At the same time it becomes overwhelmingly clear to us that, in the Arian

movement as in the Monophysite dispute,  although the subtle dogmatic

question was the main issue for the minds that originally conceived it, this

was not so for the great mass of people who took part in the controversy.

Even in those early days so subtle a question had no motivating force with

the masses, who were stirred rather by the problems and claims of political

power that had nothing to do with differences of theological opinion. Iftype differences had any significance at all here, it was merely because

they provided catchwords that gave a flattering label to the crude instincts

of the mass. But this should in no way blind us to the fact that, for those who

kindled the quarrel, homoousia and homoiousia were a very serious matter.

For concealed within  it, both historically and psychologically, lay the

Ebionite  creed  of  a  purely  human  Christ  with  only  relative  (“apparent”)

divinity, and the Docetist creed of a purely divine Christ with only apparent

corporeality. And beneath  this level in turn lies the great psychological

schism. The one  position attaches supreme value and importance to the

sensuously perceptible, whose subject, though it may not always be human

and personal, is nevertheless always a projected human sensation; the other

maintains that the chief value lies with the abstract and extra-human, whose

subject is  the function; in other words, with the objective process of

nature, that runs its course determined by impersonal law, beyond human

sensation, of which it is the actual foundation.  The former standpoint

overlooks the function in favour of the function-complex, if man may be so

regarded; the latter overlooks man as the indispensable subject in favour of

the function. Each standpoint denies the principal value of the other. The

more resolutely the adherents of either standpoint identify themselves with it,

the more they strive, with the best intentions perhaps, to force it on the other,

and thereby violate the other’s supreme value.

Another aspect of the type conflict appears in the Pelagian controversy at the

beginning of the fifth century. The  experience so profoundly felt by

Tertullian, that man cannot  avoid sin even after baptism, grew with

Augustine—who in  many ways was not unlike Tertullian—into that

thoroughly characteristic, pessimistic doctrine of original sin, whose essence

consists in the concupiscence

9 inherited from Adam. Over against the fact of original sin there stood,

  according to Augustine, the redeeming grace of God, with the institution

of the Church ordained by his grace to administer the means of salvation.

In this scheme of things the value of man stands very low. He is really

nothing but a miserable rejected creature, who is delivered over to the

devil

under all circumstances, unless through the medium of the Church, the

sole means of salvation, he is made a participator of the divine grace. Not

only man’s value, but his moral  freedom and his self-determination

crumbled away accordingly, with the result that the value and significance ofthe Church as an idea were so much the more enhanced, as was altogether

in keeping with Augustine’s explicit programme in the Civitas Dei.

Against such a stifling conception there rises ever anew the feeling of man’s

freedom and moral value—a feeling that will not long endure suppression

whether by  insight however searching, or logic however keen. The

rightness of the feeling of human value found its defenders in Pelagius, a

British monk, and Celestius, his pupil. Their teaching was founded on the

moral freedom of man as a given  fact. It is characteristic of the

psychological kinship existing  between the Pelagian standpoint and the

Dyophysite view that  the persecuted Pelagians found an advocate in

Nestorius, the  Metropolitan of Constantinople. Nestorius stressed the 

separation of  the  two  natures of Christ in  contrast to  the Cyrillian doctrine

of the   physical oneness of Christ as the God-man. Also, Nestorius definitely

did not want Mary to be understood as the   (God-bearer), but merely as

the

(Christ-bearer).

With some justification he even called the idea that Mary was the mother of

God heathenish. From him originated the  Nestorian controversy, which

finally ended with the secession of the Nestorian Church.

2. THE PROBLEM OF

      TRANSUBSTANTIATION

With the immense political upheavals of that age, the collapse of the Roman

Empire, and the decay of ancient civilization, these controversies likewise

passed into oblivion. But when, after several centuries, a state of stability was

again  reached, the psychological differences also reappeared in their

characteristic ways, tentatively at first but becoming ever more intense with

advancing civilization. No longer was it the problems that had thrown the

early Church into an uproar; new forms had been devised, but underneath

them the same psychology was concealed.

About the middle of the ninth century the Abbot  Paschasius Radbertus

appeared  on the scene  with a treatise  on  the Communion, in which he

propounded the doctrine of the transubstantiation, i.e., the assertion that the

wine and holy wafer become transformed into the actual blood and body of

Christ. As is well known, this view became a dogma, according to which

the transformation is accomplished vere, realiter, substantialiter (in truth, in

reality, in substance).  Although the “accidentals,” the bread and wine,preserve their outward aspect, they are substantially the flesh and blood of

Christ. Against this extreme concretization of a symbol Ratramnus, a monk

of the same monastery where Radbertus was abbot, ventured to raise some

opposition. However, Radbertus found a more resolute opponent in Scotus

Erigena,  one of the great philosophers and daring thinkers of the early

Middle Ages, who, as Hase says in his History of the Christian Church,

towered so high and solitary above his time  that his doctrines were not

sufficiently understood to be condemned by the Church until the thirteenth

century. As abbot of Malmesbury, he was butchered by his own monks

about the year 889. Scotus Erigena, for whom true philosophy was also true

religion, was no blind follower of authority and the “once accepted” because,

unlike the majority of his age, he himself could think. He set reason above

authority, very unseasonably perhaps but in a way that assured him the

acclaim of later centuries. Even the Church Fathers, who were considered to

be above discussion, he held as authorities only in so far as the treasures of

human reason were contained in their writings. Thus he also held that the

Communion was nothing more than a commemoration of that last supper

which Jesus celebrated with his disciples, a view in which all reasonable

men in every age will concur. Scotus Erigena, clear and humanistic as he

was in his  thinking, and however little disposed to detract from the

significance and value of the sacred ceremony, was not attuned to the spirit

of his age and the desires of the world around him, a fact that might,

indeed, be inferred from his  assassination by his own comrades of the

cloister. Because he could think rationally and logically success did not

come to him; instead, it fell to Radbertus, who assuredly could not think,

but who “transubstantiated” the symbolic and  meaningful and made it

coarse and sensual, attuned as he obviously was to the spirit of his age,

which was all for the concretization of religious experiences.

Again in this controversy we can easily recognize the basic elements we

have already met in the disputes discussed earlier: the abstract standpoint

that abhors any contamination with the concrete object, and the concretistic

that is turned towards the object.

Far be it from us to pronounce, from the intellectual standpoint, a one-

sided, depreciatory judgment on Radbertus and his achievement. Although to

the modern mind this dogma must appear simply absurd, we should not be

misled on that account into declaring it historically worthless. Certainly it

is a showpiece for every collection of human aberrations, but that doesnot establish its worthlessness eo ipso. Before passing judgment, we must

carefully examine what this dogma accomplished in the religious life of

that epoch, and what our age still owes indirectly to its effect. It must not

be overlooked, for instance, that it is precisely the belief in the reality of

this miracle that demands a detachment of the psychic process from the

purely sensual, and this  cannot remain without influence on  the  psychic

process itself. Directed thinking becomes absolutely impossible when the

sensual has too high a threshold  value. Because its value is too high it

constantly intrudes into the psyche, where it disrupts and destroys the

function of  directed thinking which is based on the exclusion of

everything incompatible with thought. From this elementary consideration

follows the practical importance of rites and dogmas that prove their value

not only from this point of view  but from a purely opportunistic and

biological one, not to speak of the immediate, specifically religious effects

accruing to individuals from a belief in this dogma. Highly as we esteem

Scotus Erigena, the less is it permitted to despise the  achievement of

Radbertus. But what we may learn from this example is that the thinking of

the introvert is incommensurable with the thinking of the extravert, since the

two forms of thinking, as regards their determinants, are  wholly and

fundamentally different. We might perhaps say that the thinking of the

introvert is rational, while that of the extravert is programmatic.

These arguments, I wish particularly to emphasize, do not pretend to have

said  anything  decisive  about  the  individual psychology of our two

protagonists. What we know of Scotus Erigena personally—it is little enough

—is not sufficient for us to make a sure diagnosis of his type. What we do

know speaks in favour of the introverted type. Of Radbertus we know

next to nothing. We know only that he said something that contradicted

ordinary human thinking, but with surer logic of feeling surmised what his

age was prepared to accept as suitable. This would speak in favour of the

extraverted type. For insufficient knowledge we must suspend judgment on

both personalities, since, particularly in the case of Radbertus, the matter

might well be decided quite differently. He might equally well have been an

introvert, but with limited reasoning powers that in no way rose above the

conceptions of his milieu, and with a logic so lacking in originality that

it was just sufficient to draw the obvious  conclusion from the premises

already laid down in the  writings of the Church Fathers. Conversely,

Scotus Erigena might as well have been an extravert, if it could be shown thathe lived in a milieu that was distinguished in any case by common sense

and that considered a corresponding assertion suitable and desirable. But

this has in no sense been demonstrated. On the other hand, we do know

how great was the yearning of that age for the reality of religious miracles.

To an age so constituted, the views of Scotus Erigena must have seemed

cold and deadening, whereas the assertion of Radbertus must have been felt

as life-promoting, since it concretized what everyone desired.

3. NOMINALISM AND REALISM

The Communion controversy of the ninth century was merely the signal for

a much greater controversy that divided the minds of men for centuries and

had incalculable consequences. This was the conflict between nominalism

and realism. By nominalism is meant that school which asserted that the so-

called universals, namely generic or universal  concepts such as beauty,

goodness, animal, man, etc., are nothing but nomina, names, or words,

derisively called flatus vocis. Anatole France says: “What is thinking? And

how does one think? We think with words; that in itself is sensual and

brings us back to nature. Think of it! A metaphysician has nothing with

which to construct his world system except the perfected cries of monkeys

and dogs.”

10 This is extreme nominalism, as it is when Nietzsche says that reason is

  “speech metaphysics.”

Realism, on the contrary, affirms the existence of universals ante rem, and

holds that general concepts exist in themselves after the manner of Platonic

ideas. In spite of its ecclesiastical associations, nominalism is a sceptical

tendency that denies the separate existence characteristic of abstractions. It is

a kind of scientific scepticism coupled with the most rigid dogmatism. Its

concept of reality necessarily coincides with the sensuous reality of things;

their  individuality represents the real as opposed to the abstract  idea.

Strict realism, on the contrary, transfers the accent on  reality to the

abstract, the idea, the universal, which it posits before the thing (ante rem).          THE PROBLEM OF UNIVERSALS IN

                                  ANTIQUITY

As our reference to the doctrine of Platonic ideas shows, we are dealing

with a conflict that reaches very far  back in  time. Certain envenomed

remarks in Plato concerning “grey-bearded schoolboys” and the “mentally

poverty-stricken” are

innuendos aimed at the adherents of two allied schools of philosophy that

were at odds with the Platonic spirit, these  being the Cynics and the

Megarians. Antisthenes, the leader of the former school, although by no

means a stranger to the Socratic ambiance and even a friend of Xenophon,

was nevertheless avowedly inimical to Plato’s beautiful world of ideas. He

even wrote a pamphlet against Plato, in which he  scurrilously changed

Plato’s name to Σάθων. Σάθων means  ‘boy’ or ‘man,’ but under his

sexual aspect, since σάθων comes from σάθη, ‘penis,’ ‘cock’; whereby

Antisthenes, through the time-honoured method of projection, delicately

suggests what cause he is defending against Plato. For Origen, as we saw,

this was also a prime cause, the very devil whom he sought to lay low by

means of self-castration, in order to pass without hindrance into the richly

furnished  world of ideas. Antisthenes, however, was a pre-Christian

pagan, and for him what the phallus has stood for from time immemorial as

the acknowledged symbol was of heartfelt interest, namely the delights of

the senses—not that he was alone in this, for as we know it affected the

whole Cynic school, whose cry was “Back to Nature!” There were plenty of

reasons that might have thrust his concrete feeling and sensation into the

foreground; he was before everything a proletarian, who made a virtue of

his envy. He was no no thoroughbred Greek. He was an outsider, and he

taught  outside too, before the gates of Athens, where he flaunted his

proletarian behaviour, a model of Cynic philosophy. Moreover, the whole

school was composed of proletarians, or at least of people on the fringe,

all of whom indulged in corrosive criticism of the traditional values.

After Antisthenes one of the most prominent members of the school was

Diogenes, who conferred on himself the title of Kύúν, ‘dog,’ and whose

tomb was adorned by a dog in Parian marble. Despite his warm love of man,

for his whole  nature was suffused with human understanding,  he

nonetheless pitilessly satirized everything that the men of his  time held

sacred. He ridiculed the horror that gripped the spectator in the theatre atthe sight of Thyestes’ repast,

11 or the incestuous tragedy of Oedipus; anthropophagy was not so bad,

  since human flesh can claim no exceptional position among meats, and

    furthermore the mishap of an incestuous affair is not such a disaster

  after all, as the instructive example of our domestic  animals makes

  plain to us. In many respects the Megarian school was akin to the

  Cynics. Was not Megara the unsuccessful rival of Athens? After a

  most promising start, when Megara rose to prominence through the

  founding of  Byzantium and Hyblaeaic Megara in Sicily, internal

  squabbles broke out, after which Megara sickened and wasted away, and

  was in every respect outstripped by Athens. Loutish peasant wit was

  known in Athens as “Megarian jesting.” This envy, which in the defeated

  is imbibed with the mother’s milk, might explain not a little that is

    characteristic of Megarian philosophy. Like that of the Cynics, it was

    thoroughly nominalistic and utterly opposed to the realism of  Plato’s

  ideology.

Another leading figure in this school was Stilpon of Megara, about whom

the following characteristic anecdote is related. One day Stilpon came to

Athens and saw on the

Acropolis the wondrous statue of Pallas Athene made by Phidias. A true

Megarian, he remarked that it was not the daughter of Zeus but of Phidias.

This jest catches the whole spirit of Megarian thinking, for Stilpon taught

that generic concepts are without reality and objective validity. Anyone,

therefore, who speaks of “man” speaks of nobody, because he is designating   

(neither this nor that). Plutarch ascribes to him the statement     (one thing can

affirm nothing concerning [the nature of] another).

12 The teaching of Antisthenes was very similar. The oldest exponent of

  this type of propositional thinking seems to have  been Antiphon of

    Rhamnos, a sophist and contemporary of  Socrates. One of his

  propositions runs: “A man who perceives long objects neither sees the

  length with his eyes nor can perceive it with his mind.”

13 The denial of the substantiality of generic concepts follows directly from

  this  proposition. Naturally the  whole  position of  Platonic ideas  is

    undermined by this type of thinking, for with Plato it is just the ideas

  that have eternal and immutable validity, while the “real” and the

“many” are merely their fugitive reflections. From the realist standpoint, theCynic-Megarian critique breaks down generic  concepts into purely

sophisticated and descriptive nomina lacking any substantiality, and lays

the accent on the individual thing.

This manifest and fundamental opposition was clearly  conceived by

Gomperz

14 as the problem of inherence and predication. When, for instance, we

  speak of “warm” and “cold,” we speak of warm and cold things, to

  which “warm” and “cold” belong as attributes, predicates, or assertions.

  The assertion refers to  something perceived and actually existing,

  namely to a warm or a cold body. From a plurality of similar cases we

  abstract the concepts of “warmth” and “coldness,” which again we

    immediately connect in our thoughts with something concrete, thing-

  like. Thus “warmth” and “coldness” are thing-like for us because of the

    reverberation of  sense-perception in the abstraction. It is extremely

  difficult for us to strip the abstraction of its “thingness,” for there

  naturally clings to every abstraction the thing it is abstracted from. In

  this sense the thingness of the predicate is actually an a priori. If we now

  pass to the next higher generic concept, “temperature,” we still have no

    difficulty in perceiving its  thingness, which, though it has lost its

    definiteness for the  senses, nevertheless retains the quality of

    representability that adheres to every sense-perception. If we then ascend

  to a very much higher generic concept, such as “energy,” its thing-like

  character quite disappears, and with it, to a certain extent, goes the

  quality of representability. At this point the conflict  arises about the

  “nature” of energy: whether energy is purely conceptual and abstract, or

  whether it is something “real.” The learned nominalist of our day is

  quite convinced that energy is nothing but a name, a mere counter in

  our mental calculus; but in spite of this, in our everyday speech we treat

  energy as though it were thing-like, thus sowing in our heads the greatest

  confusion from the standpoint of the theory of knowledge.

The thing-likeness of the purely conceptual, which creeps so naturally into

the process of abstraction and brings about the “reality” of the predicate or

the abstract idea, is no artificial product, no arbitrary hypostatizing of a

concept, but a natural necessity. It is not that the abstract idea is arbitrarily

hypostatized and transplanted into a transcendental world of  equally

artificial origin; the actual historical process is quite the reverse. Among

primitives, for instance, the imago, the psychic reverberation of the sense-perception, is so strong and  so sensuously coloured that when it is

reproduced as a  spontaneous memory-image it sometimes even has the

quality of an hallucination. Thus when the memory-image of his dead mother

suddenly reappears to a primitive, it is as if it were her ghost that he sees and

hears. We only “think” of the dead, but the primitive actually perceives them

because of the extraordinary sensuousness of his mental images.  This

explains the primitive’s belief in ghosts and spirits; they are what we quite

simply call “thoughts.” When the primitive  “thinks,” he literally has

visions, whose reality is so great that he constantly mistakes the psychic for

the real. Powell says: “The confusion of confusions is that universal habit

of savagery—the confusion of the objective with the subjective.” 15 Spencer

and Gillen observe: “What a savage experiences during a dream is just as

real to him as what he sees when he is awake.”

16 What I myself have seen of the psychology of the Negro completely

endorses these findings. From this basic fact of the psychic realism and

autonomy of the image vis-à-vis the  autonomy of the sense-perception

springs the belief in spirits, and not from  any need  of explanation on the  

part of the primitive, which is merely imputed to him by Europeans. For the

primitive, thought is visionary and auditory, hence it also has the character

of revelation. Thus the sorcerer, the visionary, is always the thinker of the

tribe, who brings about the manifestation of the spirits or gods. This also

explains the magical effect of thought; it is  as good  as the  deed, just

because it is real. In the same way the word, the outer covering of thought,

has a “real” effect because it calls up “real” memory-images. Primitive

superstition surprises us only because we have largely succeeded in de-

sensualizing the psychic image; we have learnt to think abstractly—always,

of course, with the above-mentioned limitations. Nevertheless, as anybody

who is engaged in the  practice of analytical psychology knows, even

“educated”

European patients constantly need reminding that thinking is not doing—one

patient because he believes  that to think something is enough, another

because he feels he must not think something or he would immediately have

to go and do it.

How easily the primitive reality of the psychic image reappears is shown by

the dreams of normal people and the hallucinations that accompany mental

derangement. The mystics even endeavour to recapture the primitive reality

of  the imago by means of an artificial introversion, in order tocounterbalance extraversion. There is an excellent example  of  this in the

initiation of the Mohammedan mystic  Tewekkul-Beg, by Molla-Shah.

Tewekkul-Beg relates:

After these words he called me to seat myself opposite to him, while still my

senses were as though bemused, and  commanded me to create his own

image in my inner self; and after he had bound my eyes, he bade me gather

all the forces of the soul into my heart. I obeyed, and in the twinkling of an

eye, by divine favour and with the spiritual succour of the Sheik, my heart

was opened. I beheld there in my innermost self something resembling an

overturned bowl; when this vessel was righted, a feeling of boundless joy

flooded through my whole being. I said to the Master: “From this cell, in

which I am seated before you, I behold within me a true vision, and it is

as though another Tewekkul-Beg were seated before another Molla-Shah.”

17

The Master explained this to him as the first phenomenon of his initiation.

Other visions soon followed, once the way to the primitive image of the real

had been opened.

The reality of the predicate is given a priori since it has always existed in

the human mind. Only by subsequent criticism is the abstraction deprived

of the quality of reality. Even in Plato’s time the belief in the magical reality

of verbal concepts was so great that it was worth the philosopher’s while

to devise traps or fallacies by which he was able,  through the absolute

significance of words, to elicit an absurd reply. A simple example is the

Enkekalymmenos (veiled man) fallacy devised by the Megarian philosopher

Eubulides: “Can you recognize your father? — Yes. Can you recognize this

veiled man? — No. You contradict yourself; this veiled man is your father.

Thus you can recognize your father and at the same time not recognize him.”

The fallacy merely lies in this, that the person questioned naïvely assumes the

word “recognize” refers in all cases to the same objective fact, whereas in

reality its validity  is restricted to certain definite cases. The Keratines

(horned man) fallacy is based on the same principle: “What you have not

lost, you still have. You have not lost horns, therefore you have horns.” Here

too the fallacy lies in the naïveté of the  subject, who assumes in the

premise a specific fact. With the  help of this method it could be

convincingly shown that the absolute significance of words was an illusion.

As a result, the reality of the generic concept, which in the form of the

Platonic idea had a metaphysical existence and exclusive validity, was put injeopardy. Gomperz says:

Men were not as yet possessed of that distrust of language which animates

us moderns and frequently causes us to see in words a far from adequate

expression of the facts. On the  contrary, there was a simple and

unsuspecting faith that the range of an idea and the range of the word

roughly corresponding to it must in every case exactly coincide.

18

In view of this magical, absolute significance of words, which presupposes

that words also imply the objective behaviour of things, the Sophist critique

was very much in place. It offered a striking proof of the impotence of

language. In so far as ideas are merely names—a supposition that remains to

be proved—the attack upon Plato was justified. But generic concepts cease

to be mere names when they designate the similarities or conformities of

things. The question then arises whether these conformities are objective

realities or not. These conformities actually exist, hence the generic concept

also corresponds with some kind of reality. It contains as much reality as

does the exact description of a thing. The generic concept differs from the

description only in that it describes or designates the conformities of things.

The  weakness, therefore, lies neither in the generic concept nor in  the

Platonic idea, but in its verbal expression, which  obviously under no

circumstances adequately reproduces either the thing or the conformity.

The nominalist attack on the doctrine of ideas was thus in principle an

unwarrantable  encroachment, and Plato’s exasperated counterstroke was

fully justified.

According to Antisthenes, the principle of inherence consists in this, that

not only can no kind of predicate be asserted of a subject which differs

from it, but no predicate at all. Antisthenes granted as valid only those

predicates that were identical with the subject. Apart from the fact that such

statements of identity (“sweet is sweet”) affirm nothing at all  and are,

therefore, meaningless, the weakness of the principle of inherence is that a

statement of identity has also nothing to do with the thing: the word “grass”

has no connection with  the thing “grass.” The principle of inherence

suffers just as much from the old word-fetishism, which naïvely supposes

that the word coincides with the thing. So when the nominalist tells the

realist: “You are dreaming—you think you are dealing with things, but all

the time you are fighting verbal chimeras!” the realist can answer the

nominalist in precisely the same words; for neither is the nominalist dealingwith things in themselves but with the words he has put in the  place of

things. Even when he uses a separate word for each individual thing, they

are always only words and not the things themselves.

Now though the idea of energy is admittedly a mere verbal concept, it is

nevertheless so extraordinarily real that  your Electricity Company pays

dividends out of it. The board  of directors would certainly allow no

metaphysical argument  to convince them of the unreality of energy.

“Energy” designates simply the conformity of the phenomena of force—a

conformity that cannot be denied and that daily gives striking proof of its

existence. So far as a thing is real, and a word conventionally designates

that thing, the word also acquires reality-significance. And so far as the

conformity of things is real, the generic concept designating  that

conformity  likewise acquires  reality-significance, a  significance that is

neither greater nor less than that of the word designating the individual

thing. The shifting of the accent of value from one side to the other is a

matter of individual attitude and the psychology of the time. Gomperz was

also aware of these underlying psychological factors in Antisthenes, and

brings out the following points:

Sound common sense, a resistance to all dreamy enthusiasm, perhaps also

the strength of individual feeling that endows the personality and hence,

probably, the individual’s whole  character with  the stamp of complete

reality—these may well have been among the forces that swelled the tide of

reaction.

19

To this we might add the envy of a man without full rights of citizenship, a

proletarian, a man upon whom fate had bestowed but little beauty, and

who at best could only climb to the heights by demolishing the values of

others. This was especially characteristic of the Cynic, who must forever

be carping at others, and to whom nothing was sacred if it happened to

belong to somebody else; he even had no compunction about destroying

the peace of the home if he might seize an occasion to parade his invaluable

advice.

To this essentially critical attitude of mind Plato’s world of ideas with their

eternal reality stands diametrically  opposed. It is evident that the

psychology of the man who  fashioned that world had an orientation

altogether foreign to  the carping, corrosive judgments described above.

From the  world of multiplicity Plato’s thinking abstracted and createdsynthetic constructive concepts, which designate and express  the general

conformities of things as that which truly exists.  Their invisible and

suprahuman quality is the direct opposite of the concretism of the principle

of inherence, which would reduce the stuff of thought to the unique, the

individual, the objective. This attempt is just as impossible as the exclusive

acceptance of the principle of predication, which would exalt what has been

affirmed of many isolated things to an eternally existing substance above all

decay. Both forms of judgment  are justifiable, as both are naturally

present in every man. This is best seen, in my view, from the fact that

the very founder of the Megarian school, Eucleides of Megara, established

an “All-oneness” that was immeasurably far  above the  individual and

particular.  For  he  linked  together  the  Eleatic  principle of “being” with 

“good,”  so that  for him “being” and “good” were identical. As opposed to

this there was only “non-existing evil.” This optimistic All-oneness was, of

course, nothing but a generic concept of the highest order, one that simply

included “being” but at the same time contradicted all evidence, far more so

even than the Platonic  ideas. With this concept Eucleides produced a

compensation for the negatively critical

dissolution of constructive judgments into mere verbalities.  His All-

oneness was so remote and so vague that it utterly failed to express the

conformity of things; it was no type at all, but rather the product of a

desire for a unity that would  embrace the disordered multitude of

individual things. This desire forces itself on all those who pay homage to

extreme nominalism, in so far as they make any attempt to escape from

their negatively critical attitude. Hence it is not uncommon to find in

people of this sort an idea of fundamental uniformity that is superlatively

improbable and arbitrary. It is manifestly impossible to base oneself entirely

on the principle of inherence. Gomperz pertinently observes:

Attempts of this nature are foredoomed to failure in every  age. Their

success was completely out of the question in an age that was destitute of

historical understanding, and in which there was next to no insight into the

deeper problems  of psychology. It was not a mere risk, it was an

absolute certainty that the more patent and palpable, but on the whole less

important, values would thrust into the background others of greater moment,

though less easily discerned. In taking the brute and the savage for a model

in their efforts to lop off the  excrescences of civilization, men laid a

destroying hand upon much that was the fruit of an ascending process ofdevelopment which must be measured in myriads of years.

20

Constructive judgment—which, unlike inherence, is based on the conformity

of things—has created general ideas that must be counted among the highest

values of civilization. Even if  these  ideas  relate  only  to  the  dead,  we  are

nevertheless still bound to them by threads which, as Gomperz says, have

gained an almost unbreakable strength. He continues:

Thus it is with the body bereft of life; but things which never possessed life

may also have a claim on our forbearance, our reverence, even our self-

sacrificing devotion; for example, statues, graves, the soldier’s flag. And if

we do violence to our nature, if we succeed in breaking by main force the

bonds of association, we lapse into savagery, we suffer injury in our own

souls by the loss of all those feelings which, so to speak, clothe the hard

bedrock of naked reality with a garniture of verdant life.  On the  

maintenance  of these  overgrowths  of sentiment, on the due treasuring of

acquired values, depend all the refinement, the beauty, and the grace of life,

all ennobling of the animal instincts, together with all enjoyment and the

pursuit of art—all, in short, that the Cynics set themselves to root up without

scruple and without pity. There

is, no doubt, a limit—so much we may readily concede to them and their

not inconsiderable imitators of the present day—beyond which we cannot

allow ourselves to be ruled by the principle of association without incurring

the charge of that same folly and superstition which quite certainly grew

out of the unlimited sway of that principle.

21

We have gone so thoroughly into the problem of inherence and predication

not only because this problem was revived in the nominalism and realism of

the Scholastics but because it has never yet been finally set at rest and

presumably never will be. For here again the question at issue is the typical

opposition between the abstract standpoint, where the decisive value lies

with the mental process itself, and the personal thinking and feeling which,

consciously or unconsciously, underlie orientation by the objects of sense. In

the latter case the mental process is simply a means for accentuating the

personality. It is small wonder that it was  precisely the proletarian

philosophy that adopted the principle  of inherence. Wherever sufficient

reasons exist for laying the  emphasis on personal feeling, thinking and

feeling necessarily  become negatively critical through lack of positivecreative energy, which is all diverted to personal ends; they become a mere

analytical organ that reduces everything to the concrete and particular. The

resultant accumulation of disordered particulars is at best subordinated to a

vague feeling of All-oneness, the wishful character of which is plain to

see. But when the accent lies on the mental process, the product of the mind’s

activity is exalted above the disordered multiplicity as an idea. The idea is

depersonalized as much as  possible, while personal feeling passes over

almost entirely into the mental process, which it hypostatizes.

Before proceeding further we might inquire whether the psychology of the

Platonic doctrine of ideas justifies us in  the supposition that Plato may

personally have belonged to  the introverted type, and whether the

psychology of the Cynics and Megarians allows us to count such figures

as Antisthenes, Diogenes, and Stilpon among the extraverts. Put in this form,

the question is absolutely impossible to answer. An extremely  careful

examination of Plato’s authentic writings considered as documents humains

might perhaps enable one to conclude to which type he belonged, but I for

my part would not venture to pronounce any positive judgment. If someone

were to furnish evidence that Plato belonged to the extraverted type, it

would not surprise me. What has been handed down concerning the others

is so very fragmentary that in my opinion a decision is out of the question.

Since the two types of thinking we have been discussing depend on a

displacement of the accent of value, it is of course equally possible that in

the case of the introvert personal feeling may, for various reasons, be pushed

into the foreground and will  subordinate thinking, so that his thinking

becomes negatively critical. For the extravert, the accent of value lies on his

relation to the object as such, and not necessarily on his personal relation to

it. When the relation to the object occupies the foreground, the mental

process is already subordinate; but, if it concerns itself exclusively with the

nature of the object and avoids the admixture of personal feeling, it does

not possess a destructive character. We have,  therefore, to class the

particular conflict between the principles of inherence and predication as a

special case,  which in the further course of our investigation will be

examined more thoroughly. The special nature of this case lies in the

positive and negative parts played by personal feeling. When the type

(generic concept) reduces the individual thing to a shadow, the type has

acquired the reality  of a collective idea. But when the value of the

individual  thing abolishes the type (generic concept), anarchicdisintegration is at work. Both positions are extreme and unfair, but they

form a contrasting picture whose clear outlines, by their very exaggeration,

throw into relief features which, in a milder and more covert form, are also

inherent in the nature of the introverted and extraverted types, even in the

case of individuals in whom personal feeling is not pushed  into the

foreground. For instance, it makes a considerable difference whether the

mental function is master or servant. The master thinks and feels differently

from the servant. Even the most far-reaching abstraction of the personal in

favour of  the general value can never quite eliminate the personal

admixtures. And in so far as these exist, thinking and feeling will contain

destructive tendencies that come from the self-assertion of the person in the

face of unfavourable social  conditions. But it would surely be a great

mistake if, for the  sake of personal tendencies, we were to reduce the

traditional  universal values to personal undercurrents. That would be

pseudo-psychology, but it nevertheless exists.          THE PROBLEM OF UNIVERSALS IN

                            SCHOLASTICISM

The problem of the two forms of judgment remained  unsolved because

—tertium non datur. Porphyry handed down  the problem to the Middle

Ages thus: “As regards universal and generic concepts, the real question is

whether they are substantial or merely intellectual, whether corporeal or

incorporeal, whether separate from sensible things or in and around them.”

22 The Scholastics took up the problem in this form. They started with the

Platonic view, the universalia ante rem, the universal idea as the pattern or

exemplar above all individual things and altogether  detached from them,

existing ‘in a heavenly place.’ As the wise Diotima says to Socrates in the

dialogue on beauty:

Nor again will this beauty appear to him like the beauty of a face or hands

or anything else corporeal, or like the beauty of a thought or a science, or

like beauty which has its seat in something other than itself, be it a living

thing or the earth or the sky or anything else whatever; he will see it as

absolute, existing alone with itself, unique, eternal, and all other beautiful

things as partaking of it, yet in such manner that, while they come into

being and pass away, it neither undergoes any increase or diminution nor

suffers any change. 23

Opposed to the Platonic form, as we saw, was the critical assumption that

generic concepts are mere words.  Here the real is prius, the ideal

posterius. This view was designated universalia post rem. Between the two

conceptions stood the

moderate, realistic view of Aristotle which we might  call universalia in

re, that form and matter coexist. The  Aristotelian standpoint is a

concretistic attempt at mediation fully in accord with Aristotle’s nature. As

against the transcendentalism of his teacher Plato, whose school afterwards

relapsed into Pythagorean mysticism, Aristotle was entirely a man of reality

—of classical reality, one should add, which contained much in concrete

form that later ages abstracted and added to the inventory of the human

mind. His solution reflected the concretism of classical common sense.

These three forms also reveal the structure of medieval opinion in the great

controversy about universals, which was the quintessence of Scholasticism.

It cannot be my task—even if I were competent—to probe more deeply

into the details of this controversy. I must content myself with hints forthe purpose of general orientation. The dispute began  with the views of

Johannes Roscellinus towards the end of the eleventh century. Universals

were for him nothing but nomina rerum, names of things, or, as tradition

says, flatus vocis. For him there were only individual things. He was, as

Taylor aptly observes, “strongly held by the reality of individuals.”

24 To think of God, too, as only individual was the next  obvious

    conclusion, though actually it dissolved the Trinity into three separate

  persons, so that Roscellinus arrived at tritheism. This was intolerable to

  the prevailing realism of the  times, and in 1092 his views were

    condemned by a synod at Soissons. The opposing side was represented

  by William of Champeaux, the teacher of Abelard, an extreme realist but

  of Aristotelian complexion. According to Abelard, he taught that one and

  the same thing existed in its totality and at the same time in separate

    individual things. There were no essential  differences between

    individual things, but merely a multitude  of “accidentals.” By this

  concept the actual differences  between things were explained as

  fortuitous, just as in the dogma of transubstantiation the bread and wine,

  as such, were only “accidentals.”

On the realist side there was also Anselm of  Canterbury, the father of

Scholasticism. A true Platonist, the universals resided for him in the divine

Logos. It is in this  spirit that we must understand the psychologically

important  proof  of  God  advanced by Anselm, which is known as the

ontological proof. This proof demonstrates the existence of God from the

idea of God. Fichte formulates it trenchantly as follows: “The existence of

the idea of an Absolute in our consciousness proves the real existence of

this Absolute.”

25 Anselm held that the concept of a Supreme Being present in the intellect

  also implied the quality of existence (non potest esse in intellectu solo).

  He continued: “So, then, there truly is a being than which a greater

  cannot be thought—so truly that it cannot even be thought of as not

  existing. And thou art this being, O Lord our God.”

26 The logical weakness of the ontological argument is so obvious that it

  even requires a psychological explanation to  show how a mind like

  Anselm’s could advance such an argument. The immediate cause is to

  be sought in psychological disposition of realism in general, namely in

  the fact that there was not only a certain class of men but, in keeping

  with the current of the age, also certain groups of men for whom the  accent of value lay on the idea, so that the idea represented for them a

  higher reality or value for life than the reality of individual things. Hence

  it seemed simply impossible to suppose that what to them was most

  valuable and significant should not really exist. Indeed, they had the

  most striking proof of its efficacy in their own hands, since their whole

  lives, their thinking and feeling, were entirely oriented by this point

  of view. The invisibility of an idea mattered little in comparison with

  its extraordinary efficacy, which was indeed a reality. They had an

  ideal, and not a sensual, concept of the real.

A contemporary opponent of Anselm’s, Gaunilo, raised the objection that

the oft-recurring idea of the Islands of the Blessed (based on Homer’s land

of the Phaeacians,

Odyssey, VIII) does not necessarily prove their actual  existence. This

objection is palpably reasonable. Similar  objections were raised in the

course of the centuries, though they did nothing to prevent the ontological

argument surviving even down to quite recent times, it being espoused in the

nineteenth century  by Hegel, Fichte, and Lotze. Such contradictory

statements cannot be ascribed to some peculiar defect in the logic of these

thinkers or to an even greater delusion on one side or the other. That

would be absurd. Rather is it a matter of  deep-seated psychological

differences which must be  acknowledged and clearly stated. The

assumption that only one psychology exists or only one fundamental

psychological  principle is an intolerable tyranny, a pseudo-scientific

prejudice of the common man. People always speak of man  and his

“psychology” as though there were “nothing but” that psychology. In the

same way one always talks of “reality” as though it were the only one.

Reality is simply what works in a human soul and not what is assumed by

certain people to work there, and about which prejudiced generalizations

are wont to be made. Even when this is done in a scientific spirit, it should

not be forgotten that science is not the summa of life, that it is actually

only one of the psychological attitudes, only one of the forms of human

thought.

The ontological argument is neither argument nor proof, but merely the

psychological demonstration of the fact that there is a class of men for

whom a definite idea has efficacy and reality—a reality that even rivals

the world of perception. The sensualist brags about the undeniable certainty

of his reality, and the idealist insists on his. Psychology has to resign itselfto the existence of these two (or more) types, and must at all costs avoid

thinking of one as a misconception of the other; and it should never seriously

try  to reduce one type to the other, as though everything “other”  were

merely a function of the one. This does not mean that the scientific axiom

known as Occam’s razor—“explanatory principles should not be multiplied

beyond the necessary”—should be abrogated. But the need for a plurality of

psychological explanatory principles still remains. Aside  from the

arguments already adduced in favour of this, our eyes ought to have been

opened by the remarkable fact that, notwithstanding the apparently final

overthrow of the ontological proof by Kant, there are still not a few post-

Kantian philosophers who have taken it up again. And we are today just

as far or perhaps even further from an understanding of the pairs of

opposites—idealism / realism,  spiritualism /  materialism, and all the

subsidiary questions they raise—than were the men of the early Middle

Ages, who at least had a common philosophy of life.

There can surely be no logical argument that appeals to the modern intellect

in favour of the ontological proof. The ontological argument in itself has

really nothing to do with logic; in the form in which Anselm bequeathed it

to history it is a subsequently intellectualized or rationalized psychological

fact, and naturally this could never have come about without begging the

question and sundry other sophistries. But it is just here that the unassailable

validity of the argument shows itself—in the fact that it exists, and that the

consensus gentium proves it to be a fact of universal occurrence. It is the

fact that has to be reckoned with, not the  sophistry of its proof. The

mistake of the ontological argument consists simply and solely in its

trying to argue logically, when in reality it is very much more than a merely

logical proof. The real point is that it is a psychological fact  whose

existence and efficacy are so overwhelmingly clear  that no sort of

argumentation is needed to prove it. The consensus gentium proves that, in

the statement “God is, because he is thought,” Anselm was right. It is an

obvious truth, indeed nothing but a statement of identity. The “logical”

argumentation about it is quite superfluous, and false to boot, inasmuch as

Anselm wanted to establish his idea of God as a concrete reality. He says:

“Without doubt, therefore, there exists, both in the understanding and in

reality [in intellectu et in re], something than which a greater cannot  be

thought.”

27 For the Scholastics, the concept res was something that  existed on the same level as thought. Thus Dionysius the

  Areopagite, whose writings exercised a considerable influence

  on early medieval philosophy, distinguished the  categories

  entia rationalia, intellectualia, sensibilia,  simpliciter

  existentia. For Thomas Aquinas, res was quod est  in anima 

 (what is in the soul)  as well as  quod  est extra animam (what

  is outside the soul).

28 This remarkable equation allows us to discern the primitive “thing-

  likeness” (res = “reality”) of thought in the conceptions of that time. It

  is a state of mind that makes the psychology of the ontological proof

  readily understandable. The hypostatizing of the idea was not at all an

  essential step, but  was implicit as a reverberation of the primitive

    sensuousness  of thought. Gaunilo’s counter-argument was

    psychologically  unsatisfactory,  for although,  as  the consensus gentium

  proves, the idea of the Islands of the Blessed frequently occurs, it is

    unquestionably less effective than the idea of God, which

    consequently acquires a higher reality-value.

Later writers who took up the ontological argument again all fell, at least

in principle, into Anselm’s error. Kant’s reasoning should be final. We will

therefore briefly outline it. He says:

The concept of an absolutely necessary being is a concept of pure reason,

that is, a mere idea the objective reality of which is very far from being

proved by the fact that reason requires it. … But the unconditioned necessity

of judgments is not the  same as an absolute necessity of things. The

absolute necessity of the judgment is only a conditioned necessity of the

thing, or of the predicate in the judgment.

29

Immediately prior to this Kant shows, as an example  of a necessary

judgment, that a triangle must have three  angles. He is referring to this

proposition when he continues:

The above proposition does not declare that three angles are  absolutely

necessary, but that, under the condition that there is a triangle (that is, that a

triangle is given), three angles will necessarily be found in it. So great,

indeed, is the power of illusion exercised by this logical necessity that, by

the simple device of forming an a priori concept of a thing in such a

manner as to include existence within the scope of its meaning, we havesupposed ourselves to have justified the conclusion that because existence

necessarily belongs to the  object of this concept—always under the

condition that we posit the thing as given (as existing)—we are also of

necessity, in accordance with the law of identity, required to  posit the

existence of its object, and that this being is  therefore itself absolutely

necessary—and this, to repeat, for the reason that the existence of this

being has already been thought in a concept which is assumed arbitrarily

and on condition that we posit its object.

30

The “power of illusion” referred to here is nothing else than the primitive,

magical power of the word, which likewise mysteriously inhabits the concept.

It needed a long process of development before man recognized once and for

all that the word, the flatus vocis, does not always signify a reality or

bring it into being. The fact that certain men have realized this has not by any

means been able to uproot in every mind the power of superstition that

dwells in formulated concepts.  There is evidently something in this

“instinctive” superstition that refuses to be exterminated, because it has

some sort of  justification which till now has not been sufficiently

appreciated. In like manner the false conclusion creeps into the ontological

argument, through an illusion which Kant now proceeds to elucidate. He

begins with the assertion of  “absolutely necessary subjects,” the

conception of which is  inherent in the concept of existence, and which

therefore cannot be dismissed without inner contradiction. This conception

would be that of the “supremely real being”:

It is declared that it possesses all reality, and that we are justified in

assuming that such a being is possible. … Now the “all reality” includes

existence; existence is therefore contained in the concept of a thing that is

possible. If, then, this thing is rejected, the internal possibility of the thing

is rejected—which is self-contradictory … in that case either the thought,

which is in us, is the thing itself, or we have presupposed an existence as

belonging to the realm of the possible, and have then, on that pretext,

inferred its existence from its internal possibility—which is nothing but a

miserable tautology.

31

Being is evidently not a real predicate; that is, it is not a concept of

something which could be added to the concept of a thing. It is merely the

positing of a thing, or of certain of its determinants. In logical usage, it ismerely the copula of a judgment. The proposition “God is omnipotent”

contains two concepts, each of which has its object—God and omnipotence.

The little word “is” adds no new predicate, but only serves to posit the

predicate in its relation to the subject. If, now, we take the subject (God)

with all its predicates (among which is omnipotence) and say “God is” or

“There is a God,” we attach no new predicate to the concept of God, but only

posit the subject in itself with all its predicates, and indeed posit it as

being an object that stands in relation to my concept. The content of both

must be one and the same; nothing can have been added to the concept,

which expresses merely what is possible, by my thinking its object (through

the expression “it is”) as given absolutely. Otherwise stated, the real contains

no more than the merely possible. A hundred real thalers do not contain a

cent more than a hundred possible thalers. … My financial position is,

however, affected very differently by a hundred real thalers than it is by

the mere concept of them (that is, of their possibility).

32

Whatever, therefore, and however much, our concept of an object may

contain, we must go outside it, if we are to ascribe existence to the object. In

the case of objects of the senses, this takes place through their connection

with some one of our perceptions, in accordance with empirical laws. But in

dealing with objects of pure thought, we have no means whatsoever  of

knowing their existence, since it would have to be known in a completely a

priori manner. Our consciousness of all existence (whether immediately

through perception, or  mediately through inferences which connect

something with perception) belongs exclusively to the unity of experience;

any [alleged] existence outside this field, while not indeed such as we can

declare to be absolutely impossible, is of the nature of an assumption which

we can never be in a position to justify.

33

This detailed reminder of Kant’s fundamental  exposition seems to me

necessary, because it is precisely here that we find the clearest division

between esse in intellectu and esse in re. Hegel cast the reproach at Kant

that one could not compare the concept of God with an imaginary hundred

thalers. But, as Kant rightly pointed out, logic strips away all content, for it

would no longer be logic if a content were to prevail. From the standpoint

of logic, there is, as always, no tertium between the logical either-or. But

between intellectus and res there is still anima, and this esse in anima makesthe whole ontological argument superfluous. Kant himself, in his Critique of

Practical Reason, made an attempt on a grand scale to evaluate the esse

in anima in philosophical terms. There he introduces God as a postulate

of practical reason resulting from the a priori recognition of “respect for

moral  law necessarily directed towards the highest good, and the

consequent supposition of its objective reality.”

34

The esse in anima, then, is a psychological fact, and  the  only

thing that needs ascertaining is whether it occurs but once, often,

or universally in human psychology. The datum which is called

“God” and is formulated as the “highest good”  signifies, as the

term itself shows, the supreme psychic value. In other words it is a

concept upon which is conferred, or is actually endowed with, the

highest and most general significance in determining our thoughts

and actions. In the language of analytical psychology, the God-

concept coincides with the particular ideational complex which, in

accordance with the foregoing definition, concentrates in itself

the maximum amount of libido, or psychic energy. Accordingly,

the actual God-concept is, psychologically, completely different in

different people, as experience testifies. Even as an idea God is

not a single, constant being, and still less so in reality. For, as we

know, the highest value operative in a human soul is variously

located. There are men “whose God is the belly” (Phil. 3 : 19),  

and others for whom  God is money, science, power, sex, etc. The

whole psychology of the individual, at least in its essential aspects,

varies according to the localization of the highest good, so that a

psychological  theory based exclusively on one fundamental

instinct, such as  power or sex, can explain no more than

secondary features when applied to an individual with a different

orientation.  ABELARD’S ATTEMPT AT CONCILIATION

It is not without interest to inquire how the Scholastics themselves attempted

to settle the dispute about universals and to create a balance between the

typical opposites that were divided by the tertium non datur. This attempt

was the

work of Abelard, that unhappy man who burned with love for Héloise and

who paid for his passion with the loss of his  manhood. Anyone

acquainted with the life of Abelard will know how intensely his own soul

harboured those separated opposites whose philosophical reconciliation was

for him such a vital issue. De Rémusat in his book

35 characterizes him as an eclectic, who criticized and  rejected every

accepted theory of universals but freely borrowed from them what was

true and tenable. Abelard’s writings, so far as they relate to the universals

controversy, are difficult and confusing, because the author was constantly

engaged in weighing every argument and aspect of the case. It is precisely

because he considered none of the accepted standpoints right, but always

sought to comprehend and conciliate the contrary view, that he was never

properly  understood  even  by his own pupils.  Some understood him as a

nominalist, others as a realist. This misunderstanding is characteristic: it is

much easier to think in terms of one definite type, because in it one can

remain logical and consistent, than it is to think in terms of both types,

since the intermediate position is lacking. Realism as well as nominalism if

pursued consistently lead to precision, clarity, uniformity. But the weighing

and balancing of opposites lead to confusion and, so far as the types are

concerned, to an unsatisfactory conclusion, since the solution is completely

satisfying neither to the one nor to the other. De Rémusat has collected from

Abelard’s writings a whole series of almost contradictory assertions on the

subject, and exclaims: “Must we suppose that one man’s head contained so

vast and incoherent a collection of teachings? Is Abelard’s  philosophy a

chaos?”

36

From nominalism Abelard took over the truth that universals are words, in

the sense that they are intellectual conventions expressed by language, and

also the truth that a thing in reality is never a universal but always an

individual fact. From realism he took over the truth that genera and

species are combinations of individual facts and things by reason of their

unquestionable similarities. For him the  intermediate position wasconceptualism. This is to be understood as a function which apprehends

the individual objects perceived, classifies them into genera and species by

reason of their similarities, and thus reduces their absolute multiplicity to a

relative unity. However indisputable the  multiplicity and diversity of

individual things may be, the existence of similarities, which makes their

combination possible in a concept, is equally beyond dispute. For anyone

who is psychologically so constituted as to perceive chiefly the similarity

of things, the inclusive concept is, as it were,  given from the start; it

forcibly obtrudes itself with the undeniable actuality of a sense-perception.

But for one who is psychologically so constituted as to perceive chiefly the

diversity of things, their similarity is not clearly given; what he sees is

their difference, which forces itself upon him with as much actuality as

similarity does upon the other.

It seems as if empathy into the object were the  psychological process

which brings the distinctiveness of the object into more than usually clear

focus, and as if abstraction from the object were the psychological process

most calculated to blind one’s eyes to the distinctiveness of  individual

things in favour of their general similarity, which is the actual foundation of

the idea. Empathy and abstraction  combined produce the function that

underlies the concept of conceptualism. It is grounded, therefore, on the

only  psychological function that has any real possibility of  bringing

nominalism and realism together on the middle way.

Although the Scholastics knew how to wax grandiloquent on the subject of

the soul, there was as yet no psychology, which is one of the youngest of the

sciences. If a psychology had existed at that time, Abelard would surely

have made esse in anima his mediatory formula. De Rémusat  clearly

discerned this when he said:

In pure logic, universals are only the terms of a conventional language. In

physics, which for him is transcendent rather than experimental, and is his

real ontology, genera and species are based on the way in which beings are

really produced and formed. Finally, between his pure logic and his physics

there is a kind of mediatory or half-way science—we may call it psychology

—in which Abelard examines how our  concepts come into being, and

retraces the whole intellectual genealogy of beings, a picture or symbol of

their hierarchy and their real existence.

37

The universalia ante rem and post rem remained a matter of controversyfor every century that followed, even  though they cast aside their

scholastic gown and appeared under a new guise. Fundamentally it was the

same old  problem. Sometimes the attempted solution veered towards

realism, sometimes towards  nominalism. The  scientism of the  nineteenth

century gave the problem a push once more towards the nominalist side

after the early philosophy of that century had done full justice to realism.

The opposites are no longer so far apart as they were in Abelard’s day. We

have a psychology, a  mediatory science, and this alone is capable of

uniting the idea and the thing without doing violence to either. This capacity

inheres in the very nature of psychology, though no one would contend that

psychology so far has accomplished this task. One has to agree with De

Rémusat:

Abelard, then, has triumphed; for in spite of the serious limitations which a

discerning critique discovers in the nominalism or conceptualism imputed

to him, his view is really the modern view in its first form. He heralds it,

foretells it, he is its promise. The light that silvers the horizon at dawn is that

of the star, as yet invisible, which is about to give light to the world.

38

If one disregards the existence of psychological types, and also the fact that

the truth of the one is the error of the other, then Abelard’s labours will

mean nothing but one  scholastic sophistry the more. But if we

acknowledge the existence of the two types, Abelard’s efforts must appear

to us of the greatest importance. He sought the mediatory position in the

sermo, by which he meant not so much a  “discourse” as a formal

proposition joined to a definite  meaning—in fact, a definition requiring

several words for its meaning to be established. He did not speak of verbum,

for in the nominalist sense this was nothing more than a vox, a flatus vocis.

Indeed, it is the great psychological achievement of both classical and

medieval nominalism that it completely abolished the primitive, magical,

mystical identity of the word with the thing—too completely for the type of

man who has his foothold not in things but in the abstraction of the idea

from things. Abelard’s horizon was too wide for him to have overlooked the

value of nominalism in this sense. For him the word was indeed a vox, but

the sermo, as he understood it, was something more; it carried with it a

fixed meaning, it described the common factor, the idea—what in fact has

been  thought and perceptively discerned about things. In the sermo the

universal lived, and there alone. It is readily understandable, therefore,that Abelard was counted among  the nominalists, though this was

incorrect because the universal was for him a greater reality than a vox.

The expression of his conceptualism must have been difficult enough for

Abelard, as he had necessarily to construct it out  of contradictions. An

epitaph in an Oxford manuscript gives us, I think, a profound glimpse into

the paradoxical nature of his teaching:

He taught what words signify in relation to things, And that words denote

things by signification;

He corrected the errors about genera and species,

And taught that genera and species were matters of words alone,

And made it clear that genera and species were sermones.

…

Thus he proved that both “living thing” and “no living thing” are each a

genus,

And “man” and “no man” both rightly called species.

39

The opposites can hardly be expressed otherwise than in paradoxes, in so far

as an expression is striven for that is based in principle on one standpoint,

in Abelard’s case the intellectual. We must not forget that the radical

difference  between nominalism and realism is not purely logical and

intellectual, but a psychological one, which in the last resort amounts to a

typical difference of psychological attitude to the object as well as to the

idea. The man who is oriented to the idea apprehends and reacts from the

standpoint of the  idea. But the man who is oriented to the object

apprehends and reacts from the standpoint of sensation. For him the abstract

is of secondary importance, since what must be thought about things seems to

him relatively inessential, while for the former it is just the reverse. The

man who is oriented to the object is by nature a nominalist—“name is

sound and smoke” (Faust)—in so far as he has not yet learnt to compensate

his object-oriented attitude. Should this happen, he will become, if he has the

necessary equipment, a hair-splitting logician, unequalled for meticulousness,

methodicalness, and dullness. The idea-oriented man is by nature logical;

that is why, when all is said and done, he can  neither  understand  nor

appreciate textbook logic. Compensation of his type makes him, as we saw

from  Tertullian, a man of passionate feeling, though his feelings  still

remain under the spell of his ideas. Conversely, the man who is a logician

by compensation remains, along with his ideas, under the spell of the object.These reflections bring us to the shadow-side of  Abelard’s thought. His

attempted solution was one-sided. If the conflict between nominalism and

realism had been merely a matter of logical-intellectual argumentation, it

would be  incomprehensible why nothing except a paradoxical  end-

formulation was possible. But since it was essentially a  psychological

conflict, a one-sided logical-intellectual formulation had to end in paradox:

“Thus both man and no man are rightly called species.” Logical-intellectual

expression is simply incapable, even in the form of the sermo, of providing

the mediatory formula that will be fair to the real nature of the two opposing

psychological attitudes, for it derives exclusively from the abstract side and

lacks all recognition of concrete reality.

Every logical-intellectual formulation, however perfect it may be, strips the

objective impression of its vitality and immediacy. It must do this in order

to arrive at any formulation whatever. But then just that is lost which

seems to the extravert the most important of all—the relation to the object.

There is no possibility, therefore, of finding any satisfactory, reconciling

formula by pursuing the one or the other attitude. And yet, even if his

mind could, man cannot remain thus divided, for the split is not a mere

matter of some off-beat philosophy, but the daily repeated problem of his

relation to himself and to the world. And because this is basically the

problem at issue, the division cannot be resolved by a discussion of the

nominalist and realist arguments. For  its solution a third, mediating

standpoint is needed. Esse in intellectu lacks tangible reality, esse in re

lacks mind. Idea and thing come together, however, in the human psyche,

which holds the balance between them. What would the idea amount to if

the psyche did not provide its living value? What would the thing be worth if

the psyche withheld from it the determining force of the sense-impression?

What indeed is reality if it is not a reality in ourselves, an esse in anima?

Living reality is the product neither of the actual, objective behaviour of

things nor of the formulated idea exclusively, but rather of the combination

of both in the living psychological process, through esse in anima. Only

through the specific vital activity of the psyche does the sense-impression

attain that intensity, and the idea that effective force, which are the two

indispensable constituents of living reality.

This autonomous activity of the psyche, which can be explained neither as a

reflex action to sensory stimuli nor as the executive organ of eternal ideas,

is, like every vital process, a continually creative act. The psyche createsreality every day. The only expression I can use for this activity is fantasy.

Fantasy is just as much feeling as thinking; as much intuition as sensation.

There is no psychic function that, through fantasy, is not inextricably bound

up with the other psychic functions. Sometimes it appears in primordial

form, sometimes it is the ultimate and boldest product of all our faculties

combined. Fantasy, therefore, seems to me the clearest expression of the

specific activity of the psyche. It is, pre-eminently, the creative activity from

which the answers to all answerable questions come; it is the mother of all

possibilities, where, like all psychological opposites, the inner  and outer

worlds are joined together in living union. Fantasy  it was and ever is

which fashions the bridge between the irreconcilable claims of subject and

object, introversion and extraversion. In fantasy alone both mechanisms are

united.

Had Abelard probed deeply enough to discern the psychological difference

between the two standpoints, he would logically have had to enlist the aid of

fantasy in

developing his mediating formula. But in the world of science, fantasy is just

as much taboo as feeling. Once, however, we recognize the underlying

opposition as a psychological one, psychology will be obliged to

acknowledge not only the standpoint of feeling but the mediating standpoint

of fantasy as well. But here comes the great difficulty: fantasy is for the

most part a product of the unconscious. Though it undoubtedly includes

conscious elements, it is none the less an especial characteristic of fantasy

that it is essentially involuntary and, by reason of its strangeness, directly

opposed to the conscious contents. It has these qualities in common with the

dream, though the latter of course is involuntary and strange in a much higher

degree.

The relation of the individual to his fantasy is very largely conditioned by

his relation to the unconscious in general, and this in turn is conditioned in

particular by the spirit of the age. According to the degree of rationalism

that prevails, the individual will be more disposed or less to have dealings

with the unconscious and its products. Christianity,  like every closed

system of religion, has an undoubted  tendency to suppress the

unconscious in the individual as  much as possible, thus paralyzing his

fantasy activity. Instead, religion offers stereotyped symbolic concepts that

are meant to take the place of his unconscious once and for all. The

symbolic concepts of all religions are recreations of unconscious processesin a typical, universally binding form. Religious teaching supplies, as it

were, the final information about the “last things” and the world beyond

human consciousness. Wherever we can observe a religion being born, we

see how the doctrinal figures flow into the founder himself as revelations, in

other words as concretizations of his unconscious fantasy. The forms welling

up from his unconscious are declared to be universally valid and thus

replace the individual fantasies of others. The evangelist  Matthew has

preserved for us a fragment of this process from the life of Christ: in the

story of the temptation we see how the idea of kingship rises out of the

founder’s unconscious in the visionary form of the devil, who offers him

power over all the kingdoms of the earth. Had Christ misunderstood the

fantasy and taken it concretely, there would have been one madman the

more in the world. But  he rejected the  concretism of his fantasy and

entered the world as a king to whom the kingdoms of heaven are subject.

He was therefore  no paranoiac, as the result also proved. The views

advanced  from time to time from the psychiatric side concerning the

morbidity of Christ’s psychology are nothing but ludicrous  rationalistic

twaddle, with no comprehension whatever of the meaning of such processes

in the history of mankind.

The form in which Christ presented the content of his unconscious to the

world became accepted and was declared valid for all. Thereafter all

individual fantasies became otiose and worthless, and were persecuted as

heretical, as the fate of the Gnostic movement and of all later heresies

testifies. The prophet Jeremiah is speaking just in this vein when he warns

(ch. 23):

16. Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Hearken not unto the words of the prophets

that prophesy unto you: they make you vain: they speak a vision of their

own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord.

25. I have heard what the prophets said that prophesy lies in my name,

    saying, I have dreamed, I have dreamed.

26. How long shall this be in the heart of the prophets that prophesy lies?

    yea, they are prophets of the deceit of their own heart;

27. Which think to cause my people to forget my name by their dreams

    which they tell every man to his neighbour, as  their fathers have

    forgotten my name for Baal.

28. The prophet that hath a dream, let him tell a dream; and he that hath

    my word, let him speak my word faithfully. What is the chaff to the    wheat? saith the Lord.

Similarly, we see in early Christianity how the bishops zealously strove to

stamp out the activity of the individual unconscious among the monks. The

archbishop  Athanasius  of  Alexandria in his biography of St. Anthony

gives us particularly valuable insights in this respect. By way of instruction

to his monks, he describes the apparitions and visions, the perils of the

soul, which befall those that pray and fast in solitude. He warns them how

cleverly the devil disguises himself in order to bring saintly men to their

downfall. The devil is, of course, the voice of the anchorite’s  own

unconscious, in revolt against the forcible suppression of his nature. I give a

number of excerpts from this rather inaccessible book.

40 They show very clearly how the unconscious was  systematically

suppressed and devalued.

There is a time when we see no man and yet the sound of the working of the

devils is heard by us, and it is like the singing of a song in a loud voice; and

there are times when the words of the Scriptures are heard by us, just as if a

living man were repeating them, and they are exactly like the words which

we should hear if a man were reading the Book. And it also happens that

they [the devils] rouse us up to the night prayer, and incite us to stand up;

and they make apparent unto us also the similitudes of monks and the

forms of those who mourn; and they draw nigh unto us as if they had come

from a long way off, and they begin to utter words like unto these, that

they may make lax the understanding of those who are little of soul:—“It is

now a law unto all creation that we love desolation, but we were unable, by

reason of God, to enter into our houses when we came unto them, and to

do fair things.” And when they are unable to work their will by means of a

scheme of this kind, they depart from this kind of deceit unto another, and

say: “How now is it possible for thee to live? For thou hast sinned  and

committed iniquity in many things. Thinkest thou, that the Spirit hath not

revealed unto me what hath been done by thee, or that I know not that thou

hast done such and such a thing?” If therefore a simple brother hear these

things, and feel within himself that he has done even as the Evil One has

said, and he be not acquainted with his craftiness, his mind  shall be

troubled straightway, and he shall fall into despair and turn backwards.

It is then, O my beloved, unnecessary for us to be terrified at these things,

and we have need to fear only when the devils multiply the speaking of the

things which are true and then we must rebuke them severely. … Let usthen take heed that we incline not our hearing to their words, even though

they be words of truth which they utter; for it would be a disgrace unto us

that  those who have rebelled  against  God should  become our teachers.

And let us, O my brethren, arm ourselves with the armour of righteousness,

and let us put on the helmet of redemption, and in the time of contending let

us shoot out from a believing mind spiritual arrows as from a bow which

is stretched. For they [the devils] are nothing at all, and even if they were,

their strength has in it nothing which would enable it to resist the might of

the Cross.

41

And again on another occasion  there appeared unto me a devil of an

exceedingly haughty and insolent appearance, and he stood up before me

with the tumultuous noise of many people, and he dared to say unto me: “I,

even I, am the power of God,” and “I, even I, am the Lord of the worlds.”

And he said unto me: “What dost thou wish me to give thee? Ask, and

thou shalt receive.” Then I blew a puff of wind at him, and I rebuked him in

the name of Christ. …

And on another occasion, when I was fasting, the crafty one appeared to me

in the form of a brother monk carrying bread, and he began to speak unto me

words of counsel, saying, “Rise up, and stay thy heart with bread and water,

and rest a little from thine excessive labours, for thou art a man, and

howsoever greatly thou mayest be exalted thou art clothed with a mortal

body and thou shouldest fear sickness and tribulations.” Then I regarded his

words, and I held my peace and refrained from giving an answer. And I

bowed myself down in quietness, and  I began to make supplications in

prayer, and I said: “O Lord, make Thou an end of him, even as Thou hast

been wont to do him away at all times.” And as I concluded my words he

came to an end and vanished like dust, and went forth from the door like

smoke.

Now on one occasion Satan approached the house one night and knocked

at the door, and I went out to see who was knocking, and I lifted up

mine eyes and saw the form of an exceedingly tall and strong man; and,

having asked him “Who art thou?,” he answered and said unto me: “I am

Satan.” And  after this I said unto him: “What seekest thou?” and he

answered unto me: “Why do the monks and the anchorites, and the other

Christians revile me, and why do they at all times heap curses upon me?”

And having clasped my head firmly in wonder at his mad folly, I saidunto him: “Wherefore dost thou give them trouble?” Then he answered and

said unto me: “It is not I who trouble them, but it is they  who trouble

themselves. For there happened to me on a certain occasion that which did

happen to me, and had I not cried out to them that I was the Enemy, his

slaughters would have come to an end for ever. I have therefore no place

to dwell in and not one glittering sword, and not even people who are

really subject unto me, for those who are in service to me hold me wholly in

contempt; and moreover, I have to keep them in fetters, for they do not

cleave to me because they esteem it right to do so, and they are ever

ready to escape from me in every place. The Christians have filled the

whole  world, and behold, even the desert is filled full with their

monasteries and habitations. Let them then take good heed to themselves

when they heap abuse upon me.”

Then, wondering at the grace of our Lord I said unto him: “How doth it

happen that whilst thou hast been a liar on every other occasion, at this

present the truth is spoken by thee? And how is it that thou speakest the

truth now when thou art wont to utter lies? It is indeed true that when Christ

came into this world, thou wast brought down to the lowest depths, and that

the root of thine error was plucked up from the earth.”

And when Satan heard the name of Christ his form vanished and his words

came to an end.

42

These quotations show how, with the help of the  general belief, the

unconscious of the individual was rejected  despite the fact that it

transparently spoke the truth. There are in the history of the mind especial

reasons for this rejection, but it is not incumbent on us to discuss them here.

We must be content with the fact that the unconscious was suppressed.

Psychologically, the suppression consists in a withdrawal of libido. The

libido thus gained promotes the growth and development of the conscious

attitude, with the result that a new picture of the world is gradually built up.

The undoubted advantages accruing from this process naturally consolidate

the new attitude. It is, therefore, not surprising that the psychology of our

time is characterized by a predominantly unfavourable attitude towards the

unconscious.

It is easy to understand why all sciences have excluded the standpoints of

both feeling and fantasy, and indeed it was absolutely necessary for them to

do so. They are sciences for  that very reason. How  is it then withpsychology? If it is to be regarded as a science, it must do the same. But will

it then do justice to its material? Every science ultimately seeks to formulate

and express its material in abstractions; thus  psychology could, and

actually does, grasp the processes of  feeling, sensation, and fantasy in

abstract intellectual form. This treatment certainly establishes the rights of

the abstract intellectual standpoint, but not the claims of other quite possible

psychological points of view. These others can receive only a bare mention

in a scientific psychology; they  cannot emerge as  independent scientific

principles. Science is under all circumstances an affair of the intellect, and the

other psychological functions are subordinated to it as objects. The intellect

is the sovereign of the scientific realm. But it is another matter when

science steps over into the realm of its practical application. The intellect,

which was formerly king, is now merely a minister—a scientifically refined

instrument it is true, but still only a tool; no longer an end in itself, but

merely a precondition. The intellect, and along with it science, is now

placed at the service of a creative power and purpose. Yet this is still

“psychology” although no longer science; it is psychology in the wider

meaning of the word, a psychological activity of a creative nature, in which

creative fantasy is given prior place.

Instead of using the term “creative fantasy,” it would be just as true to say

that in practical psychology of this kind the leading role is given to life

itself; for while it is undoubtedly fantasy, procreative and productive, which

uses science as a tool, it is the manifold demands of external reality which

in turn stimulate the activity of creative fantasy. Science as an end in itself

is assuredly a high ideal, yet its consistent fulfilment brings about as many

“ends in themselves” as there are sciences and arts. Naturally this leads to a

high differentiation and specialization of the particular functions concerned,

but also to their detachment from the world and from life, as well as to a

multiplication of specialized fields  which gradually lose all connection

with one another. The  result is an impoverishment and desiccation not

merely in the specialized fields but also in the psyche of every man who has

differentiated himself up or sunk down to the specialist level. Science must

prove her value for life; it is not enough that she be mistress, she must also

be the maid. By so serving she in no way dishonours herself.

Although science has granted us insight into the  irregularities and

disturbances of the psyche, thus meriting  our profound respect for her

intrinsic intellectual gifts, it  would nevertheless be a grave mistake toimpute to her an absolute aim which would incapacitate her from being

simply an instrument. For when we approach the actual business of living

from the side of the intellect and science, we  immediately come up

against barriers that shut us out from other, equally real provinces of life.

We are therefore compelled to acknowledge that the universality of our ideal

is a limitation, and to look round for a Spiritus rector which, bearing in

mind the claims of a fuller life, can offer us a  greater guarantee of

psychological universality than the intellect alone can compass. When Faust

exclaims “feeling is  all,” he is expressing merely  the antithesis of the

intellect, and so only goes to the other extreme; he does not achieve that

totality of life and of his own psyche in which feeling and thinking are

united in a third and higher principle. This higher third, as I have already

indicated, can be understood either as a practical goal  or as  the  creative

fantasy that creates the goal. The goal of totality can be reached neither by

science, which is an end in itself, nor by feeling, which lacks the visionary

power of thought. The one must lend itself as an auxiliary to the other, yet

the opposition between them is so great that a bridge is needed. This bridge

is already given us in creative fantasy. It is not born of either, for it is the

mother of both—nay more, it is pregnant with the child, that final goal

which unites the opposites.

If psychology remains for us only a science, we do not penetrate into life—

we merely serve the absolute aim of science. It leads us, certainly, to a

knowledge of the objective situation, but it always opposes every other aim

but its own.

The intellect remains imprisoned in itself just so long as it  does not

willingly sacrifice its supremacy by recognizing the value of other aims. It

shrinks from the step which takes it out  of itself and which denies its

universal validity, since from the standpoint of the intellect everything else is

nothing but fantasy. But what great thing ever came into existence that was

not first fantasy? Inasmuch as the intellect rigidly adheres to the absolute aim

of science it cuts itself off from the springs of life. For it fantasy is nothing

but a wish dream, and herein is expressed all that depreciation of fantasy

which for science is so welcome and so necessary. Science as an end in itself

is inevitable so long as the development of science is the sole question at

issue. But this at once becomes an evil when it is a question of life itself

demanding development. Thus it was an historical necessity in the Christian

process of culture that unbridled fantasy should be suppressed, just as itwas also necessary, though for different reasons, that fantasy  should be

suppressed in our age of natural science. It must not be forgotten that creative

fantasy, if not restrained within just bounds, can degenerate into the rankest

of growths. But these bounds are never artificial limitations imposed by the

intellect or by rational feeling; they are boundaries set by necessity and

irrefutable reality.

The tasks of every age differ, and it is only in retrospect that we can

discern with certainty what had to be and what should not have been. In the

momentary present the conflict of opinions will always rage, for “war is the

father of all.”

43 History alone decides the issue. Truth is not eternal, it is a programme to

  be fulfilled. The more “eternal” a truth is, the more lifeless it is and

  worthless; it says nothing more to us because it is self-evident.

How fantasy is assessed  by  psychology,  so long  as this  remains merely

science, is illustrated by the well-known views of Freud and Adler. The

Freudian interpretation reduces fantasy to causal, elementary, instinctive

processes. Adler’s conception reduces it to the elementary, final aims of the

ego. Freud’s is a psychology of instinct, Adler’s an ego-psychology. Instinct

is an impersonal biological phenomenon. A psychology founded on instinct

must by its very nature neglect the ego, since the ego owes its existence to

the principium individuationis, i.e., to individual  differentiation, whose

isolated character removes it from the  realm of general biological

phenomena. Although biological instinctive processes also contribute to the

formation of the  personality, individuality is nevertheless essentially

different  from collective instincts; indeed, it stands in the most direct

opposition to them, just as the individual as a personality is always distinct

from the collective. His essence consists precisely in this distinction. Every

ego-psychology must  necessarily  exclude  and ignore  just the  collective

element that is bound to a psychology of instinct, since it describes that

very process by which the ego becomes differentiated from  collective

drives. The characteristic animosity between the  adherents of the two

standpoints arises from the fact that either standpoint necessarily involves

a devaluation and  disparagement of the other. So long as the radical

difference between ego-psychology and the psychology of instinct is not

recognized, either side must naturally hold its respective  theory to be

universally valid. This is not to say that a psychology of instinct could not

devise a theory of the ego-process. It can very well do so, but in a waywhich to the ego-psychologist looks too much like a negation of his theory.

Hence we find that with Freud the “ego-instincts” do occasionally emerge,

but for the most part they eke out a very modest existence. With Adler, on

the other hand, it would seem as though sexuality were the merest vehicle,

which in one way or another serves the elementary aims of power. The

Adlerian principle is the safeguarding of personal power  which is

superimposed on the collective instincts. With Freud it is instinct that makes

the ego serve its purposes, so that the ego appears as a mere function of

instinct.

The scientific tendency in both is to reduce everything  to their own

principle, from which their deductions in turn  proceed. In the case of

fantasies this operation is particularly easy to accomplish because, unlike

the functions of consciousness, they are not adapted to reality and therefore

do not have an objectively oriented character, but express purely instinctive

as well as pure ego-tendencies. Anyone who  adopts the standpoint of

instinct will have no difficulty in  discovering in them the “wish-

fulfillment,” the “infantile wish,” the “repressed sexuality.” And the man

who adopts the standpoint of the ego can just as easily discover those

elementary aims concerned with the security and differentiation of the ego,

since fantasies are mediating products between the ego and the instincts.

Accordingly they contain elements of both sides. Interpretation from either

side is always somewhat forced and arbitrary, because one side is always

suppressed. Nevertheless, a demonstrable truth does on the whole emerge;

but it is only a partial truth that can lay no claim to general validity. Its

validity extends only so far as the range of its principle. But in the domain

of the other principle it is invalid.

Freudian psychology is characterized by one central idea, the repression

of incompatible wish-tendencies. Man appears as a bundle of wishes which

are only partially adaptable to the object. His neurotic difficulties are due to

the fact that environmental influences, education, and objective conditions

put a considerable check on the free expression of instinct. Other influences,

productive of moral conflicts or infantile fixations that compromise later

life, emanate from the father and mother. The original instinctive disposition

is a fundamental datum which undergoes disturbing modifications  mainly

through objective influences; hence the most untrammelled expression of

instinct in respect of suitably chosen objects would appear to be the needful

remedy.  Adler’s psychology, on the other hand, is characterized by thecentral concept of ego-superiority. Man appears primarily as an ego-point

which must not under any circumstances be subordinated to the object.

While the craving for the object,  the fixation on the object,  and the

impossible nature of certain desires for the object play a paramount role with

Freud, with Adler everything is directed to the superiority of the subject.

Freud’s repression of instinct in respect of the object corresponds to the

security of the subject in Adler. For Adler the remedy is the removal of the

security  that isolates the subject; for Freud it is the removal of the

repression that makes the object inaccessible.

The basic formula with Freud is therefore sexuality, which expresses the

strongest relation between subject and object; with Adler it is the power of

the subject, which  secures him most effectively against the object and

guarantees  him an impregnable isolation that abolishes all relationships.

Freud would like to ensure the undisturbed flow of instinct towards its

object; Adler would like to break the baleful spell of the object in order to

save the ego from suffocating in its own defensive armour. Freud’s view is

essentially  extraverted, Adler’s introverted. The extraverted theory holds

good for the extraverted type, the introverted theory for the introverted

type. Since a pure type is a product of a wholly one-sided development it

is also necessarily unbalanced. Overaccentuation of the one function is

synonymous with repression of the other.

Psychoanalysis fails to remove this repression just in so far as the method

it employs is oriented according to the theory of the patient’s own type.

Thus the extravert, in accordance with his theory, will reduce the fantasies

rising out of his unconscious to their instinctual content, while the introvert

will reduce them to his power aims. The gains  resulting from such an

analysis merely increase the already  existing imbalance. This kind of

analysis simply reinforces  the existing type and renders any mutual

understanding between the two types impossible. On the contrary the gap is

widened, both without and within. An inner dissociation  arises, because

portions of other functions coming to the surface in unconscious fantasies,

dreams, etc., are each time  devalued and again repressed. On these

grounds a certain critic was justified up to a point when he described Freud’s

as a neurotic theory, though the tinge of malice in this statement is merely

intended to absolve us from the duty of seriously coming to grips with the

problem. The standpoints of Freud  and Adler are equally one-sided and

characteristic only of one type.Both theories reject the principle of imagination since they reduce fantasies

to something else and treat them merely as a semiotic

44 expression. In reality fantasies mean much more than that,  for they

  represent at the same time the other mechanism—of  repressed

  extraversion in the introvert, and of repressed  introversion in the

  extravert. But the repressed function is  unconscious, and hence

    undeveloped, embryonic, and archaic.  In this condition it cannot be

  united with the higher level of  the conscious function. The

  unacceptable nature of fantasy derives chiefly from this peculiarity of the

    unrecognized,  unconscious function. For everyone whose guiding

  principle is adaptation to external reality, imagination is for these reasons

    something reprehensible and useless. And yet we know that every good

  idea and all creative work are the offspring of the imagination, and have

  their source in what one is pleased to call infantile fantasy. Not the

  artist alone,  but every creative individual whatsoever owes all that is

  greatest in his life to fantasy. The dynamic principle of fantasy is play, a

    characteristic also of the child, and as such it appears inconsistent with

  the principle of serious work. But without this playing with fantasy no

  creative work has ever yet come to birth. The debt we owe to the play of

    imagination is incalculable. It is therefore short-sighted to treat fantasy,

  on account of its risky or unacceptable nature, as a thing of little worth. It

  must not be forgotten that it is just in the  imagination that a man’s

  highest value may lie. I say “may” advisedly, because on the other hand

  fantasies are also  valueless, since in the form of raw material they

  possess no realizable worth. In order to unearth the treasures they contain

  they must be developed a stage further. But this development  is not

  achieved by a simple analysis of the fantasy material; a synthesis is also

  needed by means of a constructive method. 45

It remains an open question whether the opposition  between the two

standpoints can ever be satisfactorily  resolved in intellectual terms.

Although in one sense  Abelard’s attempt  must be rated very highly, in

practice no consequences worth mentioning have resulted from it, for he

was unable to  establish any mediatory psychological principle beyond

conceptualism or “sermonism,” which is merely a revised  edition,

altogether one-sided and intellectual, of the ancient Logos conception. The

Logos, as mediator, had of course this advantage over the sermo, that in its

human manifestation it also did justice to man’s non-intellectual aspirations.I cannot, however, rid myself of the impression that Abelard’s brilliant

mind, which so fully comprehended the great Yea and Nay of life, would

never have remained  satisfied with his paradoxical conceptualism, and

would not have renounced a further creative effort, if the impelling force of

passion had not been lost to him through his tragic fate. In confirmation of

this we need only compare conceptualism with what the great Chinese

philosophers Lao-tzu and Chuang-tzu, or the poet Schiller, made of this same

problem.5. THE HOLY COMMUNION CONTROVERSY

          BETWEEN LUTHER AND ZWINGLI

Of the later dissensions that stirred men’s minds, Protestantism and the

Reformation movement should really receive our first attention. Only, this

phenomenon is of such complexity that it would first have to be resolved

into many  separate psychological processes before it could become an

object of analytical investigation. But this lies outside my

competence. I must therefore content myself with selecting a  specific

instance of that great dispute, namely the Holy  Communion controversy

between Luther and Zwingli. The dogma of  transubstantiation,  mentioned

earlier, was sanctioned by the Lateran Council of  1215, and thenceforward

became an established article of faith, in which tradition Luther grew up.

Although the notion that a ceremony and its  concrete performance  have  an

objective redemptory significance is really quite unevangelical, since the

evangelical movement was actually directed against the values of Catholic

institutions, Luther was nevertheless  unable to free himself from the

immediately effective sensuous impression in the taking of bread and wine.

He was unable to perceive in it a mere sign; the sensuous reality and the

immediate experience of it were for him an indispensable religious necessity.

He therefore claimed the actual presence of the body and blood of Christ in

the Communion. “In and beneath” the bread and wine he received the body

and blood of Christ. For him the religious significance of the immediate

experience of the object was so great that his imagination was spellbound by

the concretism of the material presence of the sacred body. All his attempts

at explanation are under the spell of this fact: the body of Christ is present,

albeit  “non-spatially.”  According to the doctrine  of so-called

consubstantiation, the actual substance of the sacred body was also really

present beside the bread and wine. The ubiquity of Christ’s body, which this

assumption postulated, proved  especially discomforting to human

intelligence and was later replaced by the concept of volipresence, which

means that God is present wherever he wills to be. But Luther, unperturbed

by all these difficulties, held unswervingly to the immediate experience of

the  sensuous  impression  and preferred to thrust aside all the scruples of

human reason with  explanations that were either absurd or at best

unsatisfying.

It can hardly be supposed that it was merely the force of tradition that madeLuther determined to cling to this dogma, for he of all people gave abundant

proof of his ability to throw aside traditional forms of belief. Indeed, we

should not go far wrong in assuming that it was rather the actual contact

with the “real” and material in the Communion, and the feeling-value of

this contact for Luther himself, that  prevailed over the evangelical

principle, which maintained that the word was the sole vehicle of grace and

not the ceremony. For Luther the word certainly had redeeming power, but

the partaking of the Communion was also a  mediator of grace. This, I

repeat, must have been only an apparent concession to the institutions of the

Catholic Church;  in reality it was an acknowledgement, demanded by

Luther’s  own psychology, of the fact of feeling grounded upon the

immediate sense-impression.

In contrast to the Lutheran standpoint, Zwingli  championed a purely

symbolic conception of the Communion. What really mattered for him was

a “spiritual” partaking of the body and blood of Christ. This standpoint is

characterized by reason

and by an ideal conception of the ceremony. It had the advantage of not

violating the evangelical principle, and at the  same time it avoided all

hypotheses contrary to reason. However, it did scant justice to the thing that

Luther wished  to preserve—the reality of the sense-impression and its

particular feeling-value. Zwingli, it is true, also administered  the

Communion, and like Luther partook of the bread and  wine, but his

conception contained no formula that could

adequately reproduce the unique sensory and feeling-value of the object.

Luther provided a formula for this, but it was contrary to reason and to

the evangelical principle. From the standpoint of sensation and feeling this

matters little, and indeed rightly so, for the idea, the principle, is just as

little concerned with the sensation of the object. In the last resort,  both

points of view are mutually exclusive.

Luther’s formulation favours the extraverted  conception of things, while

Zwingli’s favours the ideal standpoint. Although Zwingli’s formula does no

violence to feeling and sensation, merely offering an ideal conception, it

nevertheless appears to leave room for the efficacy of the object. But it

seems as though the extraverted standpoint—Luther’s—is not content with

just leaving room for the object; it also demands a formulation in which

the ideal subserves the sensory, exactly as the ideal formulation demands

the subservience of feeling and sensation.[100] At this point, with the consciousness of having done no more than

pose the question, I close this chapter on the problem of types in the

history of classical and medieval thought. I lack the competence to treat so

difficult and far-reaching a problem in any way exhaustively. If I have

succeeded in conveying to the reader some idea of the existence of typical

differences of standpoint, my purpose will have been achieved. I need

hardly add that I am aware that none of the material here touched upon

has been dealt with conclusively. I must leave this task to those who

command a wider knowledge of the subject than myself.                                          IISCHILLER’S IDEAS ON THE TYPE PROBLEM

1. LETTERS ON THE AESTHETIC

                          EDUCATION OF MAN        THE SUPERIOR AND THE INFERIOR

                                  FUNCTIONS

[101] So far as I have been able to ascertain with my somewhat limited

knowledge, Friedrich Schiller seems to have been the first to attempt a

conscious differentiation of typical attitudes on a large scale and to give a

detailed account of their peculiarities. This important endeavour to present

the two mechanisms in question, and at the same time to discover a possible

way of reconciling them, is to be found in his essay first published in 1795:

“Über die ästhetische Erziehung des Menschen.” The essay consists of a

number of  letters which Schiller addressed to the Duke of  Holstein-

Augustenburg.

1

[102] Schiller’s essay, by its profundity of thought,  psychological

penetration, and wide view of a possible  psychological solution of the

conflict, prompts me to a rather lengthy discussion and evaluation of his

ideas, for it has never yet been their lot to be treated in such a context. The

service rendered by Schiller from our psychological point of view, as will

become clear in the course of our exposition, is by no  means

inconsiderable, for he offers us carefully worked out  lines of approach

whose value we, as psychologists, are only just beginning to appreciate. My

undertaking will not be an easy one, for I may well be accused of putting a

construction on Schiller’s ideas which his actual words do not warrant.

Although I shall try to quote his actual words at every essential point, it

may not be altogether possible to introduce his ideas into the present context

without putting certain interpretations and constructions upon them. This is a

possibility I must not overlook, but on the other hand we must remember

that Schiller himself  belonged to a definite type, and was therefore

compelled,  even in spite of himself, as I am, to give a one-sided

presentation of his ideas. The limitations of our views and our knowledge are

nowhere more apparent than in psychological  discussions, where it is

almost impossible for us to project any other picture than the one whose

main outlines are already laid down in our own psyche.

[103] From various characteristics I have come to the  conclusion that

Schiller belongs to the introverted type, whereas Goethe—if we disregard

his overriding  intuition—inclines more to the extraverted side. We can

easily discover Schiller’s own image in his description of the idealistic type.Because of this identification, an inevitable limitation is imposed on his

formulations, a fact we must never lose sight of if we wish to gain a fuller

understanding. It  is owing to this limitation that the one function is

presented  by Schiller in richer outline than the other, which is still

imperfectly developed in the introvert, and just because of its  imperfect

development it must necessarily have certain  inferior characteristics

attached to it. At this point the author’s exposition requires our criticism and

correction. It is evident, too, that this limitation of Schiller’s impelled him

to use a terminology which lacks general applicability. As an introvert he

had a better relation to ideas than to things. The relation to ideas can be more

emotional or more reflective according to whether the individual belongs

more to the feeling or to the thinking type. And here I would request the

reader, who may  perhaps have been led by my earlier publications to

identify feeling with extraversion and thinking with introversion, to bear in

mind the definitions given in Chapter XI of this book. By the introverted

and extraverted types I distinguish two general classes of men, which can

be further subdivided into function-types, i.e., thinking, feeling, sensation,

and intuitive types. Hence an introvert can be either a thinking or a feeling

type, since feeling as well as thinking can come under the supremacy of

the idea, just as both can be dominated by the object.

[104] If, then, I consider that Schiller, in his nature and particularly in his

characteristic opposition to Goethe, corresponds to the introverted type, the

question next arises as to  which  subdivision he belongs. This is hard to

answer. Without doubt intuition plays a great role with him; we might on

this  account, or if we regard him exclusively as a poet, reckon him  an

intuitive. But in the letters on the aesthetic education of  man it is

unquestionably Schiller the thinker who confronts  us. Not only from

these, but from his own repeated admissions, we know how strong the

reflective element was  in Schiller. Consequently we must shift his

intuitiveness very much towards the side of thinking, thus approaching him

also from the angle of the psychology of the introverted thinking type. It

will, I hope, become sufficiently clear from what  follows that this

hypothesis is in accord with reality, for there are not a few passages in

Schiller’s writings that speak distinctly in its favour. I would, therefore, beg

the reader to remember that the hypothesis I have just advanced underlies

my whole argument. This reminder seems to me necessary  because

Schiller approaches the problem from the angle of his own inner experience.In view of the fact that another psychology, i.e., another type of man, would

have approached the same problem in quite another way, the very broad

formulation which Schiller gives might be regarded as a subjective bias or an

ill-considered generalization. But such a judgment would be incorrect, since

there actually is a large class of men for whom the problem of the separated

functions is exactly the same as it was for Schiller. If, therefore, in the

ensuing argument I occasionally emphasize Schiller’s one-sidedness and

subjectivity, I do not wish to detract from  the importance and general

validity of the problem he has raised, but rather to make room for other

formulations. Such criticisms as I may occasionally offer have more the

character  of a transcription into another language which will relieve

Schiller’s  formulation  of its subjective  limitations.  My  argument,

nevertheless, follows Schiller’s very closely, since it is concerned much less

with the general question of  introversion and extraversion—which

exclusively engaged  our attention in Chapter I—than with the typical

conflict of the introverted thinking type.

[105] Schiller concerns himself at the very outset with the question of the

cause and origin of the separation of the two functions. With sure instinct

he hits on the differentiation of the individual as the basic motive. “It was

culture itself that inflicted this wound upon modern humanity.”

2 This one sentence shows Schiller’s wide grasp of the  problem. The

breakdown of the harmonious cooperation of psychic forces in instinctive

life is like an ever open and never healing wound, a veritable Amfortas’

wound, because  the differentiation of one function among several

inevitably leads to the hypertrophy of the one and the neglect and atrophy of

the others:

I do not fail to appreciate the advantages to which the present generation,

considered as a unity and weighed in the scales of reason, may lay claim in

the face of the best of antiquity, but it has to enter the contest in close order

and let whole compete with whole. What individual modern will emerge to

contend  in single combat with the individual Athenian for the prize of

humanity? Whence comes this disadvantageous relation of individuals in

spite of all the advantages of the race?

3

[106] Schiller places the responsibility for this decline of  the modern

individual on culture, that is, on the differentiation of functions. He next

points out how, in art and learning, the intuitive and the speculative mindshave become estranged, and how each has jealously excluded the other

from its respective field of application:

By confining our activity to a single sphere we have handed ourselves over

to a master who is not infrequently to end up by suppressing the rest of our

capacities. While in one place a luxuriant imagination ravages the hard-

earned fruits of the intellect, in another the spirit of abstraction stifles the

fire at  which the heart might have warmed itself and the fancy been

enkindled.

4

If the community makes the function the measure of a man, if it respects in

one of its citizens only memory, in another a tabulating intellect, in a third

only mechanical skill; if, indifferent to character, it here lays stress upon

knowledge alone, and there pardons the profoundest darkness of the intellect

so long as it co-exists with a spirit of order and a law-abiding demeanour

—if at the same time it requires these special aptitudes to be exercised

with an intensity proportionate to the loss of extensity which it permits in

the  individuals concerned—can we then wonder that the  remaining

aptitudes of the mind become neglected in order to bestow every attention

upon the only one which brings honour and profit?

5

[107] There is volume indeed in these thoughts of  Schiller’s. It is

understandable that Schiller’s generation, who  with their imperfect

knowledge of the Greek world judged the Greeks by the grandeur of the

works they left behind them, should also have overestimated them beyond

all measure, since the peculiar beauty of Greek art is due not least to its

contrast with the milieu from which it arose. The advantage enjoyed by the

Greek was that he was less differentiated than modern man, if indeed one is

disposed to regard that as an advantage—for the disadvantage of such a

condition must be equally obvious. The differentiation of functions was

assuredly not the result of human caprice, but, like everything else in nature,

of necessity. Could one of those late admirers of the “Grecian heaven” and

Arcadian bliss have visited the earth as an Attic helot, he might well have

surveyed the beauties of Greece with rather different eyes. Even if it were

true that the primitive conditions of the fifth century before Christ gave the

individual a greater opportunity for an all-round development of his qualities

and capacities, this was possible only because thousands of his fellow men

were cramped and crippled by circumstances that were all the more wretched.A high level of individual culture was undoubtedly  reached by certain

exemplary personalities, but a collective culture was quite unknown to the

ancient world. This achievement was reserved for Christianity. Hence it

comes about that, as a mass, the moderns can not only measure up to the

Greeks, but by every standard of collective culture easily surpass them. On

the other hand, Schiller is perfectly right in  his contention that our

individual culture has not kept pace with our collective culture, and it has

certainly not improved  during the hundred and twenty years that have

passed since Schiller wrote. Quite the reverse—for, if we had not strayed

even further into the collective atmosphere so detrimental to  individual

development, the violent reactions personified by  Stirner or Nietzsche

would scarcely have been needed as a  corrective. Schiller’s words,

therefore, still remain valid today.

[108] Just as the ancients, with an eye to individual development, catered

to the well-being of an upper class by an almost total suppression of the

great majority of the common people (helots, slaves), the Christian world

reached a condition of collective culture by transferring this same process, as

far as possible, to the psychological sphere within the individual himself—

raising it, one might say, to the subjective level. As the chief value of the

individual was proclaimed by Christian dogma to be an imperishable soul, it

was no longer possible  for the inferior majority of the people to be

suppressed in  actual fact for the freedom of a more valuable minority.

Instead, the more valuable function within the individual was  preferred

above the inferior functions. In this way the chief importance was attached

to the one valued function, to the detriment of all the rest. Psychologically

this meant that the external form of society in classical civilization was

transferred into the subject, so that a condition was produced within the

individual which in the ancient world had been  external, namely a

dominating, privileged function which was developed and differentiated at

the expense of an inferior majority. By means of this psychological process

a collective culture gradually came into existence, in which the “rights of

man” were guaranteed for the individual to an immeasurably greater degree

than in antiquity. But it had the disadvantage of depending on a subjective

slave culture, that is to say on a transfer of the old mass enslavement into

the psychological sphere, with the result that, while collective culture was

enhanced, individual culture was degraded. Just as the enslavement of the

masses was the open wound of the ancient world, so the enslavement of theinferior functions is an ever-bleeding wound in the psyche of modern man.

[109] “One-sidedness in the exercise of powers, it is true, inevitably leads

the individual into error, but the race to truth,”

6 says Schiller. The privileged position of the superior  function is as

detrimental to the individual as it is valuable to society. This detrimental

effect has reached such a pitch that the mass organizations of our present-

day culture actually strive for the complete extinction of the individual, since

their very existence depends on a mechanized application of the privileged

functions of individual human beings. It is not man who counts, but his one

differentiated function. Man no longer appears as man in our collective

culture: he is merely represented by a function, what is more he identifies

himself completely with this function and denies the relevance of the other

inferior functions.

Thus modern man is debased to a mere function, because it is  this that

represents a collective value and alone guarantees a  possible livelihood.

But, as Schiller clearly sees, a differentiation of function could have come

in no other way:

There was no other way of developing the manifold capacities of man than by

placing them in opposition to each other. This antagonism of powers is the

great instrument of culture, but it is only the instrument; for as long as it

persists, we are only on the way towards culture.

7

[110] According to this view the present state of our warring capacities

would not be a state of culture, but only a stage on the way. Opinions will,

of course, be divided about this, for by culture one man will understand a

state of collective culture, while another will regard this state merely as

civilization

8 and will expect of culture the sterner demands of individual development.

Schiller is, however, mistaken when he allies himself exclusively with the

second standpoint and contrasts our collective culture unfavourably with that

of the individual  Greek, since he overlooks the defectiveness of the

civilization of that time, which makes the unlimited validity of that culture

very questionable. Hence no culture is ever really complete, for it always

swings towards one side or the other.  Sometimes the  cultural ideal is

extraverted, and the  chief value then lies with the object and man’s relation

to it: sometimes it is introverted, and the chief value lies with subject and his

relation to the idea. In the former case, culture takes on a collective character,in the latter an individual one.

It is therefore easy to understand how under the influence of Christianity,

whose principle is Christian love (and by  counter-association, also its

counterpart, the violation of individuality), a collective culture came about

in which the individual is liable to be swallowed up because individual

values are depreciated on principle. Hence there arose in the age of the

German classicists that extraordinary yearning for the ancient world which

for them was a symbol of individual culture, and on that account was for the

most part very much overvalued and often grossly

idealized. Not a few attempts were even made to imitate or recapture the

spirit of Greece, attempts which nowadays appear to us somewhat silly, but

must none the less be appreciated as forerunners of an individual culture.

[111] In the hundred and twenty years that have passed since Schiller

wrote his letters, conditions with respect to individual culture have gone

from bad to worse, since the interest of the individual is invested to a far

greater extent in collective occupations, and therefore much less leisure is

left over for the development of individual culture. Hence we possess

today a highly developed collective culture which in  organization far

exceeds anything that has gone before, but which for that very reason has

become increasingly injurious to individual culture. There is a deep gulf

between what a man is and what he represents, between what he is as an

individual and what he is as a collective being. His function is developed at

the expense of his individuality. Should he excel, he is merely identical with

his collective function; but should he not, then, though he may be esteemed

as a function in society, his individuality is wholly on the level of his inferior,

undeveloped functions, and he is simply a barbarian, while in the former case

he has happily deceived himself as to  his actual barbarism. This one-

sidedness has undoubtedly brought society advantages that should not be

underestimated, and acquisitions that could have been gained in no other

way, as Schiller finely observes:

Only by concentrating the whole energy of our spirit in one single focus,

and drawing together our whole being into one single power, do we attach

wings, so to say, to this individual power and lead it by artifice far beyond

the bounds which nature seems to have imposed upon it.

9

[112] But this one-sided development must inevitably lead to a reaction,

since the suppressed inferior functions cannot be indefinitely excluded fromparticipating in our life and development. The time will come when the

division in the inner man must be abolished, in order that the undeveloped

may be granted an opportunity to live.

[113] I have already indicated that the process of differentiation in cultural

development ultimately brings about a dissociation of the basic functions of

the psyche, going far beyond the differentiation of individual capacities

and even encroaching on the sphere of the psychological attitude in general,

which governs the way in which those capacities are employed. At the same

time, culture effects a differentiation of the function that already enjoys a

better capacity for development through  heredity. In one man it is the

capacity for thought, in another feeling, which is particularly amenable to

development, and therefore, impelled by cultural demands, he will concern

himself in special degree with developing an aptitude to which he is already

favourably disposed by nature. Its cultivation does not mean that the function

in question has an a priori claim to any particular proficiency; on the

contrary, one might say, it presupposes a certain delicacy, lability, pliability,

on which account the highest individual value is not always to be sought or

found in this function, but rather, perhaps, only the highest collective

value, in so far as this function is developed for a collective end. It may

well be, as I have said, that beneath the neglected functions there lie hidden

far higher individual values which, though of small  importance for

collective life, are of the greatest value for  individual life, and are

therefore vital values that can endow  the life of the individual with an

intensity and beauty he will  vainly seek in his collective function. The

differentiated  function procures for him the possibility of a collective

existence, but not that satisfaction and joie de vivre which the development

of individual values alone can give. Their absence is often sensed as a

profound lack, and the severance from them is like an inner division which,

with Schiller, one might compare with a painful wound. He goes on to say:

Thus, however much may be gained for the world as a whole  by this

fragmentary cultivation of human powers, it is  undeniable that the

individuals whom it affects suffer under the curse of this universal aim.

Athletic bodies are certainly developed by means of gymnastic exercises, but

only through the free and equable play of the limbs is beauty formed. In the

same way the exertion of individual talents certainly produces extraordinary

men, but only their even tempering makes full and happy men. And in what

relation should we stand to past and future ages if the cultivation of humannature made such a sacrifice necessary? We should have been the bondslaves

of humanity, we should have drudged for it for centuries on end, and

branded upon our mutilated nature the shameful traces of this servitude—in

order that a later generation might devote itself in blissful indolence to the

care of its moral health, and develop the free growth of its humanity! But

can man really be destined to neglect himself for any end whatever? Should

Nature be able, by her designs, to rob us of a completeness which Reason

prescribes to us by hers? It must be false that the cultivation of individual

powers necessitates the sacrifice of their totality; or however much the law

of Nature did have that tendency, we must be at liberty to restore by

means of a higher Art this wholeness in our nature which Art has destroyed.

10

[114] It is evident that Schiller in his personal life had a profound sense of

this conflict, and that it was just this antagonism in himself that generated a

longing for the coherence or homogeneity which should bring deliverance to

the suppressed functions languishing in servitude and a  restoration of

harmonious living. This idea is also the leit-motif of Wagner’s Parsifal,

and it is given symbolic expression in the restoration of the missing spear

and the healing of the wound. What Wagner tried to say in artistic terms

Schiller laboured to make clear in his philosophical reflections. Although

it is nowhere openly stated, the implication is clear enough that his problem

revolved round the resumption of a classical mode of life and view of the

world; from which one is bound to conclude that he either overlooked the

Christian solution or deliberately ignored it. In any case his spiritual eye was

focussed more on the beauty of antiquity than on the Christian doctrine of

redemption, which,  nevertheless, has no other aim than what Schiller

himself strove for—the deliverance from evil. The heart of man is “filled

with raging battle,” says Julian the Apostate in his discourse on King

Helios;

11 and with these words he aptly characterizes not only himself but his

whole age—the inner laceration of late antiquity which found expression in

an unexampled, chaotic confusion of hearts and minds, and from which the

Christian doctrine promised deliverance. What Christianity offered was not,

of course, a solution but a breaking free, a detachment of the one valuable

function from all the other functions which, at that time, made an equally

peremptory claim to government. Christianity offered one definite direction

to the exclusion of all others. This may have been the essential reason whySchiller passed over in silence the  possibility of salvation offered by

Christianity. The pagan’s close contact with nature seemed to promise just

that possibility which Christianity did not offer:

Nature in her physical creation indicates to us the way we should pursue

in moral creation. Not until the struggle of elementary powers in the

lower organizations has been assuaged does she rise to the noble formation

of the physical man. In the same way the strife of elements in the ethical

man, the conflict of blind instincts, must first be allayed, and  the crude

antagonism within him must have ceased, before we may dare to promote

his diversity. On the other hand, the independence of his character must be

assured, and subjection to alien despotic forms have given place to a decent

freedom, before we can submit the multiplicity in him to the unity of the

ideal.

12

[115] Thus it is not to be a detachment or redemption of the inferior function,

but an acknowledgement of it, a coming to terms with it, that unites the

opposites on the path of nature. But Schiller feels that the acceptance of the

inferior function might lead to a “conflict of blind instincts,” just as,

conversely, the unity of the ideal might re-establish the supremacy of the

valuable function over the less valuable ones and thereby restore the

original state of affairs. The inferior functions are opposed to the superior,

not so much in their essential nature as because of their momentary form.

They were originally neglected and repressed because they  hindered

civilized man from attaining his aims. But these  consist of one-sided

interests and are by no means synonymous with the perfection of human

individuality. If that were the aim, these unacknowledged functions would

be indispensable, and as a matter of fact they do not by nature contradict it.

But so long as the cultural aim does not coincide with the ideal of perfecting

the human individuality, these functions are subject to depreciation and

some degree of repression. The conscious acceptance of repressed functions

is equivalent to an internal civil war; the opposites, previously restrained, are

unleashed and the “independence of character” is abolished forthwith. This

independence can be attained only by a settlement of the conflict, which

appears to be impossible without despotic jurisdiction over the opposing

forces. In that way freedom is compromised, and without it the building

up of a morally free personality is equally impossible. But if freedom is

preserved, one is delivered over to the conflict of instincts:Terrified of the freedom which always declares its hostility to  their first

attempts, men will in one place throw themselves  into the arms of a

comfortable servitude, and in another,  driven to despair by a pedantic

tutelage, they will break out into the wild libertinism of the natural state.

Usurpation will  plead the weakness of human nature, insurrection its

dignity, until at length the great sovereign of all human affairs, blind force,

steps in to decide the sham conflict of principles like a common prize-fight.

13

[116] The contemporary revolution in France gave this statement a living,

albeit bloody background: begun in the name of philosophy and reason,

with a soaring idealism, it ended in blood-drenched chaos, from which

arose the  despotic genius of Napoleon. The Goddess of Reason proved

herself powerless against the might of the unchained beast. Schiller felt the

defeat of reason and truth and therefore had to postulate that truth herself

should become a power:

If she has hitherto displayed so little of her conquering power, the fault lies

not so much with the intellect that knew not how to unveil her, as with the

heart that shut her out, and with the instinct that would not serve her.

Whence arises this still  universal sway of prejudice, this intellectual

darkness, beside all the light that philosophy and experience have shed?

The age is enlightened, that is to say knowledge has been discovered and

publicly disseminated, which would at least suffice to set right our practical

principles. The spirit of free enquiry has scattered the delusions which for

so long barred the approach to truth, and is undermining the foundations

upon which fanaticism and fraud have raised their thrones. Reason has

been purged of the illusions of the senses and of deceitful sophistry, and

philosophy itself, which first caused  us to forsake Nature, is calling us

loudly and urgently back to  her bosom—why is it that we still remain

barbarians?

14

[117] We feel in these words of Schiller the proximity of  the French

Enlightenment and the fantastic intellectualism of the Revolution. “The age

is enlightened”—what an overvaluation of the intellect! “The spirit of free

enquiry has scattered the delusions”—what rationalism! One is vividly

reminded of the Proktophantasmist in Faust: “Vanish at once, you’ve been

explained away!” Even though the men of that age were altogether too

prone to overestimate the importance  and efficacy of reason, quiteforgetting that if reason really possessed such a power, she had long had

the amplest opportunity to demonstrate it, the fact should not be overlooked

that not all the influential minds of the age thought that way; consequently

this soaring flight of  rationalistic intellectualism may equally well have

sprung  from a particularly strong subjective development of this  same

propensity in Schiller himself. In him we have to reckon  with a

predominance of intellect, not at the expense of his poetic intuition but at

the cost of feeling. To Schiller himself it seemed as though there were a

perpetual conflict in him  between imagination and abstraction, that is,

between intuition and thinking. Thus he wrote to Goethe (August 31, 1794):

This is what gave me, especially in early years, a certain awkwardness

both in the realm of speculation and in that of poetry; as a rule the poet

would overtake me when I would be a philosopher, and the philosophic  

spirit hold me when I would be a poet. Even now it happens often enough

that the power of imagination disturbs my abstraction, and cold reasoning

my poetry.

15

[118]  His extraordinary admiration for Goethe’s mind, and  his almost

feminine empathy and sympathy with his friend’s intuition, to which he so

often gives expression in his letters, spring from a piercing awareness of

this conflict, which he must have felt doubly hard in comparison with the

almost perfect synthesis of Goethe’s nature. This conflict was due to the

psychological fact that the energy of feeling lent itself in equal measure to

his intellect and to his creative imagination. Schiller seems to have suspected

this, for in the same letter to Goethe he makes the observation that no sooner

has he begun to “know and to use” his moral forces, which should set

proper limits to imagination and intellect, than a physical illness threatens

to undermine them. As has been pointed out already, it is characteristic of an

imperfectly developed function to withdraw itself from conscious control and,

thanks to its own autonomy, to get unconsciously contaminated with other

functions. It then behaves like a purely dynamic factor,  incapable of

differentiated choice, an impetus or surcharge  that gives the conscious,

differentiated function the quality of being carried away or coerced. In one

case the conscious function is transported beyond the limits of its intentions

and decisions, in another it is arrested before it attains its aim and is diverted

into a side-track, and in a third it is brought into conflict with the other

conscious functions—a conflict that  remains unresolved so long as theunconscious contaminating and disturbing force is not differentiated and

subjected to  conscious  control.  We  may  safely  conjecture  that  the

exclamation “Why is it that we are still barbarians?” was  rooted not

merely in the spirit of the age but in Schiller’s subjective psychology.

Like other men of his time, he sought the root of the evil in the wrong

place; for barbarism never did and never does consist in reason or truth

having so little effect but in expecting from them far too much, or even in

ascribing such efficacy to reason out of a superstitious overvaluation of

“truth.” Barbarism consists in one-sidedness,  lack of moderation—bad

measure in general.

[119] From the spectacular example of the French Revolution, which had

just then reached the climax of terror, Schiller could see how far the sway of

the Goddess of Reason extended, and how far the unreasoning beast in

man was  triumphant. It was doubtless these contemporary events that

forced the problem on Schiller with particular urgency; for it often happens

that, when a problem which is at bottom personal, and therefore apparently

subjective, coincides with  external events that contain the same

psychological elements as the personal conflict, it is suddenly transformed

into a general question embracing the whole of society. In this way the

personal problem acquires a dignity it lacked hitherto,  since the inner

discord always has something humiliating and degrading about it, so that

one sinks into an ignominious condition both within and without, like a

state dishonoured by  civil war. It is this that makes one  shrink from

displaying before the public a purely personal conflict, provided of course

that one does not suffer from an  overdose of self-esteem. But if the

connection between the  personal problem and the larger contemporary

events is discerned and understood, it brings a release from the loneliness

of the purely personal, and the subjective problem  is magnified into a

general question of our society. This is no  small gain as regards the

possibility of a solution. For whereas only the meagre energies of one’s

conscious interest  in one’s own person were at the disposal of the

personal  problem, there are now assembled the combined forces of

collective instinct, which flow in and unite with the interests of the ego; thus

a new situation is brought about which offers

new possibilities of a solution. For what would never have been possible

to the personal power of the will or to courage is made possible by the force

of  collective instinct; it carries a  man over obstacles which his ownpersonal energy could never overcome.

[120] We may therefore conjecture that it was largely the impressions of

contemporary events that gave Schiller the  courage to undertake this

attempt to solve the conflict  between the individual and the social

function. The same antagonism was also deeply felt by Rousseau—indeed it

was the starting-point for his work Emile, ou l’éducation (1762). We find

there several passages that are of interest as regards our problem:

The citizen is but the numerator of a fraction, whose value depends on its

denominator; his value depends on the whole, that is, on the community.

Good social institutions are those best fitted to make a man unnatural, to

exchange his independence for dependence, to merge the unit in the group. 16

He who would preserve the supremacy of natural feelings in  social life

knows not what he asks. Ever at war with himself, hesitating between his

wishes and his duties, he will be neither a man nor a citizen. He will be of

no use to himself nor to others.

17

[121] Rousseau opens his work with the famous sentence: “Everything as it

leaves the hands of the Author of things is good; everything degenerates

under the hands of man.”

18 This statement is characteristic not only of Rousseau but of the whole

  epoch.

[122] Schiller likewise looks back, not of course to Rousseau’s natural

man—and here lies the essential difference—but to the man who lived

“under a Grecian heaven.” This retrospective orientation is common to

both and is inextricably bound up with an idealization and overvaluation

of the past. Schiller, marvelling at the beauties of antiquity, forgets the actual

everyday Greek, and Rousseau mounts to dizzy heights with the sentence:

“The natural man is wholly himself; he is an integral unity, an absolute

whole,”19 quite forgetting that the natural man is thoroughly collective, i.e., just

  as much in others as in himself, and is anything rather than a unity.

  Elsewhere Rousseau says:

We grasp at everything, we clutch on to everything, times, places, men,

things; all that is, all that will be, matters to each of us; we ourselves are but

the least part of ourselves. We spread ourselves, so to speak, over the

whole world, and become sensitive over this whole vast expanse…. Is it

nature which thus bears men so far from themselves?

20

[123] Rousseau is deceived; he believes this state of affairs  is a recent

development. But it is not so; we have merely become conscious of it

recently; it was always so, and the more so the further we descend into the

beginnings of things. For what Rousseau describes is nothing but that

primitive  collective mentality which Lévy-Bruhl has aptly termed

participation mystique. This suppression of individuality is nothing new, it

is a relic of that archaic time when there was no individuality whatever. So

it is not by any means a recent

suppression we are dealing with, but merely a new sense and awareness of

the overwhelming power of the collective. One naturally projects this power

into the institutions of Church and State, as though there were not already

ways and means enough of evading even moral commands when occasion

offered! In no sense do these institutions possess the  omnipotence

ascribed to them, on account of which they are from time to time assailed

by innovators of every sort; the suppressive power lies unconsciously in

ourselves, in our own barbarian collective mentality. To the collective psyche

every individual development is hateful that does not directly serve the ends

of collectivity.

Hence although the differentiation of the one function, about which we have

spoken above, is a development of an individual value, it is still so largely

determined by the views of the collective that, as we have seen, it becomes

injurious to the individual himself.

[124] It was their imperfect knowledge of earlier conditions  of human

psychology that led both our authors into false judgments about the values

of the past. The result of this false judgment is a belief in the illusory picture

of an earlier, more perfect type of man, who somehow fell from his high

estate. Retrospective orientation is itself a relic of pagan thinking, for it is a

well-known characteristic of the archaic and barbarian mentality that  it  imagined a  paradisal Golden  Age  as  the  forerunner of the present evil

times. It was the great social and spiritual achievement of Christianity that

first gave man hope for the future, and promised him some possibility of

realizing of his ideals.

21 The emphasizing of this retrospective orientation in the more recent

development of the mind may be connected with the phenomenon of that

widespread regression to paganism which has made itself increasingly felt

ever since the Renaissance.

[125] To  me it seems certain that this retrospective orientation must also

have a decided influence on the choice of the methods of human education.

The mind thus oriented is ever seeking support in some phantasmagoria of

the past. We could make light of this were it not that the knowledge of the

conflict between the types and the typical mechanisms compels us to look

round for something that would establish their harmony. As we shall see

from the following passages, this is also what Schiller had at heart. His

fundamental thought is expressed in these words, which sum up what we

have just said:

Let some beneficent deity snatch the infant betimes from his  mother’s

breast, nourish him with the milk of a better age and suffer him to grow up to

full maturity under that far-off Grecian heaven. Then when he has become

a man, let him return, a stranger, to his own century; not to gladden it by his

appearance, but rather, terrible  like Agamemnon’s  son, to cleanse it.

22

[126] The predilection for the Grecian prototype could hardly be expressed

more clearly. But in this stern  formulation one can also glimpse a

limitation which impels  Schiller to a very essential broadening of

perspective:

He will indeed take his material from the present age, but his form he will

borrow from a nobler time—nay, from beyond all time, from the absolute

unchangeable unity of his being.

23

Schiller clearly felt that he must go back still further, to some  primeval

heroic age where men were still half divine. He continues:

Here, from the pure aether of his daemonic nature, gushes down the well-

spring of Beauty, untainted by the corruption of generations and ages which

wallow in the dark eddies far below.

24Here we have the beautiful illusion of a Golden Age when men were still

gods and were ever refreshed by the vision of eternal beauty. But here, too,

the poet has overtaken Schiller the thinker. A few pages further on the

thinker gets the upper hand again:

It must indeed set us thinking when we find that in almost every epoch of

history when the arts are flourishing and taste prevails, humanity is in a state

of decline, and cannot produce a single example where a high degree and

wide diffusion of aesthetic culture among a people has gone hand in hand

with political freedom and civic virtue, fine manners with good morals, or

polished behaviour with truth.

25

[127] In accordance with this familiar and in every way  undeniable

experience those heroes of olden time must have led a none too scrupulous

life, and indeed not a single myth, Greek or otherwise, claims that they ever

did anything else. All that beauty could revel in its existence only because

there was as yet no penal code and no guardian of public morals. With the

recognition of the psychological fact that living beauty spreads her golden

shimmer only when soaring above  a reality full of misery, pain, and

squalor, Schiller cuts the ground from under his own feet; for he had

undertaken to prove that what was divided would be united by the vision,

enjoyment, and creation of the beautiful. Beauty was to be the mediator

which should restore the primal unity of human nature. On the contrary, all

experience goes to show that beauty needs her opposite as a condition of

her existence.

[128] As before it was the poet, so now it is the thinker that carries Schiller

away: he mistrusts beauty, he even holds it  possible, arguing from

experience, that she may exercise a deleterious influence:

Whenever we turn our gaze in the ancient world, we find taste and freedom

mutually avoiding each other, and Beauty establishing her sway only on the

ruins of heroic virtues.

26

This insight, gained by experience, can hardly sustain the  claim that

Schiller makes for beauty. In the further pursuit of his theme he even gets

to the point where he depicts the reverse side of beauty with an all too

glaring clarity:

If then we keep solely to what experience has taught us hitherto about the

influence of Beauty, we  cannot certainly be  much encouraged  in thedevelopment of feelings which are so  dangerous to the true culture of

mankind; and we should rather dispense with the melting power of Beauty,

even at the risk of coarseness and austerity, than see ourselves, for all the

advantages of refinement, consigned to her enervating influence.

27

[129] The quarrel between the poet and the thinker could  surely be

composed if the thinker took the words of the poet  not literally but

symbolically, which is how the tongue of the poet desires to be understood.

Can Schiller have  misunderstood himself? It would almost seem so,

otherwise he could not argue thus against himself. The poet speaks of a

spring of unsullied beauty which flows beneath every age and generation, and

is constantly welling up in every human heart. It is not the man of Greek

antiquity whom the poet has in mind, but the old pagan in ourselves, that

bit of eternally unspoiled nature and pristine beauty which lies unconscious

but living within us, whose reflected splendour transfigures the shapes of

the past, and for whose sake we fall into the error of thinking that those

heroes actually possessed the beauty we seek. It is the archaic  man in

ourselves, who, rejected by our collectively oriented consciousness, appears

to us as hideous and unacceptable, but who is nevertheless the bearer of that

beauty we vainly seek elsewhere. This is the man the poet Schiller means,

but the thinker mistakes him for his Greek prototype. What the  thinker

cannot deduce logically from his evidential material, what he labours for in

vain, the poet in symbolic language reveals as the promised land.

[130] From all this it is abundantly clear that any attempt to equalize the one-

sided differentiation of the man of our times has to reckon very seriously

with an acceptance of the inferior, because undifferentiated, functions. No

attempt at mediation will be successful if it does not understand how to

release the energies of the inferior functions and lead them  towards

differentiation. This process can take place only in accordance with the

laws of energy, that is, a gradient must be created which offers the latent

energies a chance to come into play.

[131] It would be a hopeless task—which nevertheless has  often been

undertaken and as often has foundered—to transform an inferior function

directly into a superior one. It would be as easy to make a perpetuum mobile.

No lower form of energy can simply be converted into a higher form unless a

source of higher value simultaneously lends its support; that  is, the

conversion can be accomplished only at the expense of  the superiorfunction. But under no circumstances can the initial value of the higher

form of energy be attained by the lower forms as well or be resumed by the

superior function:  an equalization at some intermediate level must

inevitably  result. For every individual who identifies with his one

differentiated function, this entails a descent to a condition which, though

balanced, is of a definitely lower value as  compared with the initial

value. This conclusion is unavoidable. All education that aspires to the

unity and harmony of man’s nature has to reckon with this fact. In his own

fashion, Schiller draws the same conclusion, but he  struggles against

accepting its consequences, even to the point  where he has to renounce

beauty. But when the thinker has uttered his harsh judgment, the poet speaks

again:

But perhaps experience is not the tribunal before which such a question is to

be decided, and before we allow any weight to its testimony it must first be

established, beyond doubt, that it is the self-same Beauty about which we

are speaking and against which those examples testify.

28

[132] It is evident that Schiller is here attempting to stand  above

experience; in other words he bestows on beauty a  quality which

experience does not warrant. He believes that “Beauty must be exhibited as

a necessary condition of humanity,”

29 that is, as a necessary, compelling category; therefore he speaks also of

  a purely intellectual concept of beauty, and of a “transcendental way”

  that removes us from “the round of appearances and from the living

  presence of things.” “Those who do not venture out beyond actuality

  will never capture Truth.”

30 His subjective resistance to what experience has shown to  be the

    ineluctable downward way impels Schiller to press the logical intellect

  into the service of feeling, forcing it to come up with a formula that

  makes the attainment of the original aim possible after all, despite the

  fact that its impossibility has already been sufficiently demonstrated.

[133] A similar violation is committed by Rousseau in his assumption that

whereas dependence on nature does not involve depravity, dependence on

man does, so that he can arrive at the following conclusion:

If the laws of nations, like the laws of nature, could never be broken by any

human power, dependence on men would become dependence on things; all

the advantages of a state of  nature could be combined with all theadvantages of social life in the commonwealth. The liberty which preserves

a man from vice would be united with the morality which raises him  to

virtue.

31

On the basis of these reflections he gives the following advice:

Keep the child dependent solely on things, and you will have followed the

order of nature in the progress of his education…. Do not make him sit still

when he wants to run about, nor run when he wants to stay quiet. If we did

not spoil our children’s wills by our blunders, their desires would be free

from caprice.

32

[134] The misfortune is that never under any circumstances are the laws of

nations in such concord with those of nature that the civilized state is at the

same time the natural state. If such

concord is to be conceived as possible at all, it can be conceived only as a

compromise in which neither state could attain its ideal but would remain far

below it. Whoever wishes to attain one or the other of the ideals will have to

rest content with Rousseau’s own formulation: “You must choose between

making a man or a citizen, you cannot make both at once.”

33

[135] Both these necessities exist in us: nature and culture. We cannot only

be ourselves, we must also be related to others. Hence a way must be

found that is not a mere rational compromise; it must be a state or process

that is wholly consonant with the living being, “a highway and a holy way,”

as the prophet says, “a straight way, so that fools shall not err therein.”34 I am therefore inclined to give the poet in Schiller his due, though in this

  case he has encroached somewhat violently on the thinker, for rational

  truths are not the last word, there are also irrational ones. In human

  affairs, what appears  impossible by way of the intellect has often

  become true by  way of the irrational. Indeed, all the greatest

    transformations that have ever befallen mankind have come not by

  way of intellectual calculation, but by ways which contemporary minds

  either ignored or rejected as absurd, and which only long afterwards

  were recognized because of their intrinsic necessity. More often than

  not they are never recognized at all, for the all-important laws of mental

    development are still a book with seven seals.

[136] I am, however, little inclined to concede any particular value to the

philosophical gesturings of the poet, for  in his hands the intellect is a

deceptive instrument. What the intellect can achieve it has already achieved

in this case; it has  uncovered the contradiction between desire and

experience. To persist, then, in demanding a solution of this contradiction

from philosophical thinking is quite useless. And even if a solution could

finally be thought out, the real obstacle would  still confront us, for the

solution does not lie in the possibility of thinking it or in the discovery of a

rational truth, but in the discovery of a way which real life can accept. There

has never been any lack of suggestions and wise precepts. If it were only

a question of that, mankind would have had the finest  opportunityof

reaching the heights in every respect at the time of Pythagoras. That is why

what Schiller proposes must not be taken in a literal sense but, as I have

said, as a symbol, which  in accordance with Schiller’s philosophical

proclivities appears under the guise of a philosophical concept. Similarly, the

“transcendental way” which Schiller sets out to tread must not be understood

as a piece of critical ratiocination based on knowledge, but symbolically as

the way a man always follows when he encounters an obstacle that cannot

be overcome by reason, or when he is confronted with an insoluble task.

But in order to find and follow this way, he must first have lingered a long

time with the opposites into which his former way forked. The obstacle

dams up the river of his life. Whenever a damming up of libido occurs,

the opposites, previously united in the steady flow of life, fall apart and

henceforth confront one another like antagonists eager for battle. They then

exhaust themselves in a prolonged conflict the duration and upshot of which

cannot be foreseen, and from the energy which is lost to them is built thatthird thing which is the beginning of the new way.

[137] In accordance with this law, Schiller now devotes  himself to a

profound examination of the nature of the opposites at work. No matter

what obstacle we come up against—provided only it be a difficult one—the

discord between our own purpose and the refractory object soon becomes a

discord in ourselves. For, while I am striving to subordinate the object to

my will, my whole being is gradually brought into relationship with it,

following the strong libido investment which, as it were, draws a portion of

my being across into the object. The result of this is a partial identification

of certain portions of my personality with similar qualities in the object. As

soon as this identification has taken place, the conflict is transferred into my

own psyche. This “introjection” of the conflict with the object creates an

inner discord, making me powerless against the object and also releasing

affects, which are always symptomatic of inner disharmony. The affects,

however, prove that I am sensing myself and am therefore in a position—if I

am not blind—to apply my attention to myself and to follow up the play of

opposites in my own psyche.

[138] This is the way that Schiller takes. The discord he  finds is  not

between the State and the individual, but, at the beginning of the eleventh

letter, he conceives it as the duality of “person and condition,”

35 that is, as the ego and its changing states of affect. For whereas the

  ego has a relative constancy, its relatedness, or proneness to affect, is

    variable. Schiller thus tries to grasp the discord at its root. And as a

  matter of fact the one side of it is the conscious ego-function, while the

  other side is the ego’s relation to the collective. Both determinants are

  inherent in human psychology. But the various types will each see these

  basic facts in a different light. For the introvert the idea of the ego is the

    continuous and dominant note of consciousness, and its antithesis for

  him is relatedness or proneness to affect.  For the extravert, on the

    contrary, the accent lies more on the continuity of his relation to the

  object and less on the idea of the ego. Hence for him the problem is

  different. This point must be borne in mind as we follow Schiller’s

  further reflections. When, for instance, he says that the “person” reveals

  itself “in the eternally constant ego, and in this alone,” 36 this is viewed

  from the standpoint of the introvert. From the standpoint of the extravert

  we would have to say that the person reveals itself simply and solely in

  its relatedness, in the function of relationship to the object. For only  with the  introvert is the “person” exclusively the ego; with the

  extravert it lies in his affectivity and not in the affected ego. His ego is,

  as it were, of less importance than his affectivity, i.e., his relatedness.

  The extravert discovers himself in the fluctuating and changeable, the

  introvert in the constant. The ego is not “eternally constant,” least of all

  in the extravert, who pays little attention to it. For the introvert, on the

  other hand, it has too much importance; he therefore shrinks from every

  change that is at all liable to affect his ego. Affectivity for him can be

    something positively painful, while for the extravert it must on no

  account be missed. Schiller at once reveals himself as an introvert in the

    following formulation:

To remain constantly himself throughout all change, to turn  every

perception into experience, that is, into the unity of knowledge, and to

make each of his manifestations in time a law for all time, that is the rule

which is prescribed for him by his rational nature.

37

[139] The abstracting, self-contained attitude is evident; it is even made the

supreme rule of conduct. Every occurrence must at once be raised to the

level of an experience, and from the sum of these experiences a law for all

time must instantly emerge; though the other attitude, that no occurrence

should become an experience lest it produce laws that might hamper the

future, is equally human.

[140] It is altogether in keeping with Schiller’s attitude that he cannot think

of God as becoming, but only as eternally being; hence with unerring

intuition he recognizes the “godlikeness” of the introverted ideal state:

Man conceived in his perfection would accordingly be the constant unity

which amidst the tides of change remains eternally the same…,

38 Beyond question man carries the potentiality for divinity within himself.

39

[141] This conception of the nature of God ill accords with his Christian

incarnation and with similar Neoplatonic views of the mother of the gods

and of her son who descends as the demiurge into creation.

40 But it is clear what is the function to which Schiller attributes the highest

  value, divinity: it is the constancy of the idea of the ego. The ego that

  abstracts itself from affectivity is  for him the most important thing,

    consequently this is the idea he has differentiated most, as is the case with

  every introvert.  His god, his highest value, is the abstraction and    conservation of the ego. For the extravert, on the contrary, the god is

  the experience of the object, complete immersion in reality; hence a god

  who became man is more sympathetic to him  than an eternal,

  immutable lawgiver. These views, if I may anticipate a little, are valid

  only for the conscious psychology of the types. In the unconscious the

  relations are reversed. Schiller seems to have had an inkling of this:

  although with his conscious mind he believes in an immutably existing

  God, yet the way to divinity is revealed to him through the senses,

  through affectivity, through the living process of change. But for him this

  is a function of secondary importance, and to the extent that he identifies

  with his ego and abstracts it from change, his conscious attitude also

  becomes entirely abstract, while his affectivity, his relatedness to the

  object, necessarily lapses into the unconscious.

[142] From the abstracting attitude of consciousness, which in pursuit of its

ideal makes an experience of every  occurrence and from the sum of

experience a law, a certain limitation and impoverishment result which are

characteristic

of the introvert. Schiller clearly sensed this in his relation to Goethe, for he

felt Goethe’s more extraverted nature as something objectively opposed to

himself.

41 Of himself Goethe significantly says:

As a contemplative man I am an arrant realist, so that I am capable of

desiring nothing from all the things that present themselves to me, and of

wishing nothing added to them. I  make no sort of distinction among

objects beyond whether they interest me or not.

42

Concerning Schiller’s effect upon him, Goethe very characteristically says:

If I have served you as the representative of certain objects, you have led

me from a too rigorous observation of external things and their relations

back into myself. You have taught me to view the many-sidedness of the

inner man with more justice.

43

[143] In Goethe, on the other hand, Schiller finds an often  accentuated

complement or fulfillment of his own nature, at the same time sensing the

difference, which he indicates in the following way:

Expect of me no great material wealth of ideas, for that is what I find in

you. My need and endeavour is to make much out of little, and, if ever youshould realize my poverty in all that men call acquired knowledge, you will

perhaps find that in some ways I may have succeeded. Because my circle

of ideas is smaller, I traverse it more quickly and oftener, and for that reason

can make better use of what small ready cash I own, creating through the

form a diversity which is lacking in the content. You strive to simplify your

great world of ideas, while I seek variety for my small possessions.

You have a kingdom to rule, and I only a somewhat numerous family of

ideas which I would like to expand into a little universe.

44

[144] If we subtract from this statement a certain feeling of inferiority that is

characteristic of the introvert, and add to it the fact that the “great world of

ideas” is not so much ruled by the extravert as he himself is subject to it,

then Schiller’s plaint gives a striking picture of the poverty that tends to

develop as the result of an essentially abstracting attitude.

[145] A further result of the abstracting attitude of consciousness, and one

whose significance will become more  apparent  in the course of our

exposition, is that the unconscious develops a compensating attitude. For the

more the relation to the object is restricted by abstraction (because too many

“experiences” and “laws” are made), the more insistently does a craving for

the object develop in the unconscious, and this finally expresses itself in

consciousness as a compulsive sensuous tie to the object. The sensuous

relation to the object then takes the place of a  feeling relation,  which is

lacking, or  rather suppressed, because of  abstraction.  Characteristically,

therefore, Schiller regards the senses, and  not feelings, as the way to

divinity. His ego makes use of thinking, but his affections, his feelings,

make use of sensation. Thus for him the schism is between spirituality in

the form of thinking, and sensuousness in the form of affectivity or feeling.

For the extravert the situation is

reversed: his relation to the object is highly developed, but his world of ideas

is sensory and concrete.

[146] Sensuous feeling, or rather the feeling that is present in the sensuous

state, is collective. It produces a relatedness or proneness to affect which

always puts the individual in a state of participation mystique, a condition of

partial identity with the sensed object. This identity expresses itself in a

compulsive dependence on that object, and in turn, after the manner of a

vicious circle, causes in the introvert an intensification of abstraction for

the purpose of abolishing the burdensome dependence and the compulsionit evokes. Schiller recognized this peculiarity of sensuous feeling:

So long as he merely senses, merely desires and acts from mere appetite,

man is still nothing but world.

But since the introvert cannot go on abstracting indefinitely in  order to

escape being affected, he sees himself forced in the end to give shape to

externals. Schiller goes on:

Thus in order not to be merely world, he must impart form to matter; he

must externalize all within, and shape everything without. Both tasks, in

their highest fulfilment, lead back to the concept of divinity from which I

started.

45

[147] This is an important point. Let us suppose the sensuously felt object

to be a human being—will he accept this prescription? Will he permit

himself to be shaped as though the person to whom he is related were his

creator? Man is certainly called upon to play the god on a small scale, but

ultimately even inanimate things have a divine right to  their own

existence, and the world ceased to be chaos long  ago when the first

hominids began to sharpen stones. It would indeed be a dubious undertaking

if every introvert wanted to externalize his limited world of ideas and to

shape the external world accordingly. Such attempts happen daily, but the

individual suffers, and rightly so, under this “godlikeness.”

[148] For the extravert, Schiller’s formula should run:  “Internalize all

without and shape everything within.” This was the reaction that, as we

saw, Schiller evoked in Goethe. Goethe supplies a telling parallel to this

when he writes to Schiller:

On the other hand in every sort of activity I am, one might almost say,

completely idealistic: I ask nothing at all from  objects, but  instead I

demand that everything shall conform to my conceptions.

46

This means that when the extravert thinks, things go just as autocratically

as when the introvert acts upon the external world.

47 The formula can therefore hold good only when an almost perfect state

has been reached, when in fact the introvert has attained a world of ideas so

rich and flexible and capable of expression that it no longer forces the

object on to a procrustean bed, and the extravert such an ample knowledge

of and respect for the object that it no longer gives rise to a caricature

when he operates with it in his thinking. Thus we see that Schiller baseshis formula on the highest possible  criterion and so makes almost

prohibitive demands on the

psychological development of the individual—assuming that  he is

thoroughly clear in his own mind what his formula  means in every

particular.

[149] Be that as it may, it is at least fairly clear that the  formula

“Externalize all within and shape everything without” is the ideal of the

conscious attitude of the introvert. It is based, on the one hand, on the

assumption of an ideal range of his inner conceptual world, of the formal

principle, and, on the other, on the assumption of the possibility of an ideal

application of the sensuous principle, which then no longer appears as

affectivity, but as an active potency. So long as man is “sensuous” he is

“nothing but world,” and “in order not to be merely world he must impart

form to matter.” This implies a reversal of the passive, receptive, sensuous

principle. Yet how can such a reversal come about? That is the whole

point. It can scarcely be supposed that a man can give his world of ideas

that extraordinary range which would be necessary in order to impose a

congenial form on the material world, and at the same time convert his

affectivity, his sensuous nature, from a passive to an active state in order to

bring it up to the level of his world of ideas. Somewhere or other man must

be related, must be subject to something, otherwise he would be really

godlike. One is forced to conclude that Schiller would let it go so far that

violence was done to the object. But that would be to concede to the archaic,

inferior function an unlimited right to existence,  which as we know

Nietzsche, at least in theory, actually did. This conclusion is by no means

applicable to Schiller, since, so far as I am aware, he nowhere consciously

expressed himself to this effect. His formula has instead a thoroughly naïve

and idealistic character, quite consistent with the spirit of his time, which

was not yet vitiated by that deep distrust of human nature and of human truth

which haunted the epoch of psychological criticism inaugurated by Nietzsche.

[150] Schiller’s formula could be carried out only by applying a ruthless

power standpoint, with never a scruple about justice for the object nor any

conscientious  examination  of its own  competence. Only under such

conditions, which Schiller certainly never contemplated, could the inferior

function  participate in life. In this way the archaic elements, naïve and

unconscious and decked in the glamour of mighty words and fair gestures,

also came bursting through and helped to build our present  “civilization,”concerning the  nature  of which  humanity is  at  this moment  in  some

measure of disagreement. The archaic power instinct, hitherto hidden behind

the façade of civilized living, finally came to the surface in its true colours,

and proved beyond question that we are “still barbarians.” For it should

not be forgotten that, in the same measure as the conscious attitude may

pride  itself  on  a certain  godlikeness by reason of its lofty and absolute

standpoint, an  unconscious attitude develops with a godlikeness oriented

downwards to an archaic god whose nature is sensual and brutal. The

enantiodromia of Heraclitus ensures that the time will come when this deus

absconditus shall rise to the surface and press the God of our ideals to the

wall. It is as though men at the close of the eighteenth century had not really

seen  what was taking place in Paris, but lingered on in an aesthetic,

enthusiastic, or trifling attitude in order to delude themselves about the real

meaning of that glimpse into the abysses of human nature.

In that nether world is terror,

And man shall not tempt the gods. Let him never yearn to see

What they veil with night and horror!

48

[151] When Schiller lived, the time for dealing with that nether world had

not yet come. Nietzsche at heart was much nearer to it; to him it was certain

that we were approaching an epoch of unprecedented struggle. He it was,

the only true pupil of Schopenhauer, who tore through the veil of naïveté

and in his Zarathustra conjured up from the nether region ideas that were

destined to be the most vital content of the coming age.        CONCERNING THE BASIC INSTINCTS

[152] In this twelfth letter Schiller comes to grips with the  two basic

instincts, to which he devotes a detailed description. The “sensuous” instinct

is concerned with “setting man within the

bounds of time and turning him into matter.”

49 This instinct demands that there be change, so that time should have a

content. This state of merely filled time is called sensation.

Man in this state is nothing but a unit of magnitude, a filled moment of

time—or rather, he is not even that, for his personality is extinguished so

long as sensation rules him and time whirls him along.

With unbreakable bonds this instinct chains the upward-striving spirit to

the world of sense, and summons  abstraction from its unfettered

wanderings in the infinite back into the confines of the present.

50

[153] It is entirely characteristic of Schiller’s psychology that he should

conceive the expression of this instinct as sensation, and not as active,

sensuous desire. This shows that for him sensuousness has the character of

reactiveness, of affectivity, which is altogether typical of the introvert. An

extravert would undoubtedly emphasize the element of desire. It is further

significant that it is this instinct which demands change. The idea wants

changelessness and eternity. Whoever lives under the supremacy of the idea

strives for permanence; hence everything that pushes towards change must

be opposed to the idea. In Schiller’s case it is feeling and sensation, which

as a rule are fused together on account of their undeveloped state. Schiller

does not in fact discriminate sufficiently between feeling and sensation as

the following passage proves:

Feeling can only say: this is true for this subject and at this  moment;

another moment another subject may come and revoke the statement of the

present sensation.

51

[154] This passage clearly shows that for Schiller feeling and sensation are

actually interchangeable terms, and it reveals an inadequate evaluation and

differentiation of feeling as distinct from sensation. Differentiated feeling can

establish  universal values as well as those that are merely specific and

individual. But it is true that the “feeling-sensation” of the  introverted

thinking type, because of its passive and reactive  character, is purely

specific; it can never rise above the individual case, by which alone it isstimulated, to an abstract comparison of all cases, since with the introverted

thinking type this duty is performed not by the feeling function but by

the thinking  function. Conversely, with the introverted feeling type,

feeling attains an abstract and universal character and can  establish

universal and permanent values.

[155] From a further analysis of Schiller’s description we  find that

“feeling-sensation” (by which term I mean the characteristic fusion of the

two in the introverted thinking type) is the function with which the ego does

not declare itself identical. It has the character of something inimical and

foreign, that “extinguishes” the personality, whirls it away,  setting the

subject outside himself and alienating him from himself. Hence Schiller

likens it to affect, which sets a man “beside himself” (= extraverted). When

one has collected oneself he says this is called, “just as correctly, going

into oneself [= introverted], that is, returning to one’s ego, re-establishing

the personality.”

52 From this it is quite evident that it seems to Schiller as  though

    “feeling-sensation” does not really belong to the person, but is a rather

  precarious accessory “to which a firm will may triumphantly oppose its

    demands.”

53 But to the extravert it is just this side of him which seems to constitute

  his true nature; it is as if he were actually himself only when he is being

  affected by the object—as we can well understand when we consider that

  for him the relation to the object is his superior, differentiated function,

  to which abstract thinking and feeling are just as much opposed as they

  are indispensable to the introvert. The thinking of the extraverted feeling

  type is just as prejudiced by the sensuous instinct as is the feeling of the

    introverted thinking type. For both it means extreme restriction to the

  material and specific. Living through the object also has its “unfettered

    wanderings in the infinite,” and not abstraction alone, as Schiller thinks.

[156] By excluding sensuousness from the concept and  scope of the

“person” Schiller is able to assert that the “person, being an absolute and

indivisible unity, can never be at variance with itself.”54 This unity is a desideratum of the intellect, which would like to preserve

  the subject in its most ideal integrity; hence as the superior function it

  must exclude the ostensibly inferior function of sensuousness. The result

  is that very mutilation of human nature which is the motive and starting-

  point of Schiller’s quest.

[157] Since, for Schiller, feeling has the quality of “feeling-sensation” and

is therefore merely specific, the supreme value, a really eternal value, is

naturally assigned to formative thought, or what Schiller calls the “formal

instinct”: 55

But when once thought pronounces: that is, it decides for ever and aye, and

the validity of its pronouncement is vouched for by the personality itself,

which defies all change.

56

One cannot refrain from asking: Do the meaning and value of the personality

really lie only in what is permanent? May it not be that change, becoming,

and development represent actually higher values than mere “defiance” of

change?

57 Schiller continues:

When therefore the formal instinct holds sway, and the pure object acts

within us, there is the highest expansion of being, all barriers disappear, and

from a unit of magnitude to which the needy senses confined him, man has

risen to a unity of idea embracing the whole realm of phenomena. By this

operation we are no more in time, but time, with its complete and infinite

succession, is in us. We are no longer individuals, but species; the judgment

of all minds is pronounced by our own, the choice of all hearts is represented

by our deed.

58

[158] There can be no doubt that the thinking of the introvert aspires to

this Hyperion; it is only a pity that the “unity of idea” is the ideal of such

a very limited class of men. Thinking is merely a function which, when

fully developed and exclusively obeying its own laws, naturally sets up a

claim to universal validity. Only one part of the world, therefore, can be

grasped by thinking, another part only by feeling, a third only through

sensation, and so on. That is probably why there are different psychic

functions; for, biologically, the psychic system can be understood only as a

system of adaptation, just as eyes exist presumably because there is light.

Thinking can claim only a third or a fourth part of the total significance,although in its own sphere it possesses exclusive validity—just as sight is the

exclusively valid function for the perception of light waves, and hearing

for that of sound waves. Consequently a man who puts the unity of idea on

a pinnacle, and for whom “feeling-sensation” is something antipathetic to

his personality, can be compared to a man who has good eyes but is totally

deaf and suffers from anaesthesia.

[159] “We are no longer individuals, but species”: certainly, if we identify

ourselves exclusively with thinking, or with any one function whatsoever;

for then we are collective beings with universal validity although quite

estranged from ourselves.  Outside  this  quarter-psyche, the  three other

quarters languish in the darkness of repression and inferiority. “Is it nature

which thus bears men so far from  themselves?” we might ask with

Rousseau—nature, or is it  not rather  our own psychology, which so

barbarously overvalues the one function and allows itself to be swept

away by it? This impetus is of course a piece of nature too, that untamed

instinctive energy before which the  differentiated type recoils if ever it

should “accidentally” manifest itself in an inferior function instead of in the

ideal function, where it is prized and honoured as a divine afflatus.  As

Schiller truly says:

But your individuality and your present need will be swept  away by

change, and what you now ardently desire will one day become the object of

your abhorrence.

59

[160] Whether the untamed, extravagant, disproportionate  energy shows

itself in sensuality—in abjectissimo loco—or in  an overestimation and

deification of the most highly developed function, it is at bottom the same:

barbarism. But naturally one has no insight into this so long as one is still

hypnotized by the object of the deed and ignores how it is done.

[161] Identification with the one differentiated function means that one is in

a collective state—not, of course,  identical  with  the  collective,  as  is  the

primitive, but collectively adapted so far as “the judgment of all minds is

pronounced by our own” and our thought and speech exactly conform to the

general expectations of those whose thinking is differentiated and adapted to

the same degree. Furthermore, “the choice of all hearts is represented by our

deed” so far as we think and do as all desire it to be thought and done. And

in fact everyone thinks and believes that it is the best and most desirable

thing when there is the maximum of identity with the one differentiatedfunction, for that brings the most obvious social advantages, but at the same

time the greatest disadvantages to those lesser developed sides of our human

nature, which sometimes constitute a large part of our individuality. Schiller

goes on:

Once we assert the primary, and therefore necessary, antagonism of the two

instincts, there is really no other  means  of preserving the unity in man

except by the absolute subordination of the sensuous instinct to the rational.

But the only result of that is mere uniformity, not harmony, and man still

remains for ever divided.

60

Because it is difficult to remain true to our principles amidst all the ardour

of the feelings, we adopt the more comfortable expedient of making the

character more secure by blunting them; for it is infinitely easier to keep

calm in the face of an unarmed adversary than to master a spirited and active

foe. In this operation, then, consists for the most part what we call the

forming of a human being; and that in the best sense of  the term, as

signifying the cultivation of the inner, not merely the outward, man. A man

so formed will indeed be secured against being crude Nature, and from

appearing as such; but he will at the same time be armed by his principles

against every sensation of Nature, so that humanity can reach him as little

from without as from within.

61

[162] Schiller was also aware that the two functions,  thinking and

affectivity (feeling-sensation), can take one another’s place, which happens,

as we saw, when one function is privileged:

He can assign to the passive function [feeling-sensation] the intensity which

the active function requires, forestall the formal by means of the material

instinct, and make the receptive faculty the determining one. Or he can

assign to the active function [positive thinking] the extensity which is proper

to the passive, forestall the material instinct by means of the formal, and

substitute the determining for the receptive faculty. In the first case he will

never be himself, in  the  second he will never be anything else.

Consequently, in both cases he is neither the one nor the other, and is

therefore a nonentity.

62

[163] In this very remarkable passage much is contained that we have

already discussed. When the energy of positive  thinking  is supplied tofeeling-sensation, which would amount to a  reversal of the introverted

thinking type, the qualities of  undifferentiated, archaic feeling-sensation

become paramount: the  individual relapses into  an  extreme  relatedness, or

identity with the sensed object. This state is one of inferior extraversion, an

extraversion which, as it were, detaches the individual entirely from his ego

and dissolves him into archaic collective ties and identifications. He is then

no longer “himself,” but sheer relatedness, identical with the object and

therefore without a standpoint. The introvert instinctively feels the greatest

resistance to this  condition, which is no guarantee that he will not

unconsciously fall into it. It should on no account be confused  with the

extraversion of the extraverted type, inclined as the introvert is to make this

mistake and to display for this extraversion the same contempt which, at

bottom, he always feels for his own.

63 Schiller’s second instance, on the other hand, is the purest illustration of

the introverted thinking type, who by  amputating his inferior feeling-

sensations condemns himself to sterility, to a state in which “humanity can

reach him as little from without as from within.”

[164] Here again it is obvious that Schiller is writing, as always, only

from the standpoint of the introvert. The extravert, whose ego resides not in

thinking but in the feeling  relation to the object, actually finds himself

through the object, whereas the introvert loses himself in it. But when the

extravert proceeds to introvert, he arrives at a state of inferior relatedness to

collective ideas, an identity with collective  thinking of an archaic,

concretistic kind, which one might call sensation-thinking. He loses himself

in this inferior function  just as much as the introvert in his inferior

extraversion. Hence the extravert has the same repugnance, fear, or silent

contempt for introversion as the introvert for extraversion.

[165] Schiller senses this opposition between the two mechanisms—in his

case between sensation and thinking, or, as he puts it, “matter and form,”

“passivity and activity” 64—as unbridgeable.

The distance between matter and form, between passivity and  activity,

between sensation and thought, is infinite, and the two cannot conceivably

be reconciled. The two conditions are opposed to each other and can never be

made one.

65

But both instincts want  to  exist,  and  as  “energies”—Schiller’s  own very

modern word for them—they need and demand a “depotentiation.”66

The material instinct and the formal are equally earnest in their demands,

since in cognition the one relates to the reality, the other to the necessity, of

things.

67

But this depotentiation of the sensuous instinct should never be the effect of

a physical incapacity and a blunting of sensation which everywhere merits

nothing but contempt; it must be an act of freedom, an activity of the

person, tempering the sensual by its moral intensity…. For sense must lose

only to the advantage of mind.

68

It follows, then, that mind must lose only to the advantage of sense. Schiller 

does  not actually say this,  but it is  surely implied when he continues:

Just as little should the depotentiation of the formal instinct be the effect of

spiritual incapacity and a feebleness of thought  and will that would

degrade humanity. Abundance of sensations must be its glorious source;

sensuousness itself must maintain its territory with triumphant power, and

resist

the violence which by its usurping activity the mind would inflict upon it.

69

[166] With these words Schiller acknowledges the equal  rights of

sensuousness and spirituality. He concedes to sensation the right to its own

existence. But at the same time we can see in this passage the outlines of a

still deeper thought: the idea of a “reciprocity” between the two instincts, a

community of interest, or, in modern language, a symbiosis in which the

waste products of the one would be the food supply of the other.

We have now reached the conception of a reciprocal action between the

two instincts, of such a kind that the operation of the one at the same time

establishes and restricts the operation of the other, and each reaches its

highest manifestation precisely through the activity of the other.

70

[167] Hence, if we follow out this idea, their opposition must not be

conceived as something to be done away with, but on the contrary as

something useful and life-promoting  that should be preserved and

strengthened. This is a direct  attack on the predominance of the one

differentiated and socially valuable function, since that is the prime cause of

the suppression and depletion of the inferior functions. It would amount toa slave rebellion against the heroic ideal which compels us to sacrifice

everything else for the sake of the one. If this principle, which, as we saw,

was developed in  particularly high degree by Christianity for the

spiritualizing of man, and then proved equally effective in furthering his

materialistic ends, were once finally broken, the inferior functions would

find a natural release and would demand, rightly or wrongly, the same

recognition as the differentiated function. The complete opposition between

sensuousness and spirituality, or between the feeling-sensation and thinking

of the introverted thinking type, would then be openly revealed.  But, as

Schiller says, this complete opposition also entails a reciprocal limitation,

equivalent psychologically to an abolition of the power principle, i.e., to a

renunciation of the claim to a universally valid standpoint on the strength of

one differentiated and adapted collective function.

[168] The direct outcome of this renunciation is individualism,

71 that is, the need for a realization of individuality, a realization of man as

he is. But let us hear how Schiller tries to tackle the problem:

This reciprocal relation of the two instincts is purely a task of reason, which

man will be able to solve fully only through the perfection of his being. It is

in the truest sense of the term the idea of his humanity, and consequently

something infinite to which he can approach ever nearer in the course of

time, without ever reaching it.

72

[169] It is a pity that Schiller is so conditioned by his type, otherwise it

could never have occurred to him to look upon the co-operation of the two

instincts as a “task of reason,” for opposites are not to be united rationally:

tertium non datur—that is precisely why they are called opposites. It must be

that Schiller understands by reason something other than ratio, some higher

and almost mystical faculty. In practice, opposites can be united only in the

form of a compromise, or irrationally, some new thing arising between

them which, although different from both, yet has the power to take up

their energies in equal measure as an expression of both and of neither.

Such an expression cannot be contrived by reason, it can only be created

through living. As a matter of fact Schiller means just this, as we can see

from the following passage:

But if there were cases when [man] had this twofold experience at the

same time, when he was at once conscious of his freedom and sensible of

his existence, when he at once felt himself as matter and came to knowhimself as mind, he would in such cases, and positively in them alone,

have a complete intuition of his humanity, and the object which afforded him

this intuition would serve him as a symbol of his accomplished destiny.

73

Thus if a man were able to live both faculties or instincts at the same time,

i.e., thinking by sensing and sensing by thinking, then, out of that experience

(which Schiller calls the object), a symbol would arise which would express

his accomplished destiny, i.e., his individual way on which the Yea and

Nay are united.

[170] Before we take a closer look at the psychology of this idea, it would

be as well for us to ascertain how Schiller conceives the nature and origin

of the symbol:

The object of the sensuous instinct … may be called life in its  widest

meaning; a concept that signifies all material being, and all that is directly

present to the senses. The object of the formal instinct … may be called

form, both in the figurative

and in the literal sense; a concept that includes all formal qualities of

things and all their relations to the intellectual faculties.

74

[171] The object of the mediating function, therefore, according to Schiller,

is “living form,” for this would be precisely a symbol in which the opposites

are united; “a  concept that serves  to denote all aesthetic qualities of

phenomena and, in a word, what we call Beauty in the widest sense of the

term.”

75 But the symbol presupposes a function that creates symbols, and in

  addition a function that understands them. This latter function takes no

  part in the creation of the symbol, it is a function in its own right, which

  one could call symbolic thinking or symbolic understanding. The essence

  of the symbol consists in the fact that it represents in itself something that

  is not wholly understandable, and that it hints only intuitively at its

  possible meaning. The creation of a symbol is not a rational process,

  for a rational process could never produce an image that represents a

  content which is at bottom incomprehensible. To understand a symbol

  we need a  certain amount of intuition which apprehends, if only

    approximately, the meaning of the symbol that has been created, and

  then incorporates it into consciousness. Schiller  calls the symbol-

  creating function a third instinct, the play instinct; it bears no  resemblance to the two opposing functions, but stands between them

  and does justice to both their natures—always provided (a point Schiller

  does not mention) that sensation and thinking are serious functions.

  But there are many people for whom neither function is  altogether

  serious, and for them seriousness must occupy the middle place instead

  of play. Although elsewhere Schiller denies the existence of a third,

    mediating, basic instinct,

76 we will nevertheless assume, though his conclusion is somewhat at

  fault, his intuition to be all the more accurate. For, as a matter of fact,

    something does stand between the  opposites, but in the pure

    differentiated type it has become invisible. In the introvert it is what I

  have called feeling-sensation. On account of its relative repression, the

  inferior function is only partly attached to consciousness; its other part

  is attached to the unconscious. The differentiated function is the most

  fully adapted to external reality; it is essentially the reality-function;

  hence it is as much as possible shut off from any admixture of fantastic

  elements. These  elements, therefore, become associated with the

  inferior functions, which are similarly repressed. For this reason the

    sensation of the introvert, which is usually sentimental, has a very strong

  tinge of unconscious fantasy. The third element, in which the opposites

  merge, is fantasy activity, which is creative and receptive at once. This

  is the function Schiller calls the play instinct, by which he means more

  than he actually says. He exclaims: “For, to declare it once and for all,

  man plays only when he is in the full sense of the word a man, and he is

  only wholly man when he is playing.” For him the object of the play

  instinct is beauty. “Man shall only play with Beauty, and only with

  Beauty shall he play.”

77

[172] Schiller was in fact aware what it might mean to give first place to the

play instinct. As we have seen, the release of repression brings a collision

between the opposites, causing an equalization that necessarily results in a

lowering of the value that was highest. For culture, as we understand it

today, it is certainly a catastrophe when the barbarian side of the

European comes uppermost, for who can guarantee that such a man, when he

begins to play, will make the aesthetic temper and the enjoyment of genuine

beauty his goal? That would be an entirely unjustifiable anticipation. From

the inevitable lowering of the cultural level a very different result is to beexpected. Schiller rightly says:

The aesthetic play instinct will then be hardly recognizable in  its first

attempts, as the sensuous instinct is incessantly  intervening with its

headstrong caprice and its savage appetite. Hence we see crude taste first

seizing on what is new and startling, gaudy, fantastic, and bizarre, on what is

violent  and wild, and avoiding nothing so much as simplicity and

quietude.

78

[173] From this we must conclude that Schiller was aware of the dangers of

this development. It also follows that he himself could not acquiesce in the

solution found, but felt a compelling need to give man a more substantial

foundation for his humanity than the somewhat insecure basis which a

playful aesthetic attitude can offer him. And that must indeed be so. For the

opposition between the two functions, or function groups, is so great and so

inveterate that play alone would hardly suffice to counterbalance the full

gravity and seriousness of this conflict. Similia similibus curantur—a third

factor is needed, which at least can equal the other two in seriousness. With

the attitude of play all seriousness must vanish, and this opens the way for

what Schiller calls an “unlimited determinability.”

79 Sometimes instinct will allow itself to be allured by sensation, sometimes

by thinking; now it will play with objects, now with ideas.

But in any case it will not play exclusively with beauty, for then man

would be no longer a barbarian but already aesthetically educated, whereas

the question at issue is: How is he to emerge from the state of barbarism?

Above all else, therefore, it must definitely be established where man actually

stands in his innermost being. A priori he is as much sensation as thinking;

he is in opposition to himself, hence he must stand somewhere in between.

In his deepest essence he must be a being who partakes of both instincts, yet

may also differentiate himself from them in such a way that, though he must

suffer them and in some cases submit to them, he can also use them. But

first he must differentiate himself from them, as from natural forces to

which he is subject but with which he does not declare himself identical.

On this point Schiller says:

Moreover, this indwelling of the two fundamental instincts in  no way

contradicts the absolute unity of the mind, provided  only that we

distinguish it in itself from both instincts. Both certainly exist and operate

within it, but the mind itself is  neither matter nor form, neithersensuousness nor reason.

80

[174] Here, it seems to me, Schiller has put his finger on something very

important, namely, the possibility of separating out an individual nucleus,

which can be at one time the subject and at another the object of the

opposing functions, though always remaining distinguishable from them.

This separation is as much an intellectual as a moral judgment. In one

case it comes about through thinking, in another through feeling. If the

separation is unsuccessful, or if it is not made at all, a dissolution of the

individuality into  pairs of opposites inevitably follows, since it becomes

identical with them. A further consequence is disunion with oneself, or an

arbitrary decision in favour of one or the other side, together with a violent

suppression of its opposite. This train of thought is a very ancient one, and

so far as I know its most interesting formulation, psychologically speaking,

may be found in Synesius, the Christian bishop of Ptolemais and pupil of

Hypatia. In his book De insomniis he assigns to the spiritus phantasticus

practically the same psychological role as Schiller to the play instinct and I

to creative fantasy; only his mode of expression is not psychological but

metaphysical, an ancient form of speech which is not suitable for our

purpose. He says of this spirit: “The fantastic spirit is the medium between

the eternal and the temporal, and in it we are most alive.”

81 It unites the opposites in itself; hence it also participates in instinctive

nature right down to the animal level, where it  becomes instinct and

arouses daemonic desires:

For this spirit borrows anything that is suitable to its purpose, taking it from

both extremes as it were from neighbours, and  so unites in one essence

things that dwell far apart. For Nature has extended the reach of fantasy

through her many realms, and it descends even to the animals, which do not

yet possess reason…. It is itself the intelligence of the animal, and the

animal understands much through this power of fantasy…. All classes of

demons derive their essence from the life of fantasy. For they are in their

whole being imaginary, and are images of that which happens within.

[175] Indeed, from the psychological point of view demons  are nothing

other than intruders from the unconscious,  spontaneous irruptions of

unconscious complexes into the  continuity  of  the  conscious  process.

Complexes are comparable to demons which fitfully harass our thoughts and

actions; hence in antiquity and the Middle Ages acute  neuroticdisturbances were conceived as possession. Thus,  when the individual

consistently takes his stand on one side, the unconscious ranges itself on the

other and rebels—which  is naturally what struck the Neoplatonic and

Christian  philosophers most, since they represented the standpoint of

exclusive spirituality. Particularly valuable is Synesius’  reference to the

imaginary nature of demons. It is, as I have already pointed out, precisely

the fantastic element that becomes associated in the unconscious with the

repressed  functions. Hence, if the individuality (as we might call the

“individual nucleus” for short) fails to differentiate itself from the opposites,

it becomes identical with them and is inwardly torn asunder, so that a state of

agonizing disunion arises. Synesius expresses this as follows:

Thus this animal spirit, which devout men have also called the spiritual

soul, becomes both idol and god and demon of many shapes. In this also

does the soul exhibit her torment.

[176] By participating in the instinctive forces the spirit becomes a “god

and demon of many shapes.” This strange  idea becomes immediately

intelligible when we remember that in themselves sensation and thinking

are collective functions, into which the individuality (or mind, according to

Schiller) is dissolved by non-differentiation. It becomes a collective entity,

i.e., godlike, since God is a collective idea of an all-pervading essence. In

this state, says Synesius, “the soul exhibits her torment.” But deliverance

is won through differentiation; for, he continues, when the spirit becomes

“moist and gross” it sinks into the depths, i.e., gets entangled  with the

object, but when purged through pain it becomes “dry and hot” and rises

up again, for it is just this fiery quality that differentiates it from the humid

nature of its subterranean abode.

[177] Here the question naturally arises: By virtue of what power does that

which is indivisible, i.e., the individual, defend himself against the divisive

instincts? That he can do this by means of the play instinct even Schiller, at

this point,  no longer believes; it must be something serious, some

considerable power, that  can effectively detach  the individuality from both

the opposites. From one side comes the call of the highest value, the highest

ideal; from the other the allure of the strongest desire. Schiller says:

Each of these two fundamental instincts, as soon as it is developed, strives by

its nature and by necessity towards satisfaction; but just because both are

necessary and both are yet striving towards opposite objectives, this twofold

compulsion naturally cancels itself out, and the will preserves  completefreedom between them both. Thus it is the will which acts as a power

against both instincts, but neither of the two can of its own accord act as a

power against the other…. There is in man no other power but his will,

and only that  which abolishes man, death and every destroyer of

consciousness, can abolish this inner freedom.

82

[178] That the opposites must cancel each other is logically correct, but

practically it is not so, for the instincts are in mutual, active opposition

and cause a temporarily insoluble conflict. The will could indeed decide

the issue, but only if we anticipate the very condition that must first be

reached.

However, the problem of how man is to emerge from barbarism is not yet

solved, neither is that condition established which alone could impart to the

will a direction that would be fair to both opposites and so unite them. It is

truly a sign of the barbarian state that the will is determined unilaterally by

one function, for the will must have some content, some aim, and how is

this aim set? How else than by an antecedent psychic process which through

an intellectual or an emotional judgment, or a sensuous desire, provides the

will with both a content and an aim? If we allow sensuous desire to be a

motive of the will, we act in accordance with  one instinct against our

rational judgment. Yet if we leave it to our rational judgment to settle the

dispute, then even the fairest arbitration will always be based on that, and

will give the formal instinct priority over the sensuous. In any event, the

will is determined more from this side or from that, so long as it depends

for its content on one side or the other. But, to be really able to settle the

conflict, it must be grounded on an intermediate state or process, which shall

give it a content  that is neither too near  nor too far from either side.

According to Schiller, this must be a symbolic content, since the mediating

position between the opposites can be reached only by the symbol. The

reality presupposed by one instinct is different from the reality of the other.

To the other it would be quite unreal or bogus, and vice versa. This dual

character of real and unreal is inherent in the symbol. If it were only real, it

would not be a symbol, for it would then be a real phenomenon and hence

unsymbolic. Only that can be symbolic which embraces both. And if it

were altogether unreal, it would be mere empty imagining, which, being

related to nothing real, would not be a symbol either.

[179] The rational functions are, by their very nature, incapable of creatingsymbols, since they produce only  rationalities whose meaning is

determined unilaterally and does not at the same time embrace its opposite.

The sensuous functions are equally unfitted to create symbols, because their

products too are determined unilaterally by the object and contain only

themselves and not their opposites. To discover, therefore, that impartial

basis for the will, we must appeal to another  authority, where the

opposites are not yet clearly separated but still preserve their original unity.

Manifestly this is not the case with consciousness, since the whole essence

of  consciousness is discrimination, distinguishing ego from  non-ego,

subject from object, positive from negative, and so forth. The separation

into pairs of opposites is entirely due to  conscious differentiation; only

consciousness can recognize  the suitable and distinguish it from the

unsuitable and worthless. It alone can declare one function valuable and the

other non-valuable, thus bestowing on one the power of the  will while

suppressing the claims of the other. But, where no consciousness exists,

where purely unconscious instinctive  life still prevails, there is no

reflection, no pro et contra, no disunion, nothing but simple happening, self-

regulating instinctivity, living proportion. (Provided, of course, that instinct

does not come up against situations to which it is unadapted, in which

case blockage, affects, confusion, and panic arise.)

[180] It would, therefore, be pointless to call upon consciousness to decide

the conflict between the instincts. A  conscious decision would be quite

arbitrary, and could never supply the will with a symbolic content that

alone can produce an irrational solution of a logical antithesis. For this we

must go deeper; we must descend into the foundations of  consciousness

which have still preserved their primordial instinctivity—that is, into the

unconscious, where all psychic functions are indistinguishably merged in

the original and  fundamental activity of the psyche. The lack of

differentiation in the unconscious arises in the first place from the almost

direct association of all the brain centres with each other, and in the second

from the relatively weak energie value of the unconscious elements.

83 That they possess relatively little energy is clear from the fact that an

unconscious element at once ceases to be subliminal as soon as it acquires a

stronger accent of value; it then rises above the threshold of consciousness,

and it can do this only by virtue of the energy accruing to it. It becomes a

“lucky idea” or “hunch,” or, as Herbart calls it, a “spontaneously arising

presentation.” The strong energic value of the conscious contents has theeffect of intense illumination, whereby their differences  become clearly

perceptible and any confusion between them  is ruled out. In the

unconscious, on the contrary, the most heterogeneous elements possessing

only a vague analogy can be substituted for one another, just because of their

low  luminosity and weak energic value. Even heterogeneous  sense-

impressions coalesce, as we see in “photisms” (Bleuler) or in colour hearing.

Language, too, contains plenty of these unconscious contaminations, as I

have shown in the case of sound, light, and emotional states.

84

[181] The unconscious, then, might well be the authority  we have to

appeal to, since it is a neutral region of the psyche where everything that is

divided and antagonistic in consciousness flows together into groupings and

configurations. These, when raised to the light of consciousness, reveal a

nature that exhibits the constituents of one side as much as the other; they

nevertheless belong to neither but occupy an independent middle position.

It is this position that constitutes both their value and their non-value for

consciousness. They are worthless in so far as nothing  clearly

distinguishable can be perceived from  their  configuration, thus leaving

consciousness embarrassed and perplexed; but valuable in so far as it is just

their undifferentiated state that gives them that symbolic character which is

essential to the content of the mediating will.

[182] Thus, besides the will, which is entirely dependent on its content, man

has a further auxiliary in the unconscious, that maternal womb of creative

fantasy, which is able at any time to fashion symbols in the natural process

of elementary  psychic activity, symbols that can serve to determine the

mediating will. I say “can” advisedly, because the symbol does not of its

own accord step into the breach, but remains in the unconscious just so long

as the energic value of the  conscious contents exceeds that of the

unconscious symbol. Under normal conditions this is always the case; but

under  abnormal conditions a reversal of value sets in, whereby the

unconscious acquires a higher value than the conscious. The symbol then

rises to the surface without, however, being taken up by the will and the

executive conscious functions, since these, on account of the reversal of

value, have now become subliminal. The unconscious, on the other hand,

has become supraliminal, and an abnormal state, a psychic disturbance, has

supervened.

[183] Under normal conditions, therefore, energy must be  artificiallysupplied to the unconscious symbol in order to increase its value and

bring it to consciousness. This comes about (and here we return again to the

idea of differentiation provoked by Schiller) through a differentiation of the

self

85 from the opposites. This differentiation amounts to a  detachment of

libido from both sides, in so far as the libido is disposable. For the libido

invested in the instincts is only in part freely disposable, just so far in fact

as the power of the will extends. This is represented by the amount of

energy which is at the “free” disposal of the ego. The will then has the self

as a possible aim, and it becomes the more possible the more any further

development is arrested by the conflict.  In this case, the will does not

decide between the opposites, but purely for the self, that is, the disposable

energy is withdrawn into the self—in other words,  it is introverted.  The

introversion simply means that the libido is retained by the self and is

prevented from taking part in the conflict of  opposites. Since the way

outward is barred to it, it naturally turns towards thought, where again it is in

danger of getting entangled in the conflict. The act of differentiation and

introversion involves the detachment of disposable libido not merely from

the outer object but also from the inner object, the thought. The libido

becomes wholly objectless, it is no longer related to anything that could

be a content of consciousness, and it therefore sinks into the unconscious,

where it automatically takes possession of the waiting fantasy  material,

which it thereupon activates and forces to the surface.

[184] Schiller’s term for the symbol, “living form,” is  happily chosen,

because the constellated fantasy material  contains images of the

psychological development of the individuality in its successive states—a

sort of preliminary sketch or representation of the onward way between the

opposites. Although it may frequently happen that the  discriminating

activity of consciousness does not find much in these images that can be

immediately understood, these intuitions nevertheless contain a living power

which can have a determining effect on the will. But the determining of the

will has repercussions on both sides, so that after a while the  opposites

recover their strength. The renewed conflict again  demands the same

treatment, and each time a further step along the way is made possible.

This function of mediation  between the opposites I have termed the

transcendent function, by which I mean nothing mysterious, but merely a

combined function of conscious and unconscious elements,  or, as inmathematics, a common function of real and imaginary quantities.

86

[185] Besides the will—whose importance should not on that account be

denied—we also have creative fantasy, an irrational, instinctive function

which alone has the power to supply the will with a content of such a nature

that it can unite the opposites. This is the function that Schiller intuitively

apprehended as the source of symbols; but he called it the “play instinct”

and could therefore make no further use of it for the motivation of the will.

In order to obtain a content for the will he reverted to the intellect and thus

allied himself to one side  only. But he comes surprisingly close to our

problem when he says:

The sway of sensation must therefore be destroyed before the law [i.e., of the

rational will] can be set up in its place. So it is not enough for something to

begin which previously did not exist; something must first cease which

previously did exist.

Man cannot pass directly from sensation to thinking; he must take a step

backwards, since only by the removal of one determinant can its opposite

appear. In order, therefore, to exchange passivity for self-dependence, an

inactive determinant for an active one, he must be momentarily free from

all determinacy and pass through a state of pure  determinability.

Consequently, he must somehow return to  that negative state of sheer

indeterminacy in which he existed before anything at all made an impression

on his senses. But that state was completely empty of content, and it is

now a  question of uniting an equal indeterminacy with an equally

unlimited determinability possessing the greatest possible fulness of content,

since something positive is to result  directly from this condition. The

determinacy which he received by means of sensation must therefore be

preserved, because he must not lose hold of reality; but at the same time it

must, in so far as it is a limitation, be removed, because an  unlimited

determinability is to make its appearance.

87

[186] With the help of what has been said above, this difficult passage can

be understood easily enough if we bear in mind that Schiller constantly tends

to seek a solution in the rational will. Making allowance for this fact, what

he says is perfectly clear. The “step backwards” is the differentiation from

the contending instincts, the detachment and withdrawal of libido from all

inner and outer objects. Here, of course, Schiller has the sensuous objectprimarily in mind, since, as we have said, his constant aim is to get across

to the side of rational thinking, which seems to him an indispensable factor

in determining the will. Nevertheless, he is still driven by the necessity of

abolishing all determinacy, and this also implies detachment from the inner

object, the thought—otherwise it

would be impossible to achieve that complete indeterminacy and emptiness

of content which is the original state of  unconsciousness, with no

discrimination of subject and object. It is obvious that Schiller means a

process which might be formulated as an introversion into the unconscious.

[187] “Unlimited determinability” clearly means something  very like the

unconscious, a state in which everything acts on everything else without

distinction. This empty state of  consciousness must be united with the

“greatest possible fulness of content.” This fulness, the counterpart of the

emptiness of consciousness, can only be the content of the unconscious,

since no other content is given. Schiller is thus expressing the union of

conscious and unconscious, and from this state “something positive is to

result.” This “positive” something is for us a symbolic determinant of the

will. For Schiller it is a “mediatory condition,” by which the union of

sensation and thinking is brought about. He also calls it a “mediatory

disposition” where sensuousness and reason are simultaneously active; but

just because of that each cancels the determining power of the other and

their opposition ends in negation. This cancelling of the opposites produces a

void, which we call the unconscious. Because it is not determined by the

opposites, this condition is susceptible to every determinant. Schiller calls it

the “aesthetic condition.”88 It is remarkable that he overlooks the fact that sensuousness and reason

  cannot both be “active” in this condition, since, as he himself says,

  they are already cancelled by mutual negation. But, since something

  must be active and Schiller has no other function at his disposal, the 

  pairs  of opposites  must,  according  to him,  become  active again. Their

  activity is there all right, but since consciousness is “empty,” it must

    necessarily be in the unconscious.

89 But this concept was unknown to Schiller—hence he contradicts himself

  at this point. His mediating aesthetic  function would thus be the

  equivalent of our symbol-forming  activity (creative fantasy). Schiller

  defines the “aesthetic  character” of a thing as its relation to “the

  totality of our various faculties, without being a specific object for any

  single one of them.”

90 Instead of this vague definition, he would perhaps have done better to

  return to his earlier concept of the symbol; for the symbol has the quality

  of being related to all psychic functions without being a specific object

  for any single one. Having now reached this “mediatory disposition,”

  Schiller perceives that “it is henceforth possible for man, by the way of

  nature, to make of himself what he will—the freedom to be what he

  ought to be is completely restored to him.”

91

[188] Because by preference Schiller proceeds rationally  and

intellectually, he falls a victim to his own conclusion. This is already

demonstrated in his choice of the word “aesthetic.” Had he been acquainted

with Indian literature, he  would have seen that the primordial image

which floated before his mind’s eye had a very different character from an

“aesthetic” one. His intuition seized on the unconscious model which from

time immemorial has lain dormant in our mind. Yet he interpreted it as

“aesthetic,” although he himself had previously emphasized its symbolic

character. The  primordial image I am thinking of is that particular

configuration of Eastern ideas which is condensed in the brahman-atman

teaching of India and whose philosophical spokesman in China is Lao-tzu.

[189] The Indian conception  teaches  liberation  from the  opposites, by

which are to be understood every sort of affective state and emotional tie to

the object. Liberation follows the withdrawal of libido from all contents,

resulting in a state of complete introversion. This psychological process is,

very characteristically, known as tapas, a term which can best be renderedas “self-brooding.” This expression clearly pictures the state of meditation

without content, in which the libido is supplied to one’s own self somewhat

in the manner of incubating heat. As a result of the complete detachment of

all affective ties to the object, there is necessarily formed in the inner self

an equivalent of objective reality, or a complete  identity of inside and

outside, which is technically described as tat tvam asi (that art thou). The

fusion of the self with its relations to the object produces the identity of the

self (atman) with the essence of the world (i.e., with the relations of subject

to object), so that the identity of the inner with the  outer atman is

cognized. The concept of brahman differs only slightly from that of atman,

for in brahman the idea of the self is not explicitly given; it is, as it were, a

general indefinable state of identity between inside and outside.

[190] Parallel in some ways with tapas is the concept of yoga, understood

not so much as a state of meditation as a conscious technique for attaining

the tapas state. Yoga is a method by which the libido is systematically

“introverted” and liberated from the bondage of opposites. The aim of tapas

and yoga alike is to establish a mediatory condition from  which the

creative and redemptive element will emerge. For  the individual, the

psychological result is the attainment of brahman, the “supreme light,” or

ananda (bliss). This is the whole purpose of the redemptory exercises. At the

same time, the process can also be thought of as a cosmogonic one, since

brahman-atman is the universal Ground from which all creation proceeds.  

The existence  of this  myth proves, therefore, that creative processes take

place in the unconscious of the yogi which can be interpreted as new

adaptations to the object. Schiller says:

As soon as it is light in man, it is no longer night without. As soon as it is

hushed within him, the storm in the universe is stilled, and the contending

forces of nature find rest between lasting bounds. No wonder, then, that

age-old poetry speaks of this great event in the inner man as though it were a

revolution in the world outside him.

92

[191] Yoga introverts the relations to the object. Deprived of energic value,

they sink into the unconscious, where, as we have shown, they enter into

new relations with other  unconscious contents, and then reassociate

themselves with the object  in new form after the completion of the tapas

exercise. The transformation of the relation to the object has  given the

object a new face. It is as though newly created; hence the cosmogonicmyth is an apt symbol for the outcome of the tapas exercise. The trend of

Indian religious practice  being almost exclusively introverted, the new

adaptation to the object has of course little significance; but it still persists

in the form of an unconsciously projected, doctrinal  cosmogonic myth,

though without leading to any practical innovations. In this respect the

Indian religious attitude is the diametrical opposite of the Christian, since the

Christian principle of love is extraverted and positively demands an object.

The Indian principle makes for riches of knowledge, the Christian for

fulness of works.

[192] The brahman concept also contains the concept of rta, right order,

the orderly course of the world. In brahman, the creative universal essence

and universal Ground, all things come upon the right way, for in it they

are eternally dissolved and recreated; all development in an orderly way

proceeds from brahman. The concept of rta is a stepping-stone to the

concept of tao in Lao-tzu. Tao is the right way, the reign of law, the

middle road between the opposites, freed from them and yet uniting them in

itself. The purpose of life is to travel this middle road and never to

deviate towards the opposites. The ecstatic element is entirely absent in Lao-

tzu; its place is taken by sublime philosophic lucidity, an intellectual and

intuitive wisdom obscured by no mystical haze—a wisdom that represents

what is probably the highest attainable degree of spiritual superiority, as far

removed from chaos as the stars from the disorder of the actual world. It

tames all that is wild, without denaturing it and turning it into something

higher.

[193] It could easily be objected that the analogy between Schiller’s train

of thought and these apparently remote ideas is very far-fetched. But it

must not be forgotten that not so long after Schiller’s time these same ideas

found a powerful  spokesman through the genius of Schopenhauer and

became intimately wedded to Germanic mind, never again to depart from it.

In my view it is of little importance that whereas the Latin translation of the

Upanishads by Anquetil du Perron (published 1801–2) was available to

Schopenhauer, Schiller took at least no conscious note of the very meagre

information that was available in his time.

93 I have seen enough in my own practical experience to know that no

  direct communication is needed in the formation of affinities of this kind.

  We see something very similar in the  fundamental ideas of Meister

  Eckhart and also, in some  respects, of Kant, which display a quite    astonishing affinity with those of the Upanishads, though there is not the

  faintest trace of any influence either direct or indirect. It is the same as

  with myths and symbols, which can arise autochthonously in every corner

  of the earth and yet are identical, because they are fashioned out of the

  same worldwide human unconscious, whose contents are infinitely less

  variable than are races and individuals.

[194] I also feel it necessary to draw a parallel between Schiller’s ideas

and those of the East because in this way Schiller’s might be freed from

the all too constricting mantle of aestheticism.

94 Aestheticism is not fitted to solve the exceedingly serious and difficult

  task of educating man, for it always presupposes the very thing it should

    create—the capacity to  love  beauty.  It  actually hinders a deeper

    investigation of the problem,  because it always averts its face from

  anything evil, ugly, and difficult, and aims at pleasure, even though it be

  of an  edifying kind. Aestheticism therefore lacks all moral force,

  because au fond it is still only a refined hedonism. Certainly Schiller is

  at pains to introduce an absolute moral motive, but with no convincing

  success since, just because of his aesthetic attitude, it is impossible for

  him to see the consequences which a recognition of the other side of

  human nature would entail. The conflict thus engendered involves such

  confusion and suffering for the individual that, although the spectacle of

  beauty may with luck enable him to repress its opposite again, he still

  does not escape from it, so that, even at best, the old condition is re-

  established. In order to help him out of this conflict, another attitude

  than the aesthetic is needed. This is shown nowhere more clearly than in

  the parallel with Oriental ideas. The religious philosophy of India grasped

  this problem in all its profundity and showed the kind of remedy needed

  to solve the conflict. What is needed is a supreme moral effort,  the

  greatest self-denial and sacrifice, the most intense religious austerity

  and true saintliness.

[195] Schopenhauer, despite his regard for the aesthetic,  most

emphatically pointed out just this side of the problem. But we must not

delude ourselves that the words “aesthetic,” “beauty,” etc. had the same

associations for Schiller as they have for us. I am not, I think, putting it too

strongly when I say that for him “beauty” was a religious ideal. Beauty

was  his  religion. His “aesthetic mood” might equally well be called

“devoutness.” Without definitely expressing anything of that  kind, andwithout explicitly characterizing his central problem  as a religious one,

Schiller’s intuition none the less arrived at the religious problem. It was,

however, the religious problem of the primitive, which he even discussed at

some length in his letters, though without following out this line of thought

to the end.

[196] It is worth noting that in the further course of his argument the

question of the play instinct retires into the background in favour of the

aesthetic mood, which seems to have acquired an almost mystical value.

This, I believe, is no accident, but has a quite definite cause. Often it is the

best and most profound ideas in a man’s work which most obstinately resist

a clear formulation, even though they are hinted at in various places and

should therefore really be ripe enough for a lucid synthesis to be possible. It

seems to me that we are faced with some such difficulty here. To the

concept of an aesthetic mood as a mediating creative state Schiller himself

brings thoughts which at once reveal its depth and seriousness. And yet,

quite as clearly, he picks on the play instinct as the long-sought mediating

activity. Now it cannot be denied that these two concepts are in some sort

opposed, since play and seriousness are scarcely compatible. Seriousness

comes from a profound inner necessity, but play is its outward expression,

the face it turns to consciousness. It is not, of course, a matter of wanting to

play, but of having to play; a playful manifestation of fantasy from inner

necessity,  without the compulsion of circumstance, without even the

compulsion of the will.95 It is serious play. And yet it is certainly play in its outward aspect, as seen

  from the standpoint of consciousness and collective opinion. That is the

    ambiguous quality which clings to everything creative.

[197] If play expires in itself without creating anything durable and vital, it

is only play, but in the other case it is called creative work. Out of a

playful movement of elements whose  interrelations are not immediately

apparent, patterns arise which an observant and critical intellect can only

evaluate afterwards. The creation of something new is not accomplished

by the intellect, but by the play instinct acting from inner necessity. The

creative mind plays with the object it loves.

[198] Hence it is easy to regard every creative activity whose potentialities

remain hidden from the multitude as  play. There are, indeed, very few

artists who have not been accused of playing. With the man of genius,

which Schiller certainly was, one is inclined to let this label stick. But he

himself wanted to go beyond the exceptional man and his nature, and to

reach the common man, that he too might share the help and deliverance

which the creative artist, acting from inner necessity, cannot escape anyway.

But the possibility of extending such a viewpoint to the education of the

common man is not guaranteed in advance, or at least it would seem not to

be.

[199] To resolve this question we must appeal, as in all such cases, to the

testimony of the history of human thought. But first we must once more be

clear in our own minds from what angle we are approaching the question.

We have seen how Schiller demands a detachment from the opposites even

to the point of a  complete emptying of consciousness,  in  which neither

sensations, nor feelings, nor thoughts, nor intentions play any sort of role.

The condition striven for is  one of undifferentiated consciousness, a

consciousness in  which, by the depotentiation of energic values, all

contents have lost their distinctiveness. But real consciousness is possible

only when values facilitate a discrimination of  contents. Where

discrimination is lacking, no real consciousness can exist. Accordingly such

a state might be  called “unconscious,” although the possibility of

consciousness is present all the time. It is a question of an abaissement du

niveau mental (Janet), which bears some  resemblance to the yogic and

trance states of hysterical engourdissement.

[200] So far as I know, Schiller never expressed any views concerning the

actual technique—if one may use such a word—for inducing the “aestheticmood.” The example of the Juno Ludovici that he mentions incidentally in his

letters

96 Testifies to a state of “aesthetic devotion” consisting in a complete

  surrender to, and empathy for, the object of contemplation. But such a

  state of devotion lacks the essential characteristics of being without any

  content or determinant. Nevertheless, in conjunction with other passages,

  this example shows that the  idea of devotion or devoutness was

  constantly present in Schiller’s mind.

97 This brings us back to the religious problem, but at the same

  time it gives us a glimpse of the actual possibility of

  extending Schiller’s viewpoint to the common man. For

  religious devotion is a collective phenomenon that does not

  depend on individual endowment.

[201] There are, however, yet other possibilities. We have seen that the

empty state of consciousness, the unconscious condition, is brought about

by the libido sinking into the unconscious. In the unconscious feeling-

toned contents lie dormant memory-complexes from the individual’s past,

above all the parental complex, which is identical with the  childhood

complex in general. Devotion, or the sinking of  libido into the

unconscious, reactivates the childhood  complex so that the childhood

reminiscences, and especially the relations with the parents, become suffused

with life. The fantasies produced by this reactivation give rise to the birth of

father and mother divinities, as well as awakening the childhood relations

with God and the corresponding childlike feelings. Characteristically, it is

symbols of the parents that become activated and by no means always the

images of the real parents, a fact which Freud explains as repression of the

parental imago through resistance to incest. I agree with this interpretation,

yet I believe it is not exhaustive, since it  overlooks the extraordinary

significance of this symbolic substitution. Symbolization in the shape of the

God-image is an immense step beyond the concretism, the sensuousness, of

memory, since, through acceptance of the “symbol” as a real symbol, the

regression to the parents is instantly transformed into a progression, whereas

it would remain a regression if the symbol were to be interpreted merely as a

sign for the actual parents and thus robbed of its independent character.

98

[202] Humanity came to its gods by accepting the reality of the symbol, thatis, it came to the reality of thought, which has made man lord of the earth.

Devotion, as Schiller correctly conceived it, is a regressive movement of

libido towards the primordial, a diving down into the source of the first

beginnings. Out of this there rises, as an image of the incipient progressive

movement, the symbol, which is a  condensation of all the operative

unconscious factors—“living form,” as Schiller says, and a God-image, as

history proves. It is therefore no accident that he should seize on a divine

image, the Juno Ludovici, as a paradigm. Goethe makes the divine images of

Paris and Helen float up from the tripod of the Mothers

99—on the one hand the rejuvenated pair, on the other the symbol of a

process of inner union, which is precisely what Faust passionately craves

for himself as the supreme inner atonement. This is clearly shown in the

ensuing scene as also from the further course of the drama. As we can see

from the example of Faust, the vision of the symbol is a pointer to the

onward course of life, beckoning the libido towards a still distant goal—

but a goal that henceforth will burn unquenchably within him, so that his

life, kindled as by a flame, moves steadily towards the far-off beacon. This

is the specific life-promoting significance of the symbol, and such, too, is

the meaning and value of religious symbols. I am speaking, of course,

not of symbols that are dead and  stiffened by dogma, but of living

symbols that rise up from the creative unconscious of the living man.

[203] The immense significance of such symbols can be denied only by

those for whom the history of the world begins with the present day. It

ought to be superfluous to  speak of the significance of symbols, but

unfortunately this is not so, for the spirit of our time thinks itself superior

to its own psychology. The moralistic and hygienic temper of our day must

always know whether such and such a thing is harmful or useful, right or

wrong. A real psychology cannot  concern itself with such queries; to

recognize how things are in themselves is enough.

[204] The symbol-formation resulting from “devotion” is another of those

collective religious phenomena that do not  depend on  individual

endowment. So in this respect too we may assume  the possibility of

extending Schiller’s viewpoint to the common man. I think that at least its

theoretical possibility for  human psychology in general has now been

sufficiently demonstrated. For the sake of completeness and clarity I should

add that the question of the relation of the symbol to consciousness and the

conscious conduct of life has long occupied my mind. I have come to theconclusion that, in view of  its  great significance as  an  exponent of  the

unconscious, too light a value should not be set on the symbol. We know

from daily experience in the treatment of  neurotic patients what an

eminently practical importance the  interventions from the unconscious

possess. The greater the dissociation, i.e., the more the conscious attitude

becomes  alienated from the individual and collective contents of the

unconscious, the more harmfully the unconscious inhibits or intensifies the

conscious contents. For quite practical reasons, therefore, the symbol must

be credited with a not inconsiderable value. But if we grant it a value,

whether great or small, the symbol acquires a conscious motive force—that

is, it is perceived, and its unconscious libido-charge is thereby  given an

opportunity to make itself felt in the conscious conduct of life. Thus, in my

view, a practical advantage of no small consequence is gained, namely, the

collaboration of the unconscious, its participation in the conscious psychic

performance, and hence the elimination of disturbing influences from the

unconscious.

[205] This common function, the relation to the symbol, I have termed the

transcendent function. I cannot at this point  submit this question to a

thorough investigation, as it would be absolutely necessary to bring together

all the material that comes up as a result of the activity of the unconscious.

The fantasies hitherto described in the specialist literature give no conception

of the symbolic creations we are concerned with. There are, however, not a

few examples of such fantasies in belles-lettres; but these, of course, are not

observed and  reported in their “pure” state—they have undergone an

intensive “aesthetic” elaboration. From all these examples I would single

out two works of Meyrink for special attention: The Golem and Das grüne

Gesicht. I must reserve the treatment of this aspect of the problem for a

later investigation.

[206] Although these observations concerning the mediatory state were

prompted by Schiller, we have already gone far beyond his conceptions. In

spite of his having discerned the opposites in human nature with such keen

insight, he remained stuck at an early stage in his attempt at a solution. For

this failure, it seems to me, the term “aesthetic  mood” is not without

blame. Schiller makes the “aesthetic  mood” practically identical with

“beauty,” which of its own accord precipitates our sentiments into this mood.

100 Not only does he blend cause with effect, he also, in the teeth of his

    own definition, gives the state of “indeterminacy”  an unequivocally    determined character by equating it with  beauty. From the very

    outset, therefore, the edge is taken off the mediating function, since

    beauty immediately prevails  over ugliness, whereas it is equally a

    question of ugliness. We  have seen that Schiller defines a thing’s

      “aesthetic character”  as its relation to “the totality of our various

      faculties.”

101 Consequently “beautiful” cannot coincide with “aesthetic,” since our

    various faculties also vary aesthetically: some are beautiful, some ugly,

    and only an incorrigible  idealist and optimist could conceive the

    “totality” of human nature as simply beautiful. To be quite accurate,

    human nature is simply what it is; it has its dark and its light sides.

    The sum of all colours is grey—light on a dark background or dark on

    light.

[207] This conceptual flaw also accounts for the fact that it remains far from

clear how this mediatory condition is to be  brought about. There are

numerous passages which state unequivocally that it is called into being by

“the enjoyment of pure beauty.” Thus Schiller says:

Whatever flatters our senses in immediate sensation opens our  soft and

sensitive nature to every impression, but it also  makes us in the same

measure less capable of exertion. What braces our intellectual powers and

invites us to abstract concepts strengthens our mind for every kind of

resistance,  but also hardens it proportionately, and deprives us of

sensibility just as much as it helps us towards a greater spontaneity. For that

very reason the one no less than the other must in the end necessarily lead

to exhaustion…. On the other hand, when we have abandoned ourselves to

the enjoyment of pure beauty, we are at such a moment masters in equal

degree of our passive and active powers, and shall turn with equal facility

to seriousness or to play, to rest or to movement, to compliance or to

resistance, to abstract thought or to contemplation.

102

[208] This statement is in direct contradiction to the earlier definitions of the

“aesthetic condition,” where man was to be  “empty,” a “cipher,”

“undetermined,” whereas here he is in the highest degree determined by

beauty (“abandoned” to it). But it is not worth while pursuing this question

further with Schiller. Here he comes up against a barrier common both to 

himself and  his  time which  it  was impossible for  him to  overstep, for

everywhere he encountered the invisible “Ugliest Man,” whose discoverywas reserved for our age by Nietzsche.

[209] Schiller was intent on making the sensuous man into a rational being

“by first making him aesthetic.”

103 He himself says that “we must first alter his nature,”

104 “we must subject man to form even in his purely physical life,”

105 “he must carry out his physical determination … according to the

    laws of Beauty,”

106 “on the neutral plane of physical life man must start his moral life,”

107 “though still within his sensuous limits he must begin his  rational

    freedom,”

108 “he must already be imposing the law of his will upon his inclinations,”

109 “he must learn to desire more nobly.”

110

[210] That “must” of which our author speaks is the  familiar “ought”

which is always invoked when one can see no other way. Here again we

come up against the inevitable barriers. It would be unfair to expect one

individual mind, were it never so great, to master this gigantic problem

which times and nations alone can solve, and even then by no conscious

purpose, but only as fate would have it.

[211] The greatness of Schiller’s thought lies in his  psychological

observation and in his intuitive grasp of the things observed. There is yet

another of his trains of thought I would like to mention, as it deserves

special emphasis. We  have seen that the mediatory condition is

characterized as producing “something positive,” namely the symbol. The

symbol unites antithetical elements within its nature; hence it also unites the

antithesis between real and unreal, because on the one hand it is a psychic

reality (on account of its efficacy), while on the other it corresponds to no

physical reality. It is reality and appearance at once. Schiller clearly

emphasizes this in order to append an apologia for appearance, which is in

every respect significant:

Extreme stupidity and extreme intelligence have a certain affinity with each

other, in that both seek only the real and are wholly insensible to mere

appearance. Only through the immediate presence of an object in the

senses is stupidity shaken from its repose, and intelligence is granted its

repose only through relating its concepts to the data of experience; in a word,

stupidity cannot rise above reality and intelligence cannot remain belowtruth. In so far, then, as the need for reality and attachment to the real are

merely the results of deficiency, it follows that indifference to reality and

interest in appearance are a true enlargement of humanity and a decisive step

towards culture.

111

[212] When speaking earlier of an assignment of value to the symbol, I

showed the practical advantages of an appreciation of the unconscious. We

exclude an unconscious disturbance of the conscious functions when we take

the unconscious into our calculations from the start by paying attention to

the symbol. It is well known that the unconscious, when not realized, is ever

at work casting a false glamour over everything, a false appearance: it

appears to us always  on objects, because everything unconscious is

projected. Hence, when we can apprehend the unconscious as such, we strip

away the false appearance from objects, and this can only promote truth.

Schiller says:

Man exercises this human right to sovereignty in the art of appearance,

and the more strictly he here distinguishes between mine and thine, the

more carefully he separates form from being, and the more independence he

learns to give to this form, the more he will not merely extend the realm

of Beauty but even secure the boundaries of Truth; for he cannot cleanse

appearance from  reality  without  at  the  same  time  liberating reality from

appearance.

112

To strive after absolute appearance demands greater capacity for abstraction,

more freedom of heart, more vigour of will than man needs if he confines

himself to reality, and he must already have put this behind him if he

wishes to arrive at appearance.

113

2. A DISCUSSION ON NAÏVE AND

                        SENTIMENTAL POETRY

[213] For a long time it seemed to me as though Schiller’s division of poets

into naïve and sentimental

114, were a classification that accorded with the type psychology here

expounded. After mature reflection,  however, I have come to the

conclusion that this is not so. Schiller’s definition is very simple: “The naïve

poet is Nature, the sentimental poet seeks her.” This simple formula isbeguiling, since it postulates two different kinds of relation to the object. It

is therefore tempting to say: He who seeks or desires Nature as an object

does not possess her, and such a  man would be an introvert; while

conversely, he who already is Nature, and therefore stands in the most

intimate relation  with the object, would be an extravert. But a rather

forced  interpretation such as this would have little in common with

Schiller’s  point  of  view.  His  division  into  naïve  and  sentimental is one

which, in contrast to our type division, is not in the least concerned with the

individual mentality of the poet, but rather with the character of his creative

activity, or of its product. The same poet can be sentimental in one poem,

naïve in another. Homer is certainly naïve throughout, but how many of

the moderns are not, for the most part, sentimental? Evidently Schiller felt

this difficulty, and therefore asserted that the poet was conditioned by his

time, not as an individual but as a poet. He says:

All real poets will belong either to the naïve or sentimental, depending on

whether the conditions of the age in which they flourish, or accidental

circumstances, exert an influence on their general make-up and on their

passing emotional mood. 115

[214] Consequently it is not a question of fundamental types for Schiller, but

of certain characteristics or qualities of the individual product. Hence it is

at once obvious that an introverted poet can, on occasion, be just as naïve

as he is  sentimental. It therefore follows that to identify naïve and

sentimental respectively with extravert and introvert would be quite beside

the point so far as the question of types is concerned. Not so, however, so

far as it is a question of typical mechanisms.

a. The Naïve Attitude

[215] I will first present the definitions which Schiller gives of this attitude.

As has already been said, the naïve poet is “Nature.” He “simply follows

Nature and sensation and confines himself to the mere copying of reality.”

116 “With naïve poetry we delight in the living presence of objects in our

    imagination.”

117 “Naïve poetry is a boon of Nature. It is a lucky throw, needing no

      improvement when it succeeds, but fit for nothing when it fails.”

118 “The naïve genius has to do everything through his nature; he can do

    little through his freedom, and he will accomplish his idea only when

    Nature works in him from inner necessity.”119 Naïve poetry is “the child of life and unto life it returns.” 120 The naïve

    genius is wholly dependent on “experience,” on the world, with which

    he is in “direct touch.” He “needs succour from without.”

121 For the naïve poet the “common nature” of his surroundings can

    “become dangerous,” because “sensibility is  always more or less

    dependent on the external impression, and only a constant activity of

    the productive faculty, which is not to be expected of human nature,

    would be able to prevent mere matter from exercising at times a

    blind power  over his sensibility. But whenever this happens, the

    poetic feeling will be commonplace.”

122 “The naïve genius allows Nature unlimited sway in him.”

123

[216] From these definitions the dependence of the naïve poet on the object

is especially clear. His relation to the object  has a compelling character,

because he introjects the object—that is, he unconsciously identifies with it

or has, as it were, an a priori identity with it. Lévy-Bruhl describes this

relation to the object as participation mystique. This identity always derives

from an analogy between the object and an unconscious content. One could

also  say  that the  identity  comes about through the projection of an

unconscious association by analogy with the object. An identity of this

kind has a compelling character too, because it expresses a certain quantity

of libido which, like all libido operating from the unconscious, is not at the

disposal of consciousness and thus exercises a compulsion on its contents.

The attitude of the naïve poet is, therefore, in a high degree conditioned by

the object; the object operates independently in him, as it were; it fulfils

itself in him because he himself is identical with it. He lends his expressive

function to the object and represents it in a certain way, not in the least

actively or intentionally, but because it represents itself that way in him. He

is himself Nature: Nature creates in him the product. He “allows Nature

unlimited sway in him.” Supremacy is given to the object. To this extent

the naïve attitude is extraverted.            THE SENTIMENTAL ATTITUDE

[217] The sentimental poet seeks Nature. He “reflects on the impression

objects make on him, and on that reflection alone depends the emotion

with which he is exalted, and which likewise exalts us. Here the object is

related to an idea, and on this relation alone depends his poetic power.”

124 He “is always involved with two opposing ideas and sensations, with

    reality as finite, and with the idea as infinite:  the mixed  feeling  he

    arouses always bears witness to this dual origin.”

125 “The sentimental mood is the result of an effort to reproduce the naïve

    sensation, the content of it, even under conditions of reflection.”

126 “Sentimental poetry is the product of abstraction.”

127 “As a result of his effort to remove every limitation from human nature,

    the sentimental genius is exposed to the danger of abolishing human

    nature altogether; not merely mounting, as he must and should, above

    every fixed and limited reality to absolute possibility: which is to

    idealize, but even transcending possibility itself: which is to

    fantasize…. The sentimental genius abandons reality in order to soar

    into the world of ideas and rule his material with absolute freedom.” 128

[218] It is easy to see that the sentimental poet, contrasted with the naïve,

is characterized by a reflective and abstract  attitude to the object. He

reflects on the object by abstracting  himself from it. He is, as it were,

separated from the object a priori as soon as his work begins; it is not the

object that operates in him, he himself is the operator. He does not,

however, work in towards himself, but out beyond the object.

He is distinct from the object, not  identical with  it; he seeks  to establish 

 his relation to it, to “rule his material.” From his distinction from the object

comes that sense of duality which Schiller refers to; for the sentimental poet

draws his creativity from two sources: from the object and/or his perception

of it, and from himself. For him the external impression of the object is not

something absolute, but material which he handles as directed by his own

contents. He thus stands above the object and yet has a relation to it—not a

relation of mere impressionability or receptivity, but one in which by his

own free choice he  bestows value or quality on the object. His is

therefore an introverted attitude.

[219] By characterizing these two attitudes as extraverted and introverted

we have not, however, exhausted Schiller’s  conception. Our twomechanisms are merely basic phenomena of a rather general nature, which

only vaguely indicate what is specific about those attitudes. To understand

the naïve and sentimental types we must enlist the help of two  further

functions, sensation and intuition. I shall discuss these in greater detail at a

later stage of our investigation. I only wish to say at this point that the

naïve is characterized by a preponderance of sensation, and the sentimental

by a preponderance of intuition. Sensation creates ties to the object, it even

pulls the subject into the object; hence the “danger” for the naïve type

consists in his vanishing in it altogether. Intuition, being  a perception of  

one’s own unconscious processes, withdraws one from the object; it mounts

above it, ever seeking to rule its material, to shape it, even violently, in

accordance with one’s own subjective  viewpoint, though without being

aware of doing so. The  danger for the sentimental type, therefore, is a

complete severance from reality and a vanishing in the fluid fantasy world

of the unconscious.          THE IDEALIST AND THE REALIST

[220] In the same essay Schiller’s reflections lead him to  postulate two

fundamental psychological types. He says:

This brings me to a very remarkable psychological antagonism among men

in an age of progressive culture, an antagonism which, because it is radical

and grounded in the innate emotional constitution, is the cause of a sharper

division among men than the random conflict of interests could ever bring

about; which robs the poet and artist of all hope of making a universal

appeal and giving pleasure to every one—although this is his task; which

makes it impossible for the philosopher, in spite of every effort, to be

universally convincing—although this is implied  in the very idea of

philosophy; and which, finally, will never permit a man in practical life to

see his mode of behaviour universally applauded: in short, an antagonism

which is to blame for the fact that no work of the mind and no deed of the

heart can have a decisive success with one class of men without incurring

the condemnation of the other. This antagonism is, without doubt, as old as

the beginning of culture, and to the end it can hardly be otherwise, save in

rare individual cases, such as have always existed and, it is to be hoped,

will always exist. But although it lies in the very nature of its operations

that it frustrates every attempt at a settlement, because no party can be

brought to admit either a deficiency on his own side or a reality on the

other’s, yet  there is always profit enough in following up such an

important antagonism to its final source, thus at least reducing the actual point

at issue to a simpler formulation.

129

[221] It follows conclusively from this passage that by  observing the

antagonistic mechanisms Schiller arrived at a  conception of two

psychological types which claim the same significance in his scheme of

things as I ascribe to the introverted and extraverted in mine. With regard

to the reciprocal relation of the two types postulated by me I can endorse

almost word for word what Schiller says of his. In agreement with what I

said earlier, Schiller proceeds from the mechanism to the type, by “isolating

from the naïve and the  sentimental character alike the poetic quality

common to both.”

130 If we perform this operation too, subtracting the creative genius from

both, then what is left to the naïve is his attachment to the object and its

autonomy in the subject, and to the sentimental his superiority over theobject, which  expresses itself in his more or less arbitrary judgment or

treatment of it. Schiller continues:

After this nothing remains of the [naïve], on the theoretical side, but a

sober spirit of observation and a fixed dependence on the uniform testimony

of the senses; and, on the practical, a resigned submission to the exigencies

of Nature…. Of the sentimental character nothing remains, on the theoretical

side, but a restless spirit of speculation that insists on the absolute in every

act of cognition, and, on the practical, a moral rigorism that insists on the

absolute in every act of the will. Whoever counts himself among the

former can be called a realist, and, among the latter, an idealist.

131

[222] Schiller’s further observations on his two types relate  almost

exclusively to the familiar phenomena of the realist and idealist attitudes

and are therefore without interest for our investigation.                                          III

    THE APOLLINIAN AND THE DIONYSIAN

[223] The problem discerned and partially worked out by Schiller was

taken up again in a new and original way by Nietzsche in his book The

Birth of Tragedy (1871). This early  work  is more  nearly related to

Schopenhauer and Goethe than to Schiller. But it at least appears to share

Schiller’s aestheticism and Hellenism, while having pessimism and the motif

of deliverance in common with Schopenhauer and  unlimited points of

contact with Goethe’s Faust. Among these connections, those with Schiller

are naturally the most significant for our purpose. Yet we cannot pass

over Schopenhauer without paying tribute to the way in which he  gave

reality to those dawning rays of Oriental wisdom which appear in Schiller

only as insubstantial wraiths. If we disregard his pessimism which springs

from the contrast with the Christian’s enjoyment of faith and certainty of

redemption, Schopenhauer’s doctrine of deliverance is seen to be essentially

Buddhist. He was captivated by the East. This was undoubtedly a reaction

against our Occidental atmosphere. It is, as we know, a reaction that still

persists  today in various movements more or less completely oriented

towards India. For Nietzsche this pull towards the East stopped in Greece.

Also, he felt Greece to be the midpoint between East and West. To this

extent he maintains contact with Schiller—but how utterly different is his

conception of the Greek character! He sees the dark foil upon which the

serene and golden world of Olympus is painted:

In order to make life possible, the Greeks had to create those gods from

sheer necessity. … They knew and felt the terror  and frightfulness of

existence; to be able to live at all, the  Greeks had to interpose the

shining, dream-born Olympian world between themselves and that dread.

That tremendous mistrust of the titanic powers of Nature, Moira pitilessly

enthroned above all knowledge, the vulture of Prometheus the great friend

of man, the awful fate of the wise Oedipus, the family curse of the Atrides

that drove Orestes to matricide … all this dread was ever being conquered

anew by the Greeks with the help of that visionary, intermediate world of the

Olympians, or was at least veiled and withdrawn from sight.                                            1

That Greek “serenity,” that smiling heaven of Hellas seen as a shimmering

illusion hiding a sombre background—this  insight was reserved for the

moderns, and is a weighty argument against moral aestheticism.

[224] Here Nietzsche takes up a standpoint differing significantly from

Schiller’s. What one might have guessed with Schiller, that his letters on

aesthetic education were also an attempt to deal with his own problems,

becomes a  complete certainty in this work of Nietzsche’s: it is a

“profoundly personal” book. Whereas Schiller begins to paint  light and

shade almost timorously and in pallid hues, apprehending the conflict in

his own psyche as “naïve” versus “sentimental,” and excluding everything

that belongs to the  background and abysmal depths of human nature,

Nietzsche

has a profounder grasp and spans an opposition which, in one aspect, is no

whit inferior to the dazzling beauty of Schiller’s  vision, while its other

aspect reveals infinitely darker tones that certainly enhance the effect of

the light but allow still blacker depths to be divined.

[225] Nietzsche calls his fundamental pair of opposites the Apollinian and

the Dionysian. We must first try to picture to ourselves the nature of this

pair. For this purpose I shall select  a number of quotations which will

enable the reader, even though unacquainted with Nietzsche’s work, to form

his own judgment and at the same time to criticize mine.

We shall have gained much for the science of aesthetics when once we have

perceived not only by logical inference, but by the immediate certainty of

intuition, that the continuous  development of art is bound up with the

duality of the  Apollinian and the Dionysian, in much the same way as

generation depends  on the  duality of the sexes,  involving  perpetual

conflicts with only periodic reconciliations.

2

From the two deities of the arts, Apollo and Dionysus, we derive our

knowledge that a tremendous opposition existed in the Greek world, both as

to their origin and their aim, between the Apollinian art of the shaper and

the  non-figurative Dionysian art of music. These two very  different

impulses run side by side, for the most part openly at  variance, each

continually rousing the other to new and  mightier births, in order to

perpetuate in them the warring antagonism that is only seemingly bridged

by the common term “Art”; until finally, by a metaphysical miracle of theHellenic “will,” they appear paired one with the other, and  from this

mating the equally Apollinian and Dionysian creation of Attic tragedy is at

last brought to birth.

3

[226] In order to characterize these two “impulses” more  closely,

Nietzsche compares the peculiar psychological states they give rise to with

those of dreaming and intoxication. The Apollinian impulse produces the

state comparable to  dreaming, the Dionysian the state comparable to

intoxication. By “dreaming” Nietzsche means, as he himself says, essentially

an “inward vision,” the “lovely semblance of dream-worlds.”

4 Apollo “rules over the beautiful illusion of the inner world of fantasy,” he

is “the god of all shape-shifting powers.”

5 He signifies measure, number, limitation, and subjugation of everything

wild and untamed. “One might even describe  Apollo  himself as  the

  glorious divine image of the principium individuationis.”

6

[227] The Dionysian impulse, on the other hand, means the liberation of

unbounded instinct, the breaking loose of the  unbridled dynamism of

animal and divine nature; hence in the Dionysian rout man appears as a

satyr, god above and goat below.

7 The Dionysian is the horror of the annihilation of the principium

    individuationis and at the same time “rapturous  delight” in its

  destruction. It is therefore comparable to intoxication, which dissolves

  the individual into his collective instincts and components—an explosion

  of the isolated ego through the world. Hence, in the Dionysian orgy,

  man finds man: “alienated Nature, hostile or enslaved, celebrates once

  more her feast of reconciliation with her prodigal son—Man.”

8 Each feels himself “not only united, reconciled, merged  with his

  neighbour, but one with him.”

9 His individuality is entirely obliterated. “Man is no longer the artist, he

  has become the work of art.”

10 “All the artistry of Nature is revealed in the ecstasies of intoxication.”

11 Which means that the creative dynamism, libido in instinctive form,

  takes possession of the individual as though he were an object and uses

  him as a tool or as an expression of itself. If it is permissible to conceive

  the natural creature as  a “work of art,” then of course man in the  Dionysian state has become a natural work of art too; but in so far as the

  natural creature is decidedly not a work of art in the ordinary sense of the

  word, he is nothing but sheer Nature, unbridled, a raging torrent, not

  even an. animal that is restricted to itself and the laws of its being. I

  must emphasize this point for the sake of  clarity in the ensuing

    discussion, since for some reason Nietzsche has omitted to make it clear,

  and has consequently shed a deceptive aesthetic veil over the problem,

  which at times he himself has involuntarily to draw aside. Thus, in

    connection with the Dionysian orgies, he says:

Practically everywhere the central point of these festivals lay in exuberant

sexual licence, which swamped all family life and its venerable traditions;

the most savage bestialities of  nature were unleashed, including that

atrocious amalgam of lust and cruelty which has always seemed to me

the true witch’s broth.

12

[228] Nietzsche considers the reconciliation of the Delphic  Apollo with

Dionysus a symbol of the reconciliation of these opposites in the breast of

the civilized Greek. But here he forgets his own compensatory formula,

according to which  the gods of Olympus owe their splendour to the

darkness of the Greek psyche. By this token, the reconciliation of Apollo

and Dionysus would be a “beautiful illusion,” a desideratum evoked by the

need of the civilized Greek in his struggle with his own barbarian side, the

very element that broke out unchecked in the Dionysian rout.

[229] Between the religion of a people and its actual mode of life there is

always a compensatory relation, otherwise religion would have no practical

significance at all. Beginning with the highly moral religion of the Persians

and the notorious dubiousness, even in antiquity, of Persian habits of life,

right down to our own “Christian” era, when the religion of love assisted at

the greatest blood-bath in the world’s history—wherever we turn this rule

holds true. We may therefore infer from the  symbol of the Delphic

reconciliation an especially violent split in the Greek character. This would

also explain the longing for deliverance which gave the mysteries their

immense significance for the social life of Greece, and which  was

completely overlooked by the early admirers of the Greek world. They were

content with naïvely attributing to the Greeks everything they themselves

lacked.

[230] Thus in the Dionysian state the Greek was anything but a “work ofart”; on the contrary, he was gripped by his own barbarian nature, robbed

of his individuality, dissolved into his collective components, made one

with the collective unconscious (through the surrender of his individual

aims), and one with “the genius of the race, even with Nature herself.”

13 To the Apollinian side which had already achieved a certain amount of

  domestication, this intoxicated state that made man forget both himself

  and his humanity and turned him into a mere creature of instinct must

  have been altogether despicable, and for this reason a violent conflict

  between the  two impulses was bound to break out. Supposing the

    instincts  of civilized man were let loose! The culture-enthusiasts

  imagine that only sheer beauty would stream forth. This error is due to a

  profound lack of psychological knowledge. The dammed-up instinctual

  forces in civilized man are immensely  destructive and far more

  dangerous than the instincts of the primitive, who in a modest degree is

  constantly living out his negative instinct. Consequently no war of the

    historical past can rival in grandiose horror the wars of civilized nations.

  It will have been the same with the Greeks. It was just their living

  sense of horror that gradually brought about a reconciliation of the  

  Apollinian with the Dionysian—“through a metaphysical miracle,” as

  Nietzsche says. This statement, as well as the other where he says that

  the antagonism between them is “only seemingly bridged by  the

  common term ‘Art,’” must constantly be borne in mind,  because

    Nietzsche, like Schiller, had a pronounced tendency to credit art with a

    mediating and redeeming role. The  problem then remains stuck in

    aesthetics—the ugly is also “beautiful,” even beastliness and evil shine

  forth enticingly in the false glamour of aesthetic beauty. The artistic

  nature in both Schiller and Nietzsche claims a redemptive significance

  for itself and its specific capacity for creation and expression.

[231] Because of this, Nietzsche quite forgets that in the struggle between

Apollo and Dionysus and in their ultimate reconciliation the problem for the

Greeks was never an  aesthetic one, but was essentially religious. The

Dionysian satyr festival, to judge by all the analogies, was a kind of

totem feast involving a regressive identification with the mythical ancestors

or directly with the totem animal. The cult of Dionysus had in many places

a mystical and speculative streak, and in any case exercised a very strong

religious influence. The fact that Greek tragedy arose out of an originally

religious ceremony is at least as significant as the connection of our moderntheatre with the medieval Passion play, which was exclusively religious in

origin; we are not permitted, therefore, to judge the problem under its

purely  aesthetic aspect. Aestheticism is a modern bias that shows the

psychological mysteries of the Dionysus cult in a light in which they

were assuredly never seen or experienced by the ancients. With Nietzsche

as with Schiller the religious  viewpoint is entirely overlooked and is

replaced by the aesthetic. These things obviously have their aesthetic side

and it should not be neglected.

14 Nevertheless, if medieval Christianity is understood only aesthetically

  its true character is falsified and trivialized, just as much as if it were

  viewed exclusively from the historical standpoint. A true understanding

  is possible only on a  common ground—no one would wish to

  maintain that the nature of a railway bridge is adequately understood

  from a purely aesthetic angle. In adopting the view that the antagonism

  between Apollo and Dionysus is purely a  question of conflicting

  artistic impulses, the problem is shifted to the aesthetic sphere in a way

  that is both historically and materially unjustified, and is subjected to a

  partial approach which can never do justice to its real content.

[232] This shifting of the problem must doubtless have its psychological

cause and purpose. The advantages of such a procedure are not far to

seek: the aesthetic  approach  immediately converts the problem into a

picture which the spectator can contemplate at his ease, admiring both its

beauty and its ugliness, merely re-experiencing its passions at a safe distance,

with no danger of becoming involved in them. The aesthetic attitude guards

against any real participation,  prevents one from being personally

implicated, which is what a religious understanding of the problem would

mean. The same advantage is ensured by the historical approach—an

approach which Nietzsche himself criticized in a series of very valuable

essays.

15 The possibility of taking such a tremendous problem—“a problem with

  horns,” as he calls it—merely aesthetically is of course very tempting, for

  its religious understanding, which in this case is the only adequate one,

    presupposes some actual experience of it which modern man can rarely

  boast of.  Dionysus, however, seems to have taken his revenge on

    Nietzsche, as we can see from “An Attempt at Self-Criticism,” which

  dates from 1886 and was added as a preface to the reissue that year of

  The Birth of Tragedy:What is a Dionysian? In this book may be found an answer: a “knowing

one” speaks here, the votary and disciple of his god.

16

But that was not the Nietzsche who wrote The Birth of Tragedy; at that time

he was a votary of aestheticism, and he became a Dionysian only at the

time of writing Zarathustra and that memorable passage with which he

concludes “An Attempt at Self-Criticism”:

Lift up your hearts, my brethren, high, higher! And forget not the legs! Lift

up your legs also, you good dancers, and better still if also you stand on your

heads!

17

[233] Nietzsche’s profound grasp of the problem in spite of his aesthetic

defences was already so close to the real thing that his later Dionysian

experience seems an almost inevitable consequence. His attack on Socrates

in The Birth of Tragedy is aimed at the rationalist, who proves himself

impervious to  Dionysian  orgiastics. This outburst is in line with the

analogous error into which the aesthete always falls: he holds himself aloof

from the problem. But even at that time, in spite of his  aestheticism,

Nietzsche had an inkling of the real solution  when he said that the

antagonism was not bridged by art but by “a metaphysical miracle of the

Hellenic ‘will.’” He puts “will” in inverted commas, which, considering

how strongly he was at that time influenced by Schopenhauer, we might

well interpret as a reference to concept of the metaphysical  Will.

“Metaphysical” has for us the psychological connotation “unconscious.” If,

then, we replace “metaphysical” in Nietzsche’s formula by “unconscious,”

the desired key to the  problem would be an unconscious “miracle.” A

“miracle” is irrational, hence the act is an unconscious irrational happening,

shaping itself without the assistance of reason and  conscious purpose. It

happens of itself, it just grows, like a phenomenon of creative Nature, and

not  from any  clever  trick  of human wit; it is the fruit of yearning

expectation, of faith and hope.

[234] At this point I must leave the problem for the time being, as we shall

have occasion to discuss it more fully later.

Let us turn instead to a closer examination of the Apollinian and Dionysian

for their psychological qualities. First we will consider the Dionysian. From

Nietzsche’s description it is  immediately apparent that an unfolding is

meant, a streaming outwards and upwards, a diastole, as Goethe called it; a