The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Analysis of Mind
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Analysis of Mind

Author: Bertrand Russell

Release date: February 1, 2001 [eBook #2529]
                Most recently updated: December 9, 2008

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Dianne Bean, and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ANALYSIS OF MIND ***




Produced by Dianne Bean





THE ANALYSIS OF MIND

By Bertrand Russell

1921




MUIRHEAD LIBRARY OF PHILOSOPHY


An admirable statement of the aims of the Library of Philosophy was
provided by the first editor, the late Professor J. H. Muirhead, in his
description of the original programme printed in Erdmann's History of
Philosophy under the date 1890. This was slightly modified in subsequent
volumes to take the form of the following statement:

"The Muirhead Library of Philosophy was designed as a contribution to
the History of Modern Philosophy under the heads: first of Different
Schools of Thought--Sensationalist, Realist, Idealist, Intuitivist;
secondly of different Subjects--Psychology, Ethics, Aesthetics,
Political Philosophy, Theology. While much had been done in England in
tracing the course of evolution in nature, history, economics, morals
and religion, little had been done in tracing the development of thought
on these subjects. Yet 'the evolution of opinion is part of the whole
evolution'.

"By the co-operation of different writers in carrying out this plan it
was hoped that a thoroughness and completeness of treatment, otherwise
unattainable, might be secured. It was believed also that from writers
mainly British and American fuller consideration of English Philosophy
than it had hitherto received might be looked for. In the earlier series
of books containing, among others, Bosanquet's "History of Aesthetic,"
Pfleiderer's "Rational Theology since Kant," Albee's "History of English
Utilitarianism," Bonar's "Philosophy and Political Economy," Brett's
"History of Psychology," Ritchie's "Natural Rights," these objects were
to a large extent effected.

"In the meantime original work of a high order was being produced both
in England and America by such writers as Bradley, Stout, Bertrand
Russell, Baldwin, Urban, Montague, and others, and a new interest in
foreign works, German, French and Italian, which had either become
classical or were attracting public attention, had developed. The scope
of the Library thus became extended into something more international,
and it is entering on the fifth decade of its existence in the hope that
it may contribute to that mutual understanding between countries which
is so pressing a need of the present time."

The need which Professor Muirhead stressed is no less pressing to-day,
and few will deny that philosophy has much to do with enabling us to
meet it, although no one, least of all Muirhead himself, would regard
that as the sole, or even the main, object of philosophy. As Professor
Muirhead continues to lend the distinction of his name to the Library
of Philosophy it seemed not inappropriate to allow him to recall us to
these aims in his own words. The emphasis on the history of thought also
seemed to me very timely; and the number of important works promised
for the Library in the very near future augur well for the continued
fulfilment, in this and other ways, of the expectations of the original
editor.

H. D. Lewis




PREFACE

This book has grown out of an attempt to harmonize two different
tendencies, one in psychology, the other in physics, with both of which
I find myself in sympathy, although at first sight they might seem
inconsistent. On the one hand, many psychologists, especially those
of the behaviourist school, tend to adopt what is essentially a
materialistic position, as a matter of method if not of metaphysics.
They make psychology increasingly dependent on physiology and external
observation, and tend to think of matter as something much more solid
and indubitable than mind. Meanwhile the physicists, especially Einstein
and other exponents of the theory of relativity, have been making
"matter" less and less material. Their world consists of "events," from
which "matter" is derived by a logical construction. Whoever reads, for
example, Professor Eddington's "Space, Time and Gravitation" (Cambridge
University Press, 1920), will see that an old-fashioned materialism can
receive no support from modern physics. I think that what has permanent
value in the outlook of the behaviourists is the feeling that physics is
the most fundamental science at present in existence. But this position
cannot be called materialistic, if, as seems to be the case, physics
does not assume the existence of matter.

The view that seems to me to reconcile the materialistic tendency of
psychology with the anti-materialistic tendency of physics is the view
of William James and the American new realists, according to which the
"stuff" of the world is neither mental nor material, but a "neutral
stuff," out of which both are constructed. I have endeavoured in this
work to develop this view in some detail as regards the phenomena with
which psychology is concerned.

My thanks are due to Professor John B. Watson and to Dr. T. P. Nunn
for reading my MSS. at an early stage and helping me with many valuable
suggestions; also to Mr. A. Wohlgemuth for much very useful information
as regards important literature. I have also to acknowledge the help
of the editor of this Library of Philosophy, Professor Muirhead, for
several suggestions by which I have profited.

The work has been given in the form of lectures both in London and
Peking, and one lecture, that on Desire, has been published in the
Athenaeum.

There are a few allusions to China in this book, all of which were
written before I had been in China, and are not intended to be taken by
the reader as geographically accurate. I have used "China" merely as
a synonym for "a distant country," when I wanted illustrations of
unfamiliar things.

Peking, January 1921.



CONTENTS

  I.   Recent Criticisms of "Consciousness"
  II.  Instinct and Habit
  III. Desire and Feeling
  IV.  Influence of Past History on Present Occurrences
            in Living Organisms
  V.   Psychological and Physical Causal Laws
  VI.  Introspection
  VII. The Definition of Perception
  VIII.Sensations and Images
  IX.  Memory
  X.   Words and Meaning
  XI.  General Ideas and Thought
  XII. Belief
  XIII.Truth and Falsehood
  XIV. Emotions and Will
  XV.  Characteristics of Mental Phenomena




THE ANALYSIS OF MIND




LECTURE I. RECENT CRITICISMS OF "CONSCIOUSNESS"

There are certain occurrences which we are in the habit of calling
"mental." Among these we may take as typical BELIEVING and DESIRING.
The exact definition of the word "mental" will, I hope, emerge as
the lectures proceed; for the present, I shall mean by it whatever
occurrences would commonly be called mental.

I wish in these lectures to analyse as fully as I can what it is that
really takes place when we, e.g. believe or desire. In this first
lecture I shall be concerned to refute a theory which is widely held,
and which I formerly held myself: the theory that the essence of
everything mental is a certain quite peculiar something called
"consciousness," conceived either as a relation to objects, or as a
pervading quality of psychical phenomena.

The reasons which I shall give against this theory will be mainly
derived from previous authors. There are two sorts of reasons, which
will divide my lecture into two parts:

(1) Direct reasons, derived from analysis and its difficulties;

(2) Indirect reasons, derived from observation of animals (comparative
psychology) and of the insane and hysterical (psycho-analysis).

Few things are more firmly established in popular philosophy than the
distinction between mind and matter. Those who are not professional
metaphysicians are willing to confess that they do not know what mind
actually is, or how matter is constituted; but they remain convinced
that there is an impassable gulf between the two, and that both belong
to what actually exists in the world. Philosophers, on the other hand,
have maintained often that matter is a mere fiction imagined by mind,
and sometimes that mind is a mere property of a certain kind of matter.
Those who maintain that mind is the reality and matter an evil dream are
called "idealists"--a word which has a different meaning in philosophy
from that which it bears in ordinary life. Those who argue that matter
is the reality and mind a mere property of protoplasm are called
"materialists." They have been rare among philosophers, but common,
at certain periods, among men of science. Idealists, materialists, and
ordinary mortals have been in agreement on one point: that they knew
sufficiently what they meant by the words "mind" and "matter" to be able
to conduct their debate intelligently. Yet it was just in this point, as
to which they were at one, that they seem to me to have been all alike
in error.

The stuff of which the world of our experience is composed is, in my
belief, neither mind nor matter, but something more primitive than
either. Both mind and matter seem to be composite, and the stuff of
which they are compounded lies in a sense between the two, in a sense
above them both, like a common ancestor. As regards matter, I have set
forth my reasons for this view on former occasions,* and I shall not now
repeat them. But the question of mind is more difficult, and it is this
question that I propose to discuss in these lectures. A great deal of
what I shall have to say is not original; indeed, much recent work, in
various fields, has tended to show the necessity of such theories as
those which I shall be advocating. Accordingly in this first lecture
I shall try to give a brief description of the systems of ideas within
which our investigation is to be carried on.

     * "Our Knowledge of the External World" (Allen & Unwin),
     Chapters III and IV. Also "Mysticism and Logic," Essays VII
     and VIII.

If there is one thing that may be said, in the popular estimation, to
characterize mind, that one thing is "consciousness." We say that we are
"conscious" of what we see and hear, of what we remember, and of our own
thoughts and feelings. Most of us believe that tables and chairs are
not "conscious." We think that when we sit in a chair, we are aware
of sitting in it, but it is not aware of being sat in. It cannot for
a moment be doubted that we are right in believing that there is SOME
difference between us and the chair in this respect: so much may be
taken as fact, and as a datum for our inquiry. But as soon as we try to
say what exactly the difference is, we become involved in perplexities.
Is "consciousness" ultimate and simple, something to be merely accepted
and contemplated? Or is it something complex, perhaps consisting in our
way of behaving in the presence of objects, or, alternatively, in the
existence in us of things called "ideas," having a certain relation
to objects, though different from them, and only symbolically
representative of them? Such questions are not easy to answer; but until
they are answered we cannot profess to know what we mean by saying that
we are possessed of "consciousness."

Before considering modern theories, let us look first at consciousness
from the standpoint of conventional psychology, since this embodies
views which naturally occur when we begin to reflect upon the subject.
For this purpose, let us as a preliminary consider different ways of
being conscious.

First, there is the way of PERCEPTION. We "perceive" tables and chairs,
horses and dogs, our friends, traffic passing in the street--in short,
anything which we recognize through the senses. I leave on one side for
the present the question whether pure sensation is to be regarded as a
form of consciousness: what I am speaking of now is perception, where,
according to conventional psychology, we go beyond the sensation to the
"thing" which it represents. When you hear a donkey bray, you not only
hear a noise, but realize that it comes from a donkey. When you see a
table, you not only see a coloured surface, but realize that it is hard.
The addition of these elements that go beyond crude sensation is said to
constitute perception. We shall have more to say about this at a later
stage. For the moment, I am merely concerned to note that perception
of objects is one of the most obvious examples of what is called
"consciousness." We are "conscious" of anything that we perceive.

We may take next the way of MEMORY. If I set to work to recall what
I did this morning, that is a form of consciousness different from
perception, since it is concerned with the past. There are various
problems as to how we can be conscious now of what no longer exists.
These will be dealt with incidentally when we come to the analysis of
memory.

From memory it is an easy step to what are called "ideas"--not in the
Platonic sense, but in that of Locke, Berkeley and Hume, in which they
are opposed to "impressions." You may be conscious of a friend either
by seeing him or by "thinking" of him; and by "thought" you can be
conscious of objects which cannot be seen, such as the human race,
or physiology. "Thought" in the narrower sense is that form of
consciousness which consists in "ideas" as opposed to impressions or
mere memories.

We may end our preliminary catalogue with BELIEF, by which I mean that
way of being conscious which may be either true or false. We say that a
man is "conscious of looking a fool," by which we mean that he believes
he looks a fool, and is not mistaken in this belief. This is a different
form of consciousness from any of the earlier ones. It is the form which
gives "knowledge" in the strict sense, and also error. It is, at least
apparently, more complex than our previous forms of consciousness;
though we shall find that they are not so separable from it as they
might appear to be.

Besides ways of being conscious there are other things that would
ordinarily be called "mental," such as desire and pleasure and pain.
These raise problems of their own, which we shall reach in Lecture III.
But the hardest problems are those that arise concerning ways of being
"conscious." These ways, taken together, are called the "cognitive"
elements in mind, and it is these that will occupy us most during the
following lectures.

There is one element which SEEMS obviously in common among the different
ways of being conscious, and that is, that they are all directed to
OBJECTS. We are conscious "of" something. The consciousness, it seems,
is one thing, and that of which we are conscious is another thing.
Unless we are to acquiesce in the view that we can never be conscious
of anything outside our own minds, we must say that the object of
consciousness need not be mental, though the consciousness must be. (I
am speaking within the circle of conventional doctrines, not expressing
my own beliefs.) This direction towards an object is commonly regarded
as typical of every form of cognition, and sometimes of mental life
altogether. We may distinguish two different tendencies in traditional
psychology. There are those who take mental phenomena naively, just as
they would physical phenomena. This school of psychologists tends not to
emphasize the object. On the other hand, there are those whose primary
interest is in the apparent fact that we have KNOWLEDGE, that there is a
world surrounding us of which we are aware. These men are interested in
the mind because of its relation to the world, because knowledge, if
it is a fact, is a very mysterious one. Their interest in psychology
is naturally centred in the relation of consciousness to its object, a
problem which, properly, belongs rather to theory of knowledge. We may
take as one of the best and most typical representatives of this school
the Austrian psychologist Brentano, whose "Psychology from the Empirical
Standpoint,"* though published in 1874, is still influential and was the
starting-point of a great deal of interesting work. He says (p. 115):

     * "Psychologie vom empirischen Standpunkte," vol. i, 1874.
     (The second volume was never published.)

"Every psychical phenomenon is characterized by what the scholastics of
the Middle Ages called the intentional (also the mental) inexistence of
an object, and what we, although with not quite unambiguous expressions,
would call relation to a content, direction towards an object (which is
not here to be understood as a reality), or immanent objectivity. Each
contains something in itself as an object, though not each in the same
way. In presentation something is presented, in judgment something is
acknowledged or rejected, in love something is loved, in hatred hated,
in desire desired, and so on.

"This intentional inexistence is exclusively peculiar to psychical
phenomena. No physical phenomenon shows anything similar. And so we
can define psychical phenomena by saying that they are phenomena which
intentionally contain an object in themselves."

The view here expressed, that relation to an object is an ultimate
irreducible characteristic of mental phenomena, is one which I shall be
concerned to combat. Like Brentano, I am interested in psychology, not
so much for its own sake, as for the light that it may throw on the
problem of knowledge. Until very lately I believed, as he did, that
mental phenomena have essential reference to objects, except possibly in
the case of pleasure and pain. Now I no longer believe this, even in
the case of knowledge. I shall try to make my reasons for this rejection
clear as we proceed. It must be evident at first glance that the
analysis of knowledge is rendered more difficult by the rejection; but
the apparent simplicity of Brentano's view of knowledge will be found,
if I am not mistaken, incapable of maintaining itself either against
an analytic scrutiny or against a host of facts in psycho-analysis and
animal psychology. I do not wish to minimize the problems. I will
merely observe, in mitigation of our prospective labours, that thinking,
however it is to be analysed, is in itself a delightful occupation,
and that there is no enemy to thinking so deadly as a false simplicity.
Travelling, whether in the mental or the physical world, is a joy, and
it is good to know that, in the mental world at least, there are vast
countries still very imperfectly explored.

The view expressed by Brentano has been held very generally, and
developed by many writers. Among these we may take as an example his
Austrian successor Meinong.* According to him there are three elements
involved in the thought of an object. These three he calls the act, the
content and the object. The act is the same in any two cases of the same
kind of consciousness; for instance, if I think of Smith or think
of Brown, the act of thinking, in itself, is exactly similar on both
occasions. But the content of my thought, the particular event that
is happening in my mind, is different when I think of Smith and when I
think of Brown. The content, Meinong argues, must not be confounded with
the object, since the content must exist in my mind at the moment when
I have the thought, whereas the object need not do so. The object may
be something past or future; it may be physical, not mental; it may
be something abstract, like equality for example; it may be something
imaginary, like a golden mountain; or it may even be something
self-contradictory, like a round square. But in all these cases, so
he contends, the content exists when the thought exists, and is what
distinguishes it, as an occurrence, from other thoughts.

     * See, e.g. his article: "Ueber Gegenstande hoherer Ordnung
     und deren Verhaltniss zur inneren Wahrnehmung," "Zeitschrift
     fur Psychologie and Physiologie der Sinnesorgane," vol. xxi,
     pp. 182-272 (1899), especially pp. 185-8.

To make this theory concrete, let us suppose that you are thinking of
St. Paul's. Then, according to Meinong, we have to distinguish three
elements which are necessarily combined in constituting the one thought.
First, there is the act of thinking, which would be just the same
whatever you were thinking about. Then there is what makes the character
of the thought as contrasted with other thoughts; this is the content.
And finally there is St. Paul's, which is the object of your thought.
There must be a difference between the content of a thought and what it
is about, since the thought is here and now, whereas what it is about
may not be; hence it is clear that the thought is not identical with St.
Paul's. This seems to show that we must distinguish between content
and object. But if Meinong is right, there can be no thought without an
object: the connection of the two is essential. The object might exist
without the thought, but not the thought without the object: the three
elements of act, content and object are all required to constitute the
one single occurrence called "thinking of St. Paul's."

The above analysis of a thought, though I believe it to be mistaken, is
very useful as affording a schema in terms of which other theories can
be stated. In the remainder of the present lecture I shall state in
outline the view which I advocate, and show how various other views
out of which mine has grown result from modifications of the threefold
analysis into act, content and object.

The first criticism I have to make is that the ACT seems unnecessary and
fictitious. The occurrence of the content of a thought constitutes
the occurrence of the thought. Empirically, I cannot discover anything
corresponding to the supposed act; and theoretically I cannot see that
it is indispensable. We say: "_I_ think so-and-so," and this word "I"
suggests that thinking is the act of a person. Meinong's "act" is the
ghost of the subject, or what once was the full-blooded soul. It is
supposed that thoughts cannot just come and go, but need a person to
think them. Now, of course it is true that thoughts can be collected
into bundles, so that one bundle is my thoughts, another is your
thoughts, and a third is the thoughts of Mr. Jones. But I think
the person is not an ingredient in the single thought: he is rather
constituted by relations of the thoughts to each other and to the body.
This is a large question, which need not, in its entirety, concern us
at present. All that I am concerned with for the moment is that the
grammatical forms "I think," "you think," and "Mr. Jones thinks," are
misleading if regarded as indicating an analysis of a single thought.
It would be better to say "it thinks in me," like "it rains here"; or
better still, "there is a thought in me." This is simply on the
ground that what Meinong calls the act in thinking is not empirically
discoverable, or logically deducible from what we can observe.

The next point of criticism concerns the relation of content and object.
The reference of thoughts to objects is not, I believe, the simple
direct essential thing that Brentano and Meinong represent it as being.
It seems to me to be derivative, and to consist largely in BELIEFS:
beliefs that what constitutes the thought is connected with various
other elements which together make up the object. You have, say, an
image of St. Paul's, or merely the word "St. Paul's" in your head. You
believe, however vaguely and dimly, that this is connected with what
you would see if you went to St. Paul's, or what you would feel if you
touched its walls; it is further connected with what other people see
and feel, with services and the Dean and Chapter and Sir Christopher
Wren. These things are not mere thoughts of yours, but your thought
stands in a relation to them of which you are more or less aware. The
awareness of this relation is a further thought, and constitutes
your feeling that the original thought had an "object." But in pure
imagination you can get very similar thoughts without these accompanying
beliefs; and in this case your thoughts do not have objects or seem to
have them. Thus in such instances you have content without object. On
the other hand, in seeing or hearing it would be less misleading to
say that you have object without content, since what you see or hear is
actually part of the physical world, though not matter in the sense of
physics. Thus the whole question of the relation of mental occurrences
to objects grows very complicated, and cannot be settled by regarding
reference to objects as of the essence of thoughts. All the above
remarks are merely preliminary, and will be expanded later.

Speaking in popular and unphilosophical terms, we may say that the
content of a thought is supposed to be something in your head when you
think the thought, while the object is usually something in the outer
world. It is held that knowledge of the outer world is constituted by
the relation to the object, while the fact that knowledge is different
from what it knows is due to the fact that knowledge comes by way of
contents. We can begin to state the difference between realism and
idealism in terms of this opposition of contents and objects. Speaking
quite roughly and approximately, we may say that idealism tends to
suppress the object, while realism tends to suppress the content.
Idealism, accordingly, says that nothing can be known except thoughts,
and all the reality that we know is mental; while realism maintains that
we know objects directly, in sensation certainly, and perhaps also in
memory and thought. Idealism does not say that nothing can be known
beyond the present thought, but it maintains that the context of vague
belief, which we spoke of in connection with the thought of St. Paul's,
only takes you to other thoughts, never to anything radically different
from thoughts. The difficulty of this view is in regard to sensation,
where it seems as if we came into direct contact with the outer world.
But the Berkeleian way of meeting this difficulty is so familiar that I
need not enlarge upon it now. I shall return to it in a later lecture,
and will only observe, for the present, that there seem to me no valid
grounds for regarding what we see and hear as not part of the physical
world.

Realists, on the other hand, as a rule, suppress the content, and
maintain that a thought consists either of act and object alone, or of
object alone. I have been in the past a realist, and I remain a realist
as regards sensation, but not as regards memory or thought. I will try
to explain what seem to me to be the reasons for and against various
kinds of realism.

Modern idealism professes to be by no means confined to the present
thought or the present thinker in regard to its knowledge; indeed, it
contends that the world is so organic, so dove-tailed, that from any
one portion the whole can be inferred, as the complete skeleton of an
extinct animal can be inferred from one bone. But the logic by which
this supposed organic nature of the world is nominally demonstrated
appears to realists, as it does to me, to be faulty. They argue that,
if we cannot know the physical world directly, we cannot really know
any thing outside our own minds: the rest of the world may be merely our
dream. This is a dreary view, and they there fore seek ways of escaping
from it. Accordingly they maintain that in knowledge we are in direct
contact with objects, which may be, and usually are, outside our own
minds. No doubt they are prompted to this view, in the first place, by
bias, namely, by the desire to think that they can know of the existence
of a world outside themselves. But we have to consider, not what led
them to desire the view, but whether their arguments for it are valid.

There are two different kinds of realism, according as we make a thought
consist of act and object, or of object alone. Their difficulties are
different, but neither seems tenable all through. Take, for the sake of
definiteness, the remembering of a past event. The remembering occurs
now, and is therefore necessarily not identical with the past event.
So long as we retain the act, this need cause no difficulty. The act
of remembering occurs now, and has on this view a certain essential
relation to the past event which it remembers. There is no LOGICAL
objection to this theory, but there is the objection, which we spoke
of earlier, that the act seems mythical, and is not to be found by
observation. If, on the other hand, we try to constitute memory without
the act, we are driven to a content, since we must have something that
happens NOW, as opposed to the event which happened in the past. Thus,
when we reject the act, which I think we must, we are driven to a theory
of memory which is more akin to idealism. These arguments, however, do
not apply to sensation. It is especially sensation, I think, which is
considered by those realists who retain only the object.* Their views,
which are chiefly held in America, are in large measure derived from
William James, and before going further it will be well to consider
the revolutionary doctrine which he advocated. I believe this doctrine
contains important new truth, and what I shall have to say will be in a
considerable measure inspired by it.

     * This is explicitly the case with Mach's "Analysis of
     Sensations," a book of fundamental importance in the present
     connection. (Translation of fifth German edition, Open Court
     Co., 1914. First German edition, 1886.)


William James's view was first set forth in an essay called "Does
'consciousness' exist?"* In this essay he explains how what used to be
the soul has gradually been refined down to the "transcendental ego,"
which, he says, "attenuates itself to a thoroughly ghostly condition,
being only a name for the fact that the 'content' of experience IS
KNOWN. It loses personal form and activity--these passing over to the
content--and becomes a bare Bewusstheit or Bewusstsein uberhaupt, of
which in its own right absolutely nothing can be said. I believe (he
continues) that 'consciousness,' when once it has evaporated to this
estate of pure diaphaneity, is on the point of disappearing altogether.
It is the name of a nonentity, and has no right to a place among first
principles. Those who still cling to it are clinging to a mere echo,
the faint rumour left behind by the disappearing 'soul' upon the air of
philosophy"(p. 2).

     * "Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific
     Methods," vol. i, 1904. Reprinted in "Essays in Radical
     Empiricism" (Longmans, Green & Co., 1912), pp. 1-38, to
     which references in what follows refer.


He explains that this is no sudden change in his opinions. "For twenty
years past," he says, "I have mistrusted 'consciousness' as an entity;
for seven or eight years past I have suggested its non-existence to my
students, and tried to give them its pragmatic equivalent in realities
of experience. It seems to me that the hour is ripe for it to be openly
and universally discarded"(p. 3).

His next concern is to explain away the air of paradox, for James
was never wilfully paradoxical. "Undeniably," he says, "'thoughts' do
exist." "I mean only to deny that the word stands for an entity, but to
insist most emphatically that it does stand for a function. There is, I
mean, no aboriginal stuff or quality of being, contrasted with that of
which material objects are made, out of which our thoughts of them are
made; but there is a function in experience which thoughts perform,
and for the performance of which this quality of being is invoked. That
function is KNOWING"(pp. 3-4).

James's view is that the raw material out of which the world is built
up is not of two sorts, one matter and the other mind, but that it is
arranged in different patterns by its inter-relations, and that some
arrangements may be called mental, while others may be called physical.

"My thesis is," he says, "that if we start with the supposition that
there is only one primal stuff or material in the world, a stuff
of which everything is composed, and if we call that stuff 'pure
experience,' then knowing can easily be explained as a particular sort
of relation towards one another into which portions of pure experience
may enter. The relation itself is a part of pure experience; one of its
'terms' becomes the subject or bearer of the knowledge, the knower, the
other becomes the object known"(p. 4).

After mentioning the duality of subject and object, which is supposed
to constitute consciousness, he proceeds in italics: "EXPERIENCE, I
BELIEVE, HAS NO SUCH INNER DUPLICITY; AND THE SEPARATION OF IT INTO
CONSCIOUSNESS AND CONTENT COMES, NOT BY WAY OF SUBTRACTION, BUT BY WAY
OF ADDITION"(p. 9).

He illustrates his meaning by the analogy of paint as it appears in a
paint-shop and as it appears in a picture: in the one case it is just
"saleable matter," while in the other it "performs a spiritual function.
Just so, I maintain (he continues), does a given undivided portion
of experience, taken in one context of associates, play the part of a
knower, of a state of mind, of 'consciousness'; while in a different
context the same undivided bit of experience plays the part of a thing
known, of an objective 'content.' In a word, in one group it figures as
a thought, in another group as a thing"(pp. 9-10).

He does not believe in the supposed immediate certainty of thought. "Let
the case be what it may in others," he says, "I am as confident as I am
of anything that, in myself, the stream of thinking (which I recognize
emphatically as a phenomenon) is only a careless name for what, when
scrutinized, reveals itself to consist chiefly of the stream of my
breathing. The 'I think' which Kant said must be able to accompany all
my objects, is the 'I breathe' which actually does accompany them"(pp.
36-37).

The same view of "consciousness" is set forth in the succeeding essay,
"A World of Pure Experience" (ib., pp. 39-91). The use of the phrase
"pure experience" in both essays points to a lingering influence of
idealism. "Experience," like "consciousness," must be a product, not
part of the primary stuff of the world. It must be possible, if James is
right in his main contentions, that roughly the same stuff, differently
arranged, would not give rise to anything that could be called
"experience." This word has been dropped by the American realists, among
whom we may mention specially Professor R. B. Perry of Harvard and Mr.
Edwin B. Holt. The interests of this school are in general philosophy
and the philosophy of the sciences, rather than in psychology; they have
derived a strong impulsion from James, but have more interest than he
had in logic and mathematics and the abstract part of philosophy. They
speak of "neutral" entities as the stuff out of which both mind and
matter are constructed. Thus Holt says: "If the terms and propositions
of logic must be substantialized, they are all strictly of one
substance, for which perhaps the least dangerous name is neutral-stuff.
The relation of neutral-stuff to matter and mind we shall have presently
to consider at considerable length." *

     * "The Concept of Consciousness" (Geo. Allen & Co., 1914),
     p. 52.

My own belief--for which the reasons will appear in subsequent
lectures--is that James is right in rejecting consciousness as an
entity, and that the American realists are partly right, though not
wholly, in considering that both mind and matter are composed of a
neutral-stuff which, in isolation, is neither mental nor material. I
should admit this view as regards sensations: what is heard or seen
belongs equally to psychology and to physics. But I should say that
images belong only to the mental world, while those occurrences (if any)
which do not form part of any "experience" belong only to the physical
world. There are, it seems to me, prima facie different kinds of causal
laws, one belonging to physics and the other to psychology. The law
of gravitation, for example, is a physical law, while the law of
association is a psychological law. Sensations are subject to both kinds
of laws, and are therefore truly "neutral" in Holt's sense. But entities
subject only to physical laws, or only to psychological laws, are not
neutral, and may be called respectively purely material and purely
mental. Even those, however, which are purely mental will not have that
intrinsic reference to objects which Brentano assigns to them and which
constitutes the essence of "consciousness" as ordinarily understood. But
it is now time to pass on to other modern tendencies, also hostile to
"consciousness."

There is a psychological school called "Behaviourists," of whom the
protagonist is Professor John B. Watson,* formerly of the Johns Hopkins
University. To them also, on the whole, belongs Professor John Dewey,
who, with James and Dr. Schiller, was one of the three founders of
pragmatism. The view of the "behaviourists" is that nothing can be known
except by external observation. They deny altogether that there is a
separate source of knowledge called "introspection," by which we can
know things about ourselves which we could never observe in others.
They do not by any means deny that all sorts of things MAY go on in
our minds: they only say that such things, if they occur, are not
susceptible of scientific observation, and do not therefore concern
psychology as a science. Psychology as a science, they say, is only
concerned with BEHAVIOUR, i.e. with what we DO; this alone, they
contend, can be accurately observed. Whether we think meanwhile, they
tell us, cannot be known; in their observation of the behaviour of human
beings, they have not so far found any evidence of thought. True, we
talk a great deal, and imagine that in so doing we are showing that we
can think; but behaviourists say that the talk they have to listen to
can be explained without supposing that people think. Where you might
expect a chapter on "thought processes" you come instead upon a chapter
on "The Language Habit." It is humiliating to find how terribly adequate
this hypothesis turns out to be.

     * See especially his "Behavior: an Introduction to
     Comparative Psychology," New York, 1914.

Behaviourism has not, however, sprung from observing the folly of men.
It is the wisdom of animals that has suggested the view. It has always
been a common topic of popular discussion whether animals "think." On
this topic people are prepared to take sides without having the vaguest
idea what they mean by "thinking." Those who desired to investigate such
questions were led to observe the behaviour of animals, in the hope that
their behaviour would throw some light on their mental faculties.
At first sight, it might seem that this is so. People say that a
dog "knows" its name because it comes when it is called, and that it
"remembers" its master, because it looks sad in his absence, but wags
its tail and barks when he returns. That the dog behaves in this way is
matter of observation, but that it "knows" or "remembers" anything is an
inference, and in fact a very doubtful one. The more such inferences are
examined, the more precarious they are seen to be. Hence the study of
animal behaviour has been gradually led to abandon all attempt at mental
interpretation. And it can hardly be doubted that, in many cases of
complicated behaviour very well adapted to its ends, there can be no
prevision of those ends. The first time a bird builds a nest, we can
hardly suppose it knows that there will be eggs to be laid in it, or
that it will sit on the eggs, or that they will hatch into young birds.
It does what it does at each stage because instinct gives it an impulse
to do just that, not because it foresees and desires the result of its
actions.*

     * An interesting discussion of the question whether
     instinctive actions, when first performed, involve any
     prevision, however vague, will be found in Lloyd Morgan's
     "Instinct and Experience" (Methuen, 1912), chap. ii.

Careful observers of animals, being anxious to avoid precarious
inferences, have gradually discovered more and more how to give
an account of the actions of animals without assuming what we call
"consciousness." It has seemed to the behaviourists that similar methods
can be applied to human behaviour, without assuming anything not open
to external observation. Let us give a crude illustration, too crude for
the authors in question, but capable of affording a rough insight into
their meaning. Suppose two children in a school, both of whom are asked
"What is six times nine?" One says fifty-four, the other says fifty-six.
The one, we say, "knows" what six times nine is, the other does not. But
all that we can observe is a certain language-habit. The one child has
acquired the habit of saying "six times nine is fifty-four"; the other
has not. There is no more need of "thought" in this than there is when
a horse turns into his accustomed stable; there are merely more numerous
and complicated habits. There is obviously an observable fact called
"knowing" such-and-such a thing; examinations are experiments for
discovering such facts. But all that is observed or discovered is a
certain set of habits in the use of words. The thoughts (if any) in the
mind of the examinee are of no interest to the examiner; nor has the
examiner any reason to suppose even the most successful examinee capable
of even the smallest amount of thought.

Thus what is called "knowing," in the sense in which we can ascertain
what other people "know," is a phenomenon exemplified in their physical
behaviour, including spoken and written words. There is no reason--so
Watson argues--to suppose that their knowledge IS anything beyond the
habits shown in this behaviour: the inference that other people
have something nonphysical called "mind" or "thought" is therefore
unwarranted.

So far, there is nothing particularly repugnant to our prejudices in the
conclusions of the behaviourists. We are all willing to admit that
other people are thoughtless. But when it comes to ourselves, we feel
convinced that we can actually perceive our own thinking. "Cogito, ergo
sum" would be regarded by most people as having a true premiss. This,
however, the behaviourist denies. He maintains that our knowledge of
ourselves is no different in kind from our knowledge of other people.
We may see MORE, because our own body is easier to observe than that of
other people; but we do not see anything radically unlike what we see
of others. Introspection, as a separate source of knowledge, is entirely
denied by psychologists of this school. I shall discuss this question at
length in a later lecture; for the present I will only observe that
it is by no means simple, and that, though I believe the behaviourists
somewhat overstate their case, yet there is an important element of
truth in their contention, since the things which we can discover by
introspection do not seem to differ in any very fundamental way from the
things which we discover by external observation.

So far, we have been principally concerned with knowing. But it might
well be maintained that desiring is what is really most characteristic
of mind. Human beings are constantly engaged in achieving some end
they feel pleasure in success and pain in failure. In a purely material
world, it may be said, there would be no opposition of pleasant and
unpleasant, good and bad, what is desired and what is feared. A man's
acts are governed by purposes. He decides, let us suppose, to go to a
certain place, whereupon he proceeds to the station, takes his ticket
and enters the train. If the usual route is blocked by an accident,
he goes by some other route. All that he does is determined--or so it
seems--by the end he has in view, by what lies in front of him, rather
than by what lies behind. With dead matter, this is not the case.
A stone at the top of a hill may start rolling, but it shows no
pertinacity in trying to get to the bottom. Any ledge or obstacle will
stop it, and it will exhibit no signs of discontent if this happens. It
is not attracted by the pleasantness of the valley, as a sheep or cow
might be, but propelled by the steepness of the hill at the place
where it is. In all this we have characteristic differences between the
behaviour of animals and the behaviour of matter as studied by physics.

Desire, like knowledge, is, of course, in one sense an observable
phenomenon. An elephant will eat a bun, but not a mutton chop; a duck
will go into the water, but a hen will not. But when we think of our
own desires, most people believe that we can know them by an immediate
self-knowledge which does not depend upon observation of our actions.
Yet if this were the case, it would be odd that people are so often
mistaken as to what they desire. It is matter of common observation that
"so-and-so does not know his own motives," or that "A is envious of B
and malicious about him, but quite unconscious of being so." Such people
are called self-deceivers, and are supposed to have had to go through
some more or less elaborate process of concealing from themselves what
would otherwise have been obvious. I believe that this is an entire
mistake. I believe that the discovery of our own motives can only be
made by the same process by which we discover other people's, namely,
the process of observing our actions and inferring the desire which
could prompt them. A desire is "conscious" when we have told ourselves
that we have it. A hungry man may say to himself: "Oh, I do want my
lunch." Then his desire is "conscious." But it only differs from an
"unconscious" desire by the presence of appropriate words, which is by
no means a fundamental difference.

The belief that a motive is normally conscious makes it easier to be
mistaken as to our own motives than as to other people's. When some
desire that we should be ashamed of is attributed to us, we notice that
we have never had it consciously, in the sense of saying to ourselves,
"I wish that would happen." We therefore look for some other
interpretation of our actions, and regard our friends as very unjust
when they refuse to be convinced by our repudiation of what we hold to
be a calumny. Moral considerations greatly increase the difficulty of
clear thinking in this matter. It is commonly argued that people are not
to blame for unconscious motives, but only for conscious ones. In order,
therefore, to be wholly virtuous it is only necessary to repeat virtuous
formulas. We say: "I desire to be kind to my friends, honourable in
business, philanthropic towards the poor, public-spirited in politics."
So long as we refuse to allow ourselves, even in the watches of the
night, to avow any contrary desires, we may be bullies at home, shady in
the City, skinflints in paying wages and profiteers in dealing with the
public; yet, if only conscious motives are to count in moral valuation,
we shall remain model characters. This is an agreeable doctrine, and
it is not surprising that men are un willing to abandon it. But moral
considerations are the worst enemies of the scientific spirit and we
must dismiss them from our minds if we wish to arrive at truth.

I believe--as I shall try to prove in a later lecture--that desire,
like force in mechanics, is of the nature of a convenient fiction
for describing shortly certain laws of behaviour. A hungry animal is
restless until it finds food; then it becomes quiescent. The thing which
will bring a restless condition to an end is said to be what is desired.
But only experience can show what will have this sedative effect, and it
is easy to make mistakes. We feel dissatisfaction, and think that
such and-such a thing would remove it; but in thinking this, we are
theorizing, not observing a patent fact. Our theorizing is often
mistaken, and when it is mistaken there is a difference between what we
think we desire and what in fact will bring satisfaction. This is such
a common phenomenon that any theory of desire which fails to account for
it must be wrong.

What have been called "unconscious" desires have been brought very much
to the fore in recent years by psycho-analysis. Psycho-analysis, as
every one knows, is primarily a method of understanding hysteria and
certain forms of insanity*; but it has been found that there is much
in the lives of ordinary men and women which bears a humiliating
resemblance to the delusions of the insane. The connection of dreams,
irrational beliefs and foolish actions with unconscious wishes has been
brought to light, though with some exaggeration, by Freud and Jung and
their followers. As regards the nature of these unconscious wishes,
it seems to me--though as a layman I speak with diffidence--that many
psycho-analysts are unduly narrow; no doubt the wishes they emphasize
exist, but others, e.g. for honour and power, are equally operative and
equally liable to concealment. This, however, does not affect the
value of their general theories from the point of view of theoretic
psychology, and it is from this point of view that their results are
important for the analysis of mind.

     * There is a wide field of "unconscious" phenomena which
     does not depend upon psycho-analytic theories. Such
     occurrences as automatic writing lead Dr. Morton Prince to
     say: "As I view this question of the subconscious, far too
     much weight is given to the point of awareness or not
     awareness of our conscious processes. As a matter of fact,
     we find entirely identical phenomena, that is, identical in
     every respect but one-that of awareness in which sometimes
     we are aware of these conscious phenomena and sometimes
     not"(p. 87 of "Subconscious Phenomena," by various authors,
     Rebman). Dr. Morton Price conceives that there may be
     "consciousness" without "awareness." But this is a difficult
     view, and one which makes some definition of "consciousness"
     imperative. For nay part, I cannot see how to separate
     consciousness from awareness.

What, I think, is clearly established, is that a man's actions and
beliefs may be wholly dominated by a desire of which he is quite
unconscious, and which he indignantly repudiates when it is suggested
to him. Such a desire is generally, in morbid cases, of a sort which
the patient would consider wicked; if he had to admit that he had the
desire, he would loathe himself. Yet it is so strong that it must force
an outlet for itself; hence it becomes necessary to entertain whole
systems of false beliefs in order to hide the nature of what is desired.
The resulting delusions in very many cases disappear if the hysteric or
lunatic can be made to face the facts about himself. The consequence
of this is that the treatment of many forms of insanity has grown more
psychological and less physiological than it used to be. Instead of
looking for a physical defect in the brain, those who treat delusions
look for the repressed desire which has found this contorted mode
of expression. For those who do not wish to plunge into the somewhat
repulsive and often rather wild theories of psychoanalytic pioneers, it
will be worth while to read a little book by Dr. Bernard Hart on "The
Psychology of Insanity."* On this question of the mental as opposed to
the physiological study of the causes of insanity, Dr. Hart says:

     * Cambridge, 1912; 2nd edition, 1914. The following
     references are to the second edition.

"The psychological conception [of insanity] is based on the view that
mental processes can be directly studied without any reference to the
accompanying changes which are presumed to take place in the brain, and
that insanity may therefore be properly attacked from the standpoint of
psychology"(p. 9).

This illustrates a point which I am anxious to make clear from the
outset. Any attempt to classify modern views, such as I propose to
advocate, from the old standpoint of materialism and idealism, is only
misleading. In certain respects, the views which I shall be setting
forth approximate to materialism; in certain others, they approximate to
its opposite. On this question of the study of delusions, the practical
effect of the modern theories, as Dr. Hart points out, is emancipation
from the materialist method. On the other hand, as he also points
out (pp. 38-9), imbecility and dementia still have to be considered
physiologically, as caused by defects in the brain. There is no
inconsistency in this If, as we maintain, mind and matter are neither of
them the actual stuff of reality, but different convenient groupings of
an underlying material, then, clearly, the question whether, in regard
to a given phenomenon, we are to seek a physical or a mental cause, is
merely one to be decided by trial. Metaphysicians have argued endlessly
as to the interaction of mind and matter. The followers of Descartes
held that mind and matter are so different as to make any action of the
one on the other impossible. When I will to move my arm, they said,
it is not my will that operates on my arm, but God, who, by His
omnipotence, moves my arm whenever I want it moved. The modern doctrine
of psychophysical parallelism is not appreciably different from this
theory of the Cartesian school. Psycho-physical parallelism is the
theory that mental and physical events each have causes in their own
sphere, but run on side by side owing to the fact that every state of
the brain coexists with a definite state of the mind, and vice versa.
This view of the reciprocal causal independence of mind and matter has
no basis except in metaphysical theory.* For us, there is no necessity
to make any such assumption, which is very difficult to harmonize with
obvious facts. I receive a letter inviting me to dinner: the letter is
a physical fact, but my apprehension of its meaning is mental. Here we
have an effect of matter on mind. In consequence of my apprehension of
the meaning of the letter, I go to the right place at the right time;
here we have an effect of mind on matter. I shall try to persuade you,
in the course of these lectures, that matter is not so material and mind
not so mental as is generally supposed. When we are speaking of matter,
it will seem as if we were inclining to idealism; when we are speaking
of mind, it will seem as if we were inclining to materialism. Neither
is the truth. Our world is to be constructed out of what the American
realists call "neutral" entities, which have neither the hardness and
indestructibility of matter, nor the reference to objects which is
supposed to characterize mind.

     * It would seem, however, that Dr. Hart accepts this theory
     as 8 methodological precept. See his contribution to
     "Subconscious Phenomena" (quoted above), especially pp. 121-2.

There is, it is true, one objection which might be felt, not indeed to
the action of matter on mind, but to the action of mind on matter. The
laws of physics, it may be urged, are apparently adequate to explain
everything that happens to matter, even when it is matter in a man's
brain. This, however, is only a hypothesis, not an established theory.
There is no cogent empirical reason for supposing that the laws
determining the motions of living bodies are exactly the same as those
that apply to dead matter. Sometimes, of course, they are clearly the
same. When a man falls from a precipice or slips on a piece of orange
peel, his body behaves as if it were devoid of life. These are the
occasions that make Bergson laugh. But when a man's bodily movements
are what we call "voluntary," they are, at any rate prima facie, very
different in their laws from the movements of what is devoid of life.
I do not wish to say dogmatically that the difference is irreducible;
I think it highly probable that it is not. I say only that the study of
the behaviour of living bodies, in the present state of our knowledge,
is distinct from physics. The study of gases was originally quite
distinct from that of rigid bodies, and would never have advanced to its
present state if it had not been independently pursued. Nowadays both
the gas and the rigid body are manufactured out of a more primitive and
universal kind of matter. In like manner, as a question of methodology,
the laws of living bodies are to be studied, in the first place, without
any undue haste to subordinate them to the laws of physics. Boyle's law
and the rest had to be discovered before the kinetic theory of gases
became possible. But in psychology we are hardly yet at the stage
of Boyle's law. Meanwhile we need not be held up by the bogey of
the universal rigid exactness of physics. This is, as yet, a mere
hypothesis, to be tested empirically without any preconceptions. It may
be true, or it may not. So far, that is all we can say.

Returning from this digression to our main topic, namely, the criticism
of "consciousness," we observe that Freud and his followers, though they
have demonstrated beyond dispute the immense importance of "unconscious"
desires in determining our actions and beliefs, have not attempted the
task of telling us what an "unconscious" desire actually is, and have
thus invested their doctrine with an air of mystery and mythology which
forms a large part of its popular attractiveness. They speak always as
though it were more normal for a desire to be conscious, and as though
a positive cause had to be assigned for its being unconscious. Thus
"the unconscious" becomes a sort of underground prisoner, living in a
dungeon, breaking in at long intervals upon our daylight respectability
with dark groans and maledictions and strange atavistic lusts. The
ordinary reader, almost inevitably, thinks of this underground person as
another consciousness, prevented by what Freud calls the "censor" from
making his voice heard in company, except on rare and dreadful occasions
when he shouts so loud that every one hears him and there is a scandal.
Most of us like the idea that we could be desperately wicked if only we
let ourselves go. For this reason, the Freudian "unconscious" has been a
consolation to many quiet and well-behaved persons.

I do not think the truth is quite so picturesque as this. I believe an
"unconscious" desire is merely a causal law of our behaviour,* namely,
that we remain restlessly active until a certain state of affairs is
realized, when we achieve temporary equilibrium If we know beforehand
what this state of affairs is, our desire is conscious; if not,
unconscious. The unconscious desire is not something actually existing,
but merely a tendency to a certain behaviour; it has exactly the same
status as a force in dynamics. The unconscious desire is in no way
mysterious; it is the natural primitive form of desire, from which the
other has developed through our habit of observing and theorizing (often
wrongly). It is not necessary to suppose, as Freud seems to do,
that every unconscious wish was once conscious, and was then, in his
terminology, "repressed" because we disapproved of it. On the contrary,
we shall suppose that, although Freudian "repression" undoubtedly occurs
and is important, it is not the usual reason for unconsciousness of our
wishes. The usual reason is merely that wishes are all, to begin with,
unconscious, and only become known when they are actively noticed.
Usually, from laziness, people do not notice, but accept the theory
of human nature which they find current, and attribute to themselves
whatever wishes this theory would lead them to expect. We used to be
full of virtuous wishes, but since Freud our wishes have become, in
the words of the Prophet Jeremiah, "deceitful above all things and
desperately wicked." Both these views, in most of those who have held
them, are the product of theory rather than observation, for observation
requires effort, whereas repeating phrases does not.

     * Cf. Hart, "The Psychology of Insanity," p. 19.

The interpretation of unconscious wishes which I have been advocating
has been set forth briefly by Professor John B. Watson in an article
called "The Psychology of Wish Fulfilment," which appeared in "The
Scientific Monthly" in November, 1916. Two quotations will serve to show
his point of view:

"The Freudians (he says) have made more or less of a 'metaphysical
entity' out of the censor. They suppose that when wishes are repressed
they are repressed into the 'unconscious,' and that this mysterious
censor stands at the trapdoor lying between the conscious and the
unconscious. Many of us do not believe in a world of the unconscious
(a few of us even have grave doubts about the usefulness of the term
consciousness), hence we try to explain censorship along ordinary
biological lines. We believe that one group of habits can 'down' another
group of habits--or instincts. In this case our ordinary system of
habits--those which we call expressive of our 'real selves'--inhibit
or quench (keep inactive or partially inactive) those habits and
instinctive tendencies which belong largely in the past"(p. 483).

Again, after speaking of the frustration of some impulses which is
involved in acquiring the habits of a civilized adult, he continues:

"It is among these frustrated impulses that I would find the biological
basis of the unfulfilled wish. Such 'wishes' need never have been
'conscious,' and NEED NEVER HAVE BEEN SUPPRESSED INTO FREUD'S REALM
OF THE UNCONSCIOUS. It may be inferred from this that there is no
particular reason for applying the term 'wish' to such tendencies"(p.
485).

One of the merits of the general analysis of mind which we shall
be concerned with in the following lectures is that it removes the
atmosphere of mystery from the phenomena brought to light by the
psycho-analysts. Mystery is delightful, but unscientific, since it
depends upon ignorance. Man has developed out of the animals, and
there is no serious gap between him and the amoeba. Something closely
analogous to knowledge and desire, as regards its effects on behaviour,
exists among animals, even where what we call "consciousness" is hard
to believe in; something equally analogous exists in ourselves in cases
where no trace of "consciousness" can be found. It is therefore
natural to suppose that, what ever may be the correct definition of
"consciousness," "consciousness" is not the essence of life or mind. In
the following lectures, accordingly, this term will disappear until we
have dealt with words, when it will re-emerge as mainly a trivial and
unimportant outcome of linguistic habits.




LECTURE II. INSTINCT AND HABIT

In attempting to understand the elements out of which mental phenomena
are compounded, it is of the greatest importance to remember that from
the protozoa to man there is nowhere a very wide gap either in structure
or in behaviour. From this fact it is a highly probable inference that
there is also nowhere a very wide mental gap. It is, of course, POSSIBLE
that there may be, at certain stages in evolution, elements which are
entirely new from the standpoint of analysis, though in their nascent
form they have little influence on behaviour and no very marked
correlatives in structure. But the hypothesis of continuity in mental
development is clearly preferable if no psychological facts make it
impossible. We shall find, if I am not mistaken, that there are no facts
which refute the hypothesis of mental continuity, and that, on the other
hand, this hypothesis affords a useful test of suggested theories as to
the nature of mind.

The hypothesis of mental continuity throughout organic evolution may be
used in two different ways. On the one hand, it may be held that we
have more knowledge of our own minds than those of animals, and that we
should use this knowledge to infer the existence of something similar
to our own mental processes in animals and even in plants. On the other
hand, it may be held that animals and plants present simpler phenomena,
more easily analysed than those of human minds; on this ground it may be
urged that explanations which are adequate in the case of animals ought
not to be lightly rejected in the case of man. The practical effects of
these two views are diametrically opposite: the first leads us to level
up animal intelligence with what we believe ourselves to know about our
own intelligence, while the second leads us to attempt a levelling down
of our own intelligence to something not too remote from what we can
observe in animals. It is therefore important to consider the relative
justification of the two ways of applying the principle of continuity.

It is clear that the question turns upon another, namely, which can we
know best, the psychology of animals or that of human beings? If we
can know most about animals, we shall use this knowledge as a basis for
inference about human beings; if we can know most about human beings, we
shall adopt the opposite procedure. And the question whether we can know
most about the psychology of human beings or about that of animals turns
upon yet another, namely: Is introspection or external observation
the surer method in psychology? This is a question which I propose to
discuss at length in Lecture VI; I shall therefore content myself now
with a statement of the conclusions to be arrived at.

We know a great many things concerning ourselves which we cannot know
nearly so directly concerning animals or even other people. We know when
we have a toothache, what we are thinking of, what dreams we have when
we are asleep, and a host of other occurrences which we only know about
others when they tell us of them, or otherwise make them inferable
by their behaviour. Thus, so far as knowledge of detached facts is
concerned, the advantage is on the side of self-knowledge as against
external observation.

But when we come to the analysis and scientific understanding of the
facts, the advantages on the side of self-knowledge become far less
clear. We know, for example, that we have desires and beliefs, but we
do not know what constitutes a desire or a belief. The phenomena are so
familiar that it is difficult to realize how little we really know about
them. We see in animals, and to a lesser extent in plants, behaviour
more or less similar to that which, in us, is prompted by desires and
beliefs, and we find that, as we descend in the scale of evolution,
behaviour becomes simpler, more easily reducible to rule, more
scientifically analysable and predictable. And just because we are not
misled by familiarity we find it easier to be cautious in interpreting
behaviour when we are dealing with phenomena remote from those of our
own minds: Moreover, introspection, as psychoanalysis has demonstrated,
is extraordinarily fallible even in cases where we feel a high degree of
certainty. The net result seems to be that, though self-knowledge has
a definite and important contribution to make to psychology, it is
exceedingly misleading unless it is constantly checked and controlled
by the test of external observation, and by the theories which such
observation suggests when applied to animal behaviour. On the whole,
therefore, there is probably more to be learnt about human psychology
from animals than about animal psychology from human beings; but this
conclusion is one of degree, and must not be pressed beyond a point.

It is only bodily phenomena that can be directly observed in animals,
or even, strictly speaking, in other human beings. We can observe such
things as their movements, their physiological processes, and the sounds
they emit. Such things as desires and beliefs, which seem obvious
to introspection, are not visible directly to external observation.
Accordingly, if we begin our study of psychology by external
observation, we must not begin by assuming such things as desires and
beliefs, but only such things as external observation can reveal, which
will be characteristics of the movements and physiological processes of
animals. Some animals, for example, always run away from light and hide
themselves in dark places. If you pick up a mossy stone which is lightly
embedded in the earth, you will see a number of small animals scuttling
away from the unwonted daylight and seeking again the darkness of which
you have deprived them. Such animals are sensitive to light, in the
sense that their movements are affected by it; but it would be rash to
infer that they have sensations in any way analogous to our sensations
of sight. Such inferences, which go beyond the observable facts, are to
be avoided with the utmost care.

It is customary to divide human movements into three classes, voluntary,
reflex and mechanical. We may illustrate the distinction by a quotation
from William James ("Psychology," i, 12):

"If I hear the conductor calling 'all aboard' as I enter the depot, my
heart first stops, then palpitates, and my legs respond to the air-waves
falling on my tympanum by quickening their movements. If I stumble as I
run, the sensation of falling provokes a movement of the hands towards
the direction of the fall, the effect of which is to shield the body
from too sudden a shock. If a cinder enter my eye, its lids close
forcibly and a copious flow of tears tends to wash it out.

"These three responses to a sensational stimulus differ, however, in
many respects. The closure of the eye and the lachrymation are quite
involuntary, and so is the disturbance of the heart. Such involuntary
responses we know as 'reflex' acts. The motion of the arms to break the
shock of falling may also be called reflex, since it occurs too quickly
to be deliberately intended. Whether it be instinctive or whether it
result from the pedestrian education of childhood may be doubtful; it
is, at any rate, less automatic than the previous acts, for a man might
by conscious effort learn to perform it more skilfully, or even to
suppress it altogether. Actions of this kind, with which instinct and
volition enter upon equal terms, have been called 'semi-reflex.' The
act of running towards the train, on the other hand, has no instinctive
element about it. It is purely the result of education, and is preceded
by a consciousness of the purpose to be attained and a distinct mandate
of the will. It is a 'voluntary act.' Thus the animal's reflex and
voluntary performances shade into each other gradually, being connected
by acts which may often occur automatically, but may also be modified by
conscious intelligence.

"An outside observer, unable to perceive the accompanying consciousness,
might be wholly at a loss to discriminate between the automatic acts and
those which volition escorted. But if the criterion of mind's existence
be the choice of the proper means for the attainment of a supposed
end, all the acts alike seem to be inspired by intelligence, for
APPROPRIATENESS characterizes them all alike."

There is one movement, among those that James mentions at first, which
is not subsequently classified, namely, the stumbling. This is the
kind of movement which may be called "mechanical"; it is evidently of a
different kind from either reflex or voluntary movements, and more akin
to the movements of dead matter. We may define a movement of an animal's
body as "mechanical" when it proceeds as if only dead matter were
involved. For example, if you fall over a cliff, you move under the
influence of gravitation, and your centre of gravity describes just as
correct a parabola as if you were already dead. Mechanical movements
have not the characteristic of appropriateness, unless by accident, as
when a drunken man falls into a waterbutt and is sobered. But reflex
and voluntary movements are not ALWAYS appropriate, unless in some very
recondite sense. A moth flying into a lamp is not acting sensibly; no
more is a man who is in such a hurry to get his ticket that he cannot
remember the name of his destination. Appropriateness is a complicated
and merely approximate idea, and for the present we shall do well to
dismiss it from our thoughts.

As James states, there is no difference, from the point of view of
the outside observer, between voluntary and reflex movements. The
physiologist can discover that both depend upon the nervous system,
and he may find that the movements which we call voluntary depend upon
higher centres in the brain than those that are reflex. But he
cannot discover anything as to the presence or absence of "will" or
"consciousness," for these things can only be seen from within, if
at all. For the present, we wish to place ourselves resolutely in the
position of outside observers; we will therefore ignore the distinction
between voluntary and reflex movements. We will call the two together
"vital" movements. We may then distinguish "vital" from mechanical
movements by the fact that vital movements depend for their causation
upon the special properties of the nervous system, while mechanical
movements depend only upon the properties which animal bodies share with
matter in general.

There is need for some care if the distinction between mechanical and
vital movements is to be made precise. It is quite likely that, if we
knew more about animal bodies, we could deduce all their movements from
the laws of chemistry and physics. It is already fairly easy to see how
chemistry reduces to physics, i.e. how the differences between different
chemical elements can be accounted for by differences of physical
structure, the constituents of the structure being electrons which are
exactly alike in all kinds of matter. We only know in part how to reduce
physiology to chemistry, but we know enough to make it likely that the
reduction is possible. If we suppose it effected, what would become of
the difference between vital and mechanical movements?

Some analogies will make the difference clear. A shock to a mass of
dynamite produces quite different effects from an equal shock to a mass
of steel: in the one case there is a vast explosion, while in the other
case there is hardly any noticeable disturbance. Similarly, you may
sometimes find on a mountain-side a large rock poised so delicately that
a touch will set it crashing down into the valley, while the rocks all
round are so firm that only a considerable force can dislodge them What
is analogous in these two cases is the existence of a great store of
energy in unstable equilibrium ready to burst into violent motion by
the addition of a very slight disturbance. Similarly, it requires only
a very slight expenditure of energy to send a post-card with the words
"All is discovered; fly!" but the effect in generating kinetic energy
is said to be amazing. A human body, like a mass of dynamite, contains
a store of energy in unstable equilibrium, ready to be directed in this
direction or that by a disturbance which is physically very small,
such as a spoken word. In all such cases the reduction of behaviour to
physical laws can only be effected by entering into great minuteness; so
long as we confine ourselves to the observation of comparatively
large masses, the way in which the equilibrium will be upset cannot be
determined. Physicists distinguish between macroscopic and microscopic
equations: the former determine the visible movements of bodies of
ordinary size, the latter the minute occurrences in the smallest parts.
It is only the microscopic equations that are supposed to be the same
for all sorts of matter. The macroscopic equations result from a process
of averaging out, and may be different in different cases. So, in our
instance, the laws of macroscopic phenomena are different for mechanical
and vital movements, though the laws of microscopic phenomena may be the
same.

We may say, speaking somewhat roughly, that a stimulus applied to the
nervous system, like a spark to dynamite, is able to take advantage of
the stored energy in unstable equilibrium, and thus to produce movements
out of proportion to the proximate cause. Movements produced in this way
are vital movements, while mechanical movements are those in which the
stored energy of a living body is not involved. Similarly dynamite may
be exploded, thereby displaying its characteristic properties, or may
(with due precautions) be carted about like any other mineral. The
explosion is analogous to vital movements, the carting about to
mechanical movements.

Mechanical movements are of no interest to the psychologist, and it has
only been necessary to define them in order to be able to exclude them.
When a psychologist studies behaviour, it is only vital movements
that concern him. We shall, therefore, proceed to ignore mechanical
movements, and study only the properties of the remainder.

The next point is to distinguish between movements that are instinctive
and movements that are acquired by experience. This distinction also is
to some extent one of degree. Professor Lloyd Morgan gives the following
definition of "instinctive behaviour":

"That which is, on its first occurrence, independent of prior
experience; which tends to the well-being of the individual and the
preservation of the race; which is similarly performed by all members
of the same more or less restricted group of animals; and which may be
subject to subsequent modification under the guidance of experience." *

     * "Instinct and Experience" (Methuen, 1912) p. 5.

This definition is framed for the purposes of biology, and is in
some respects unsuited to the needs of psychology. Though perhaps
unavoidable, allusion to "the same more or less restricted group
of animals" makes it impossible to judge what is instinctive in the
behaviour of an isolated individual. Moreover, "the well-being of
the individual and the preservation of the race" is only a usual
characteristic, not a universal one, of the sort of movements that, from
our point of view, are to be called instinctive; instances of harmful
instincts will be given shortly. The essential point of the definition,
from our point of view, is that an instinctive movement is in dependent
of prior experience.

We may say that an "instinctive" movement is a vital movement performed
by an animal the first time that it finds itself in a novel situation;
or, more correctly, one which it would perform if the situation were
novel.* The instincts of an animal are different at different periods of
its growth, and this fact may cause changes of behaviour which are
not due to learning. The maturing and seasonal fluctuation of the
sex-instinct affords a good illustration. When the sex-instinct first
matures, the behaviour of an animal in the presence of a mate is
different from its previous behaviour in similar circumstances, but is
not learnt, since it is just the same if the animal has never previously
been in the presence of a mate.

     * Though this can only be decided by comparison with other
     members of the species, and thus exposes us to the need of
     comparison which we thought an objection to Professor Lloyd
     Morgan's definition.

On the other hand, a movement is "learnt," or embodies a "habit," if it
is due to previous experience of similar situations, and is not what it
would be if the animal had had no such experience.

There are various complications which blur the sharpness of this
distinction in practice. To begin with, many instincts mature gradually,
and while they are immature an animal may act in a fumbling manner which
is very difficult to distinguish from learning. James ("Psychology," ii,
407) maintains that children walk by instinct, and that the awkwardness
of their first attempts is only due to the fact that the instinct has
not yet ripened. He hopes that "some scientific widower, left alone with
his offspring at the critical moment, may ere long test this suggestion
on the living subject." However this may be, he quotes evidence to show
that "birds do not LEARN to fly," but fly by instinct when they reach
the appropriate age (ib., p. 406). In the second place, instinct often
gives only a rough outline of the sort of thing to do, in which case
learning is necessary in order to acquire certainty and precision in
action. In the third place, even in the clearest cases of acquired
habit, such as speaking, some instinct is required to set in motion
the process of learning. In the case of speaking, the chief instinct
involved is commonly supposed to be that of imitation, but this may be
questioned. (See Thorndike's "Animal Intelligence," p. 253 ff.)

In spite of these qualifications, the broad distinction between instinct
and habit is undeniable. To take extreme cases, every animal at birth
can take food by instinct, before it has had opportunity to learn; on
the other hand, no one can ride a bicycle by instinct, though, after
learning, the necessary movements become just as automatic as if they
were instinctive.

The process of learning, which consists in the acquisition of habits,
has been much studied in various animals.* For example: you put a hungry
animal, say a cat, in a cage which has a door that can be opened by
lifting a latch; outside the cage you put food. The cat at first dashes
all round the cage, making frantic efforts to force a way out. At last,
by accident, the latch is lifted and the cat pounces on the food. Next
day you repeat the experiment, and you find that the cat gets out much
more quickly than the first time, although it still makes some random
movements. The third day it gets out still more quickly, and before long
it goes straight to the latch and lifts it at once. Or you make a model
of the Hampton Court maze, and put a rat in the middle, assaulted by the
smell of food on the outside. The rat starts running down the passages,
and is constantly stopped by blind alleys, but at last, by persistent
attempts, it gets out. You repeat this experiment day after day; you
measure the time taken by the rat in reaching the food; you find that
the time rapidly diminishes, and that after a while the rat ceases to
make any wrong turnings. It is by essentially similar processes that we
learn speaking, writing, mathematics, or the government of an empire.

     * The scientific study of this subject may almost be said to
     begin with Thorndike's "Animal Intelligence" (Macmillan,
     1911).

Professor Watson ("Behavior," pp. 262-3) has an ingenious theory as to
the way in which habit arises out of random movements. I think there is
a reason why his theory cannot be regarded as alone sufficient, but it
seems not unlikely that it is partly correct. Suppose, for the sake of
simplicity, that there are just ten random movements which may be made
by the animal--say, ten paths down which it may go--and that only one of
these leads to food, or whatever else represents success in the case in
question. Then the successful movement always occurs during the animal's
attempts, whereas each of the others, on the average, occurs in only
half the attempts. Thus the tendency to repeat a previous performance
(which is easily explicable without the intervention of "consciousness")
leads to a greater emphasis on the successful movement than on any
other, and in time causes it alone to be performed. The objection to
this view, if taken as the sole explanation, is that on improvement
ought to set in till after the SECOND trial, whereas experiment shows
that already at the second attempt the animal does better than the
first time. Something further is, therefore, required to account for the
genesis of habit from random movements; but I see no reason to suppose
that what is further required involves "consciousness."

Mr. Thorndike (op. cit., p. 244) formulates two "provisional laws of
acquired behaviour or learning," as follows:

"The Law of Effect is that: Of several responses made to the same
situation, those which are accompanied or closely followed by
satisfaction to the animal will, other things being equal, be more
firmly connected with the situation, so that, when it recurs, they will
be more likely to recur; those which are accompanied or closely followed
by discomfort to the animal will, other things being equal, have their
connections with that situation weakened, so that, when it recurs,
they will be less likely to occur. The greater the satisfaction or
discomfort, the greater the strengthening or weakening of the bond.

"The Law of Exercise is that: Any response to a situation will, other
things being equal, be more strongly connected with the situation
in proportion to the number of times it has been connected with that
situation and to the average vigour and duration of the connections."

With the explanation to be presently given of the meaning of
"satisfaction" and "discomfort," there seems every reason to accept
these two laws.

What is true of animals, as regards instinct and habit, is equally
true of men. But the higher we rise in the evolutionary scale, broadly
speaking, the greater becomes the power of learning, and the fewer are
the occasions when pure instinct is exhibited unmodified in adult life.
This applies with great force to man, so much so that some have thought
instinct less important in the life of man than in that of animals.
This, however, would be a mistake. Learning is only possible when
instinct supplies the driving-force. The animals in cages, which
gradually learn to get out, perform random movements at first, which
are purely instinctive. But for these random movements, they would never
acquire the experience which afterwards enables them to produce the
right movement. (This is partly questioned by Hobhouse*--wrongly, I
think.) Similarly, children learning to talk make all sorts of sounds,
until one day the right sound comes by accident. It is clear that the
original making of random sounds, without which speech would never be
learnt, is instinctive. I think we may say the same of all the habits
and aptitudes that we acquire in all of them there has been present
throughout some instinctive activity, prompting at first rather
inefficient movements, but supplying the driving force while more and
more effective methods are being acquired. A cat which is hungry smells
fish, and goes to the larder. This is a thoroughly efficient method when
there is fish in the larder, and it is often successfully practised by
children. But in later life it is found that merely going to the larder
does not cause fish to be there; after a series of random movements it
is found that this result is to be caused by going to the City in the
morning and coming back in the evening. No one would have guessed a
priori that this movement of a middle-aged man's body would cause fish
to come out of the sea into his larder, but experience shows that it
does, and the middle-aged man therefore continues to go to the City,
just as the cat in the cage continues to lift the latch when it has once
found it. Of course, in actual fact, human learning is rendered easier,
though psychologically more complex, through language; but at bottom
language does not alter the essential character of learning, or of the
part played by instinct in promoting learning. Language, however, is a
subject upon which I do not wish to speak until a later lecture.

     * "Mind in Evolution" (Macmillan, 1915), pp. 236-237.

The popular conception of instinct errs by imagining it to be infallible
and preternaturally wise, as well as incapable of modification. This is
a complete delusion. Instinct, as a rule, is very rough and ready, able
to achieve its result under ordinary circumstances, but easily misled by
anything unusual. Chicks follow their mother by instinct, but when they
are quite young they will follow with equal readiness any moving
object remotely resembling their mother, or even a human being (James,
"Psychology," ii, 396). Bergson, quoting Fabre, has made play with the
supposed extraordinary accuracy of the solitary wasp Ammophila, which
lays its eggs in a caterpillar. On this subject I will quote from
Drever's "Instinct in Man," p. 92:

"According to Fabre's observations, which Bergson accepts, the Ammophila
stings its prey EXACTLY and UNERRINGLY in EACH of the nervous centres.
The result is that the caterpillar is paralyzed, but not immediately
killed, the advantage of this being that the larva cannot be injured by
any movement of the caterpillar, upon which the egg is deposited, and is
provided with fresh meat when the time comes.

"Now Dr. and Mrs. Peckham have shown that the sting of the wasp is NOT
UNERRING, as Fabre alleges, that the number of stings is NOT CONSTANT,
that sometimes the caterpillar is NOT PARALYZED, and sometimes it is
KILLED OUTRIGHT, and that THE DIFFERENT CIRCUMSTANCES DO NOT APPARENTLY
MAKE ANY DIFFERENCE TO THE LARVA, which is not injured by slight
movements of the caterpillar, nor by consuming food decomposed rather
than fresh caterpillar."

This illustrates how love of the marvellous may mislead even so careful
an observer as Fabre and so eminent a philosopher as Bergson.

In the same chapter of Dr. Drever's book there are some interesting
examples of the mistakes made by instinct. I will quote one as a sample:

"The larva of the Lomechusa beetle eats the young of the ants, in whose
nest it is reared. Nevertheless, the ants tend the Lomechusa larvae
with the same care they bestow on their own young. Not only so, but they
apparently discover that the methods of feeding, which suit their own
larvae, would prove fatal to the guests, and accordingly they change
their whole system of nursing" (loc. cit., p. 106).

Semon ("Die Mneme," pp. 207-9) gives a good illustration of an instinct
growing wiser through experience. He relates how hunters attract stags
by imitating the sounds of other members of their species, male or
female, but find that the older a stag becomes the more difficult it
is to deceive him, and the more accurate the imitation has to be. The
literature of instinct is vast, and illustrations might be multiplied
indefinitely. The main points as regards instinct, which need to be
emphasized as against the popular conceptions of it, are:

(1) That instinct requires no prevision of the biological end which it
serves;

(2) That instinct is only adapted to achieve this end in the usual
circumstances of the animal in question, and has no more precision than
is necessary for success AS A RULE;

(3) That processes initiated by instinct often come to be performed
better after experience;

(4) That instinct supplies the impulses to experimental movements which
are required for the process of learning;

(5) That instincts in their nascent stages are easily modifiable, and
capable of being attached to various sorts of objects.

All the above characteristics of instinct can be established by purely
external observation, except the fact that instinct does not require
prevision. This, though not strictly capable of being PROVED by
observation, is irresistibly suggested by the most obvious phenomena.
Who can believe, for example, that a new-born baby is aware of the
necessity of food for preserving life? Or that insects, in laying eggs,
are concerned for the preservation of their species? The essence of
instinct, one might say, is that it provides a mechanism for
acting without foresight in a manner which is usually advantageous
biologically. It is partly for this reason that it is so important to
understand the fundamental position of instinct in prompting both animal
and human behaviour.




LECTURE III. DESIRE AND FEELING

Desire is a subject upon which, if I am not mistaken, true views can
only be arrived at by an almost complete reversal of the ordinary
unreflecting opinion. It is natural to regard desire as in its essence
an attitude towards something which is imagined, not actual; this
something is called the END or OBJECT of the desire, and is said to be
the PURPOSE of any action resulting from the desire. We think of the
content of the desire as being just like the content of a belief, while
the attitude taken up towards the content is different. According to
this theory, when we say: "I hope it will rain," or "I expect it will
rain," we express, in the first case, a desire, and in the second, a
belief, with an identical content, namely, the image of rain. It would
be easy to say that, just as belief is one kind of feeling in relation
to this content, so desire is another kind. According to this view, what
comes first in desire is something imagined, with a specific feeling
related to it, namely, that specific feeling which we call "desiring"
it. The discomfort associated with unsatisfied desire, and the actions
which aim at satisfying desire, are, in this view, both of them effects
of the desire. I think it is fair to say that this is a view against
which common sense would not rebel; nevertheless, I believe it to be
radically mistaken. It cannot be refuted logically, but various facts
can be adduced which make it gradually less simple and plausible, until
at last it turns out to be easier to abandon it wholly and look at the
matter in a totally different way.

The first set of facts to be adduced against the common sense view of
desire are those studied by psycho-analysis. In all human beings, but
most markedly in those suffering from hysteria and certain forms of
insanity, we find what are called "unconscious" desires, which are
commonly regarded as showing self-deception. Most psycho-analysts
pay little attention to the analysis of desire, being interested in
discovering by observation what it is that people desire, rather than in
discovering what actually constitutes desire. I think the strangeness of
what they report would be greatly diminished if it were expressed in the
language of a behaviourist theory of desire, rather than in the language
of every-day beliefs. The general description of the sort of phenomena
that bear on our present question is as follows: A person states that
his desires are so-and-so, and that it is these desires that inspire his
actions; but the outside observer perceives that his actions are such
as to realize quite different ends from those which he avows, and
that these different ends are such as he might be expected to desire.
Generally they are less virtuous than his professed desires, and are
therefore less agreeable to profess than these are. It is accordingly
supposed that they really exist as desires for ends, but in a
subconscious part of the mind, which the patient refuses to admit into
consciousness for fear of having to think ill of himself. There are
no doubt many cases to which such a supposition is applicable without
obvious artificiality. But the deeper the Freudians delve into the
underground regions of instinct, the further they travel from anything
resembling conscious desire, and the less possible it becomes to believe
that only positive self-deception conceals from us that we really wish
for things which are abhorrent to our explicit life.

In the cases in question we have a conflict between the outside observer
and the patient's consciousness. The whole tendency of psycho-analysis
is to trust the outside observer rather than the testimony of
introspection. I believe this tendency to be entirely right, but to
demand a re-statement of what constitutes desire, exhibiting it as a
causal law of our actions, not as something actually existing in our
minds.

But let us first get a clearer statement of the essential characteristic
of the phenomena.

A person, we find, states that he desires a certain end A, and that he
is acting with a view to achieving it. We observe, however, that his
actions are such as are likely to achieve a quite different end B, and
that B is the sort of end that often seems to be aimed at by animals and
savages, though civilized people are supposed to have discarded it. We
sometimes find also a whole set of false beliefs, of such a kind as to
persuade the patient that his actions are really a means to A, when in
fact they are a means to B. For example, we have an impulse to inflict
pain upon those whom we hate; we therefore believe that they are wicked,
and that punishment will reform them. This belief enables us to act upon
the impulse to inflict pain, while believing that we are acting upon
the desire to lead sinners to repentance. It is for this reason that the
criminal law has been in all ages more severe than it would have been if
the impulse to ameliorate the criminal had been what really inspired
it. It seems simple to explain such a state of affairs as due to
"self-deception," but this explanation is often mythical. Most people,
in thinking about punishment, have had no more need to hide their
vindictive impulses from themselves than they have had to hide
the exponential theorem. Our impulses are not patent to a casual
observation, but are only to be discovered by a scientific study of our
actions, in the course of which we must regard ourselves as objectively
as we should the motions of the planets or the chemical reactions of a
new element.

The study of animals reinforces this conclusion, and is in many ways
the best preparation for the analysis of desire. In animals we are
not troubled by the disturbing influence of ethical considerations. In
dealing with human beings, we are perpetually distracted by being told
that such-and-such a view is gloomy or cynical or pessimistic: ages of
human conceit have built up such a vast myth as to our wisdom and virtue
that any intrusion of the mere scientific desire to know the facts is
instantly resented by those who cling to comfortable illusions. But no
one cares whether animals are virtuous or not, and no one is under the
delusion that they are rational. Moreover, we do not expect them to be
so "conscious," and are prepared to admit that their instincts prompt
useful actions without any prevision of the ends which they achieve. For
all these reasons, there is much in the analysis of mind which is more
easily discovered by the study of animals than by the observation of
human beings.

We all think that, by watching the behaviour of animals, we can discover
more or less what they desire. If this is the case--and I fully agree
that it is--desire must be capable of being exhibited in actions, for it
is only the actions of animals that we can observe. They MAY have minds
in which all sorts of things take place, but we can know nothing about
their minds except by means of inferences from their actions; and the
more such inferences are examined, the more dubious they appear. It
would seem, therefore, that actions alone must be the test of the
desires of animals. From this it is an easy step to the conclusion that
an animal's desire is nothing but a characteristic of a certain series
of actions, namely, those which would be commonly regarded as inspired
by the desire in question. And when it has been shown that this view
affords a satisfactory account of animal desires, it is not difficult
to see that the same explanation is applicable to the desires of human
beings.

We judge easily from the behaviour of an animal of a familiar
kind whether it is hungry or thirsty, or pleased or displeased, or
inquisitive or terrified. The verification of our judgment, so far
as verification is possible, must be derived from the immediately
succeeding actions of the animal. Most people would say that they infer
first something about the animal's state of mind--whether it is hungry
or thirsty and so on--and thence derive their expectations as to its
subsequent conduct. But this detour through the animal's supposed mind
is wholly unnecessary. We can say simply: The animal's behaviour during
the last minute has had those characteristics which distinguish what
is called "hunger," and it is likely that its actions during the next
minute will be similar in this respect, unless it finds food, or is
interrupted by a stronger impulse, such as fear. An animal which is
hungry is restless, it goes to the places where food is often to be
found, it sniffs with its nose or peers with its eyes or otherwise
increases the sensitiveness of its sense-organs; as soon as it is near
enough to food for its sense-organs to be affected, it goes to it with
all speed and proceeds to eat; after which, if the quantity of food has
been sufficient, its whole demeanour changes it may very likely lie
down and go to sleep. These things and others like them are observable
phenomena distinguishing a hungry animal from one which is not hungry.
The characteristic mark by which we recognize a series of actions
which display hunger is not the animal's mental state, which we cannot
observe, but something in its bodily behaviour; it is this observable
trait in the bodily behaviour that I am proposing to call "hunger,"
not some possibly mythical and certainly unknowable ingredient of the
animal's mind.

Generalizing what occurs in the case of hunger, we may say that what
we call a desire in an animal is always displayed in a cycle of actions
having certain fairly well marked characteristics. There is first a
state of activity, consisting, with qualifications to be mentioned
presently, of movements likely to have a certain result; these
movements, unless interrupted, continue until the result is achieved,
after which there is usually a period of comparative quiescence. A cycle
of actions of this sort has marks by which it is broadly distinguished
from the motions of dead matter. The most notable of these marks
are--(1) the appropriateness of the actions for the realization of a
certain result; (2) the continuance of action until that result has been
achieved. Neither of these can be pressed beyond a point. Either may
be (a) to some extent present in dead matter, and (b) to a considerable
extent absent in animals, while vegetable are intermediate, and display
only a much fainter form of the behaviour which leads us to attribute
desire to animals. (a) One might say rivers "desire" the sea water,
roughly speaking, remains in restless motion until it reaches either
the sea or a place from which it cannot issue without going uphill, and
therefore we might say that this is what it wishes while it is flowing.
We do not say so, because we can account for the behaviour of water by
the laws of physics; and if we knew more about animals, we might equally
cease to attribute desires to them, since we might find physical and
chemical reactions sufficient to account for their behaviour. (b) Many
of the movements of animals do not exhibit the characteristics of the
cycles which seem to embody desire. There are first of all the movements
which are "mechanical," such as slipping and falling, where ordinary
physical forces operate upon the animal's body almost as if it were
dead matter. An animal which falls over a cliff may make a number of
desperate struggles while it is in the air, but its centre of gravity
will move exactly as it would if the animal were dead. In this case, if
the animal is killed at the end of the fall, we have, at first sight,
just the characteristics of a cycle of actions embodying desire, namely,
restless movement until the ground is reached, and then quiescence.
Nevertheless, we feel no temptation to say that the animal desired what
occurred, partly because of the obviously mechanical nature of the whole
occurrence, partly because, when an animal survives a fall, it tends not
to repeat the experience.

There may be other reasons also, but of them I do not wish to speak yet.
Besides mechanical movements, there are interrupted movements, as when
a bird, on its way to eat your best peas, is frightened away by the boy
whom you are employing for that purpose. If interruptions are frequent
and completion of cycles rare, the characteristics by which cycles
are observed may become so blurred as to be almost unrecognizable. The
result of these various considerations is that the differences
between animals and dead matter, when we confine ourselves to external
unscientific observation of integral behaviour, are a matter of degree
and not very precise. It is for this reason that it has always been
possible for fanciful people to maintain that even stocks and stones
have some vague kind of soul. The evidence that animals have souls is
so very shaky that, if it is assumed to be conclusive, one might just as
well go a step further and extend the argument by analogy to all matter.
Nevertheless, in spite of vagueness and doubtful cases, the existence
of cycles in the behaviour of animals is a broad characteristic by which
they are prima facie distinguished from ordinary matter; and I think it
is this characteristic which leads us to attribute desires to animals,
since it makes their behaviour resemble what we do when (as we say) we
are acting from desire.

I shall adopt the following definitions for describing the behaviour of
animals:

A "behaviour-cycle" is a series of voluntary or reflex movements of an
animal, tending to cause a certain result, and continuing until that
result is caused, unless they are interrupted by death, accident,
or some new behaviour-cycle. (Here "accident" may be defined as the
intervention of purely physical laws causing mechanical movements.)

The "purpose" of a behaviour-cycle is the result which brings it to an
end, normally by a condition of temporary quiescence-provided there is
no interruption.

An animal is said to "desire" the purpose of a behaviour cycle while the
behaviour-cycle is in progress.

I believe these definitions to be adequate also to human purposes and
desires, but for the present I am only occupied with animals and with
what can be learnt by external observation. I am very anxious that no
ideas should be attached to the words "purpose" and "desire" beyond
those involved in the above definitions.

We have not so far considered what is the nature of the initial stimulus
to a behaviour-cycle. Yet it is here that the usual view of desire seems
on the strongest ground. The hungry animal goes on making movements
until it gets food; it seems natural, therefore, to suppose that the
idea of food is present throughout the process, and that the thought of
the end to be achieved sets the whole process in motion. Such a view,
however, is obviously untenable in many cases, especially where instinct
is concerned. Take, for example, reproduction and the rearing of the
young. Birds mate, build a nest, lay eggs in it, sit on the eggs, feed
the young birds, and care for them until they are fully grown. It
is totally impossible to suppose that this series of actions, which
constitutes one behaviour-cycle, is inspired by any prevision of the
end, at any rate the first time it is performed.* We must suppose that
the stimulus to the performance of each act is an impulsion from behind,
not an attraction from the future. The bird does what it does, at each
stage, because it has an impulse to that particular action, not because
it perceives that the whole cycle of actions will contribute to the
preservation of the species. The same considerations apply to other
instincts. A hungry animal feels restless, and is led by instinctive
impulses to perform the movements which give it nourishment; but the act
of seeking food is not sufficient evidence from which to conclude that
the animal has the thought of food in its "mind."

     * For evidence as to birds' nests, cf. Semon, "Die Mneme,"
     pp. 209, 210.

Coming now to human beings, and to what we know about our own actions,
it seems clear that what, with us, sets a behaviour-cycle in motion is
some sensation of the sort which we call disagreeable. Take the case
of hunger: we have first an uncomfortable feeling inside, producing a
disinclination to sit still, a sensitiveness to savoury smells, and an
attraction towards any food that there may be in our neighbourhood. At
any moment during this process we may become aware that we are hungry,
in the sense of saying to ourselves, "I am hungry"; but we may have been
acting with reference to food for some time before this moment. While we
are talking or reading, we may eat in complete unconsciousness; but we
perform the actions of eating just as we should if we were conscious,
and they cease when our hunger is appeased. What we call "consciousness"
seems to be a mere spectator of the process; even when it issues orders,
they are usually, like those of a wise parent, just such as would have
been obeyed even if they had not been given. This view may seem at first
exaggerated, but the more our so-called volitions and their causes are
examined, the more it is forced upon us. The part played by words in all
this is complicated, and a potent source of confusions; I shall return
to it later. For the present, I am still concerned with primitive
desire, as it exists in man, but in the form in which man shows his
affinity to his animal ancestors.

Conscious desire is made up partly of what is essential to desire,
partly of beliefs as to what we want. It is important to be clear as to
the part which does not consist of beliefs.

The primitive non-cognitive element in desire seems to be a push, not
a pull, an impulsion away from the actual, rather than an attraction
towards the ideal. Certain sensations and other mental occurrences have
a property which we call discomfort; these cause such bodily movements
as are likely to lead to their cessation. When the discomfort ceases,
or even when it appreciably diminishes, we have sensations possessing a
property which we call PLEASURE. Pleasurable sensations either stimulate
no action at all, or at most stimulate such action as is likely to
prolong them. I shall return shortly to the consideration of what
discomfort and pleasure are in themselves; for the present, it is
their connection with action and desire that concerns us. Abandoning
momentarily the standpoint of behaviourism, we may presume that hungry
animals experience sensations involving discomfort, and stimulating such
movements as seem likely to bring them to the food which is outside the
cages. When they have reached the food and eaten it, their discomfort
ceases and their sensations become pleasurable. It SEEMS, mistakenly, as
if the animals had had this situation in mind throughout, when in fact
they have been continually pushed by discomfort. And when an animal
is reflective, like some men, it comes to think that it had the final
situation in mind throughout; sometimes it comes to know what situation
will bring satisfaction, so that in fact the discomfort does bring the
thought of what will allay it. Nevertheless the sensation involving
discomfort remains the prime mover.

This brings us to the question of the nature of discomfort and pleasure.
Since Kant it has been customary to recognize three great divisions of
mental phenomena, which are typified by knowledge, desire and feeling,
where "feeling" is used to mean pleasure and discomfort. Of course,
"knowledge" is too definite a word: the states of mind concerned are
grouped together as "cognitive," and are to embrace not only beliefs,
but perceptions, doubts, and the understanding of concepts. "Desire,"
also, is narrower than what is intended: for example, WILL is to be
included in this category, and in fact every thing that involves any
kind of striving, or "conation" as it is technically called. I do not
myself believe that there is any value in this threefold division of the
contents of mind. I believe that sensations (including images) supply
all the "stuff" of the mind, and that everything else can be analysed
into groups of sensations related in various ways, or characteristics of
sensations or of groups of sensations. As regards belief, I shall give
grounds for this view in later lectures. As regards desires, I have
given some grounds in this lecture. For the present, it is pleasure and
discomfort that concern us. There are broadly three theories that might
be held in regard to them. We may regard them as separate existing
items in those who experience them, or we may regard them as intrinsic
qualities of sensations and other mental occurrences, or we may regard
them as mere names for the causal characteristics of the occurrences
which are uncomfortable or pleasant. The first of these theories,
namely, that which regards discomfort and pleasure as actual contents in
those who experience them, has, I think, nothing conclusive to be said
in its favour.* It is suggested chiefly by an ambiguity in the word
"pain," which has misled many people, including Berkeley, whom it
supplied with one of his arguments for subjective idealism. We may use
"pain" as the opposite of "pleasure," and "painful" as the opposite of
"pleasant," or we may use "pain" to mean a certain sort of sensation, on
a level with the sensations of heat and cold and touch. The latter use
of the word has prevailed in psychological literature, and it is now
no longer used as the opposite of "pleasure." Dr. H. Head, in a recent
publication, has stated this distinction as follows:**

     * Various arguments in its favour are advanced by A.
     Wohlgemuth, "On the feelings and their neural correlate,
     with an examination of the nature of pain," "British Journal
     of Psychology," viii, 4. (1917). But as these arguments are
     largely a reductio ad absurdum of other theories, among
     which that which I am advocating is not included, I cannot
     regard them as establishing their contention.

     ** "Sensation and the Cerebral Cortex," "Brain," vol. xli,
     part ii (September, 1918), p. 90. Cf. also Wohlgemuth, loc.
     cit. pp. 437, 450.

"It is necessary at the outset to distinguish clearly between
'discomfort' and 'pain.' Pain is a distinct sensory quality equivalent
to heat and cold, and its intensity can be roughly graded according to
the force expended in stimulation. Discomfort, on the other hand,
is that feeling-tone which is directly opposed to pleasure. It may
accompany sensations not in themselves essentially painful; as for
instance that produced by tickling the sole of the foot. The reaction
produced by repeated pricking contains both these elements; for it
evokes that sensory quality known as pain, accompanied by a disagreeable
feeling-tone, which we have called discomfort. On the other hand,
excessive pressure, except when applied directly over some nerve-trunk,
tends to excite more discomfort than pain."

The confusion between discomfort and pain has made people regard
discomfort as a more substantial thing than it is, and this in turn has
reacted upon the view taken of pleasure, since discomfort and pleasure
are evidently on a level in this respect. As soon as discomfort is
clearly distinguished from the sensation of pain, it becomes more
natural to regard discomfort and pleasure as properties of mental
occurrences than to regard them as separate mental occurrences on their
own account. I shall therefore dismiss the view that they are separate
mental occurrences, and regard them as properties of such experiences as
would be called respectively uncomfortable and pleasant.

It remains to be examined whether they are actual qualities of such
occurrences, or are merely differences as to causal properties. I do not
myself see any way of deciding this question; either view seems equally
capable of accounting for the facts. If this is true, it is safer to
avoid the assumption that there are such intrinsic qualities of
mental occurrences as are in question, and to assume only the causal
differences which are undeniable. Without condemning the intrinsic
theory, we can define discomfort and pleasure as consisting in causal
properties, and say only what will hold on either of the two theories.
Following this course, we shall say:

"Discomfort" is a property of a sensation or other mental occurrence,
consisting in the fact that the occurrence in question stimulates
voluntary or reflex movements tending to produce some more or less
definite change involving the cessation of the occurrence.

"Pleasure" is a property of a sensation or other mental occurrence,
consisting in the fact that the occurrence in question either does not
stimulate any voluntary or reflex movement, or, if it does, stimulates
only such as tend to prolong the occurrence in question.*

     * Cf. Thorndike, op. cit., p. 243.

"Conscious" desire, which we have now to consider, consists of desire
in the sense hitherto discussed, together with a true belief as to its
"purpose," i.e. as to the state of affairs that will bring quiescence
with cessation of the discomfort. If our theory of desire is correct,
a belief as to its purpose may very well be erroneous, since only
experience can show what causes a discomfort to cease. When the
experience needed is common and simple, as in the case of hunger, a
mistake is not very probable. But in other cases--e.g. erotic desire in
those who have had little or no experience of its satisfaction--mistakes
are to be expected, and do in fact very often occur. The practice of
inhibiting impulses, which is to a great extent necessary to civilized
life, makes mistakes easier, by preventing experience of the actions to
which a desire would otherwise lead, and by often causing the inhibited
impulses themselves to be unnoticed or quickly forgotten. The perfectly
natural mistakes which thus arise constitute a large proportion of what
is, mistakenly in part, called self-deception, and attributed by Freud
to the "censor."

But there is a further point which needs emphasizing, namely, that a
belief that something is desired has often a tendency to cause the very
desire that is believed in. It is this fact that makes the effect of
"consciousness" on desire so complicated.

When we believe that we desire a certain state of affairs, that often
tends to cause a real desire for it. This is due partly to the influence
of words upon our emotions, in rhetoric for example, and partly to the
general fact that discomfort normally belongs to the belief that we
desire such-and-such a thing that we do not possess. Thus what was
originally a false opinion as to the object of a desire acquires a
certain truth: the false opinion generates a secondary subsidiary
desire, which nevertheless becomes real. Let us take an illustration.
Suppose you have been jilted in a way which wounds your vanity. Your
natural impulsive desire will be of the sort expressed in Donne's poem:

     When by thy scorn, O Murderess, I am dead,

in which he explains how he will haunt the poor lady as a ghost, and
prevent her from enjoying a moment's peace. But two things stand in
the way of your expressing yourself so naturally: on the one hand, your
vanity, which will not acknowledge how hard you are hit; on the other
hand, your conviction that you are a civilized and humane person,
who could not possibly indulge so crude a desire as revenge. You will
therefore experience a restlessness which will at first seem quite
aimless, but will finally resolve itself in a conscious desire to change
your profession, or go round the world, or conceal your identity and
live in Putney, like Arnold Bennett's hero. Although the prime cause of
this desire is a false judgment as to your previous unconscious desire,
yet the new conscious desire has its own derivative genuineness, and may
influence your actions to the extent of sending you round the world.
The initial mistake, however, will have effects of two kinds. First,
in uncontrolled moments, under the influence of sleepiness or drink
or delirium, you will say things calculated to injure the faithless
deceiver. Secondly, you will find travel disappointing, and the East
less fascinating than you had hoped--unless, some day, you hear that the
wicked one has in turn been jilted. If this happens, you will believe
that you feel sincere sympathy, but you will suddenly be much more
delighted than before with the beauties of tropical islands or the
wonders of Chinese art. A secondary desire, derived from a false
judgment as to a primary desire, has its own power of influencing
action, and is therefore a real desire according to our definition.
But it has not the same power as a primary desire of bringing thorough
satisfaction when it is realized; so long as the primary desire remains
unsatisfied, restlessness continues in spite of the secondary desire's
success. Hence arises a belief in the vanity of human wishes: the vain
wishes are those that are secondary, but mistaken beliefs prevent us
from realizing that they are secondary.

What may, with some propriety, be called self-deception arises through
the operation of desires for beliefs. We desire many things which it is
not in our power to achieve: that we should be universally popular and
admired, that our work should be the wonder of the age, and that the
universe should be so ordered as to bring ultimate happiness to all,
though not to our enemies until they have repented and been purified
by suffering. Such desires are too large to be achieved through our own
efforts. But it is found that a considerable portion of the satisfaction
which these things would bring us if they were realized is to be
achieved by the much easier operation of believing that they are or
will be realized. This desire for beliefs, as opposed to desire for the
actual facts, is a particular case of secondary desire, and, like all
secondary desire its satisfaction does not lead to a complete cessation
of the initial discomfort. Nevertheless, desire for beliefs, as opposed
to desire for facts, is exceedingly potent both individually and
socially. According to the form of belief desired, it is called vanity,
optimism, or religion. Those who have sufficient power usually imprison
or put to death any one who tries to shake their faith in their own
excellence or in that of the universe; it is for this reason that
seditious libel and blasphemy have always been, and still are, criminal
offences.

It is very largely through desires for beliefs that the primitive
nature of desire has become so hidden, and that the part played by
consciousness has been so confusing and so exaggerated.

We may now summarize our analysis of desire and feeling.

A mental occurrence of any kind--sensation, image, belief, or
emotion--may be a cause of a series of actions, continuing, unless
interrupted, until some more or less definite state of affairs is
realized. Such a series of actions we call a "behaviour-cycle." The
degree of definiteness may vary greatly: hunger requires only food in
general, whereas the sight of a particular piece of food raises a desire
which requires the eating of that piece of food. The property of causing
such a cycle of occurrences is called "discomfort"; the property of the
mental occurrences in which the cycle ends is called "pleasure." The
actions constituting the cycle must not be purely mechanical, i.e. they
must be bodily movements in whose causation the special properties
of nervous tissue are involved. The cycle ends in a condition of
quiescence, or of such action as tends only to preserve the status quo.
The state of affairs in which this condition of quiescence is achieved
is called the "purpose" of the cycle, and the initial mental occurrence
involving discomfort is called a "desire" for the state of affairs that
brings quiescence. A desire is called "conscious" when it is accompanied
by a true belief as to the state of affairs that will bring quiescence;
otherwise it is called "unconscious." All primitive desire is
unconscious, and in human beings beliefs as to the purposes of desires
are often mistaken. These mistaken beliefs generate secondary desires,
which cause various interesting complications in the psychology of human
desire, without fundamentally altering the character which it shares
with animal desire.




LECTURE IV. INFLUENCE OF PAST HISTORY ON PRESENT OCCURRENCES IN LIVING
ORGANISMS

In this lecture we shall be concerned with a very general characteristic
which broadly, though not absolutely, distinguishes the behaviour
of living organisms from that of dead matter. The characteristic in
question is this:

The response of an organism to a given stimulus is very often dependent
upon the past history of the organism, and not merely upon the stimulus
and the HITHERTO DISCOVERABLE present state of the organism.

This characteristic is embodied in the saying "a burnt child fears the
fire." The burn may have left no visible traces, yet it modifies the
reaction of the child in the presence of fire. It is customary to assume
that, in such cases, the past operates by modifying the structure of the
brain, not directly. I have no wish to suggest that this hypothesis is
false; I wish only to point out that it is a hypothesis. At the end of
the present lecture I shall examine the grounds in its favour. If we
confine ourselves to facts which have been actually observed, we must
say that past occurrences, in addition to the present stimulus and
the present ascertainable condition of the organism, enter into the
causation of the response.

The characteristic is not wholly confined to living organisms. For
example, magnetized steel looks just like steel which has not been
magnetized, but its behaviour is in some ways different. In the case
of dead matter, however, such phenomena are less frequent and important
than in the case of living organisms, and it is far less difficult
to invent satisfactory hypotheses as to the microscopic changes of
structure which mediate between the past occurrence and the present
changed response. In the case of living organisms, practically
everything that is distinctive both of their physical and of their
mental behaviour is bound up with this persistent influence of the past.
Further, speaking broadly, the change in response is usually of a kind
that is biologically advantageous to the organism.

Following a suggestion derived from Semon ("Die Mneme," Leipzig, 1904;
2nd edition, 1908, English translation, Allen & Unwin, 1921; "Die
mnemischen Empfindungen," Leipzig, 1909), we will give the name of
"mnemic phenomena" to those responses of an organism which, so far as
hitherto observed facts are concerned, can only be brought under causal
laws by including past occurrences in the history of the organism as
part of the causes of the present response. I do not mean merely--what
would always be the case--that past occurrences are part of a CHAIN of
causes leading to the present event. I mean that, in attempting to state
the PROXIMATE cause of the present event, some past event or events
must be included, unless we take refuge in hypothetical modifications of
brain structure. For example: you smell peat-smoke, and you recall some
occasion when you smelt it before. The cause of your recollection, so
far as hitherto observable phenomena are concerned, consists both
of the peat smoke (present stimulus) and of the former occasion (past
experience). The same stimulus will not produce the same recollection
in another man who did not share your former experience, although the
former experience left no OBSERVABLE traces in the structure of the
brain. According to the maxim "same cause, same effect," we cannot
therefore regard the peat-smoke alone as the cause of your recollection,
since it does not have the same effect in other cases. The cause of
your recollection must be both the peat-smoke and the past occurrence.
Accordingly your recollection is an instance of what we are calling
"mnemic phenomena."

Before going further, it will be well to give illustrations of different
classes of mnemic phenomena.

(a) ACQUIRED HABITS.--In Lecture II we saw how animals can learn by
experience how to get out of cages or mazes, or perform other actions
which are useful to them but not provided for by their instincts alone.
A cat which is put into a cage of which it has had experience behaves
differently from the way in which it behaved at first. We can easily
invent hypotheses, which are quite likely to be true, as to connections
in the brain caused by past experience, and themselves causing the
different response. But the observable fact is that the stimulus of
being in the cage produces differing results with repetition, and that
the ascertainable cause of the cat's behaviour is not merely the cage
and its own ascertainable organization, but also its past history
in regard to the cage. From our present point of view, the matter is
independent of the question whether the cat's behaviour is due to some
mental fact called "knowledge," or displays a merely bodily habit. Our
habitual knowledge is not always in our minds, but is called up by the
appropriate stimuli. If we are asked "What is the capital of France?"
we answer "Paris," because of past experience; the past experience is as
essential as the present question in the causation of our response. Thus
all our habitual knowledge consists of acquired habits, and comes under
the head of mnemic phenomena.

(b) IMAGES.--I shall have much to say about images in a later lecture;
for the present I am merely concerned with them in so far as they are
"copies" of past sensations. When you hear New York spoken of, some
image probably comes into your mind, either of the place itself (if you
have been there), or of some picture of it (if you have not). The image
is due to your past experience, as well as to the present stimulus of
the words "New York." Similarly, the images you have in dreams are
all dependent upon your past experience, as well as upon the present
stimulus to dreaming. It is generally believed that all images, in their
simpler parts, are copies of sensations; if so, their mnemic character
is evident. This is important, not only on its own account, but also
because, as we shall see later, images play an essential part in what is
called "thinking."

(c) ASSOCIATION.--The broad fact of association, on the mental side, is
that when we experience something which we have experienced before,
it tends to call up the context of the former experience. The smell of
peat-smoke recalling a former scene is an instance which we discussed a
moment ago. This is obviously a mnemic phenomenon. There is also a more
purely physical association, which is indistinguishable from physical
habit. This is the kind studied by Mr. Thorndike in animals, where a
certain stimulus is associated with a certain act. This is the sort
which is taught to soldiers in drilling, for example. In such a case
there need not be anything mental, but merely a habit of the body.
There is no essential distinction between association and habit, and the
observations which we made concerning habit as a mnemic phenomenon are
equally applicable to association.

(d) NON-SENSATIONAL ELEMENTS IN PERCEPTION.--When we perceive any object
of a familiar kind, much of what appears subjectively to be immediately
given is really derived from past experience. When we see an object, say
a penny, we seem to be aware of its "real" shape we have the impression
of something circular, not of something elliptical. In learning to draw,
it is necessary to acquire the art of representing things according
to the sensation, not according to the perception. And the visual
appearance is filled out with feeling of what the object would be like
to touch, and so on. This filling out and supplying of the "real" shape
and so on consists of the most usual correlates of the sensational core
in our perception. It may happen that, in the particular case, the real
correlates are unusual; for example, if what we are seeing is a
carpet made to look like tiles. If so, the non-sensational part of our
perception will be illusory, i.e. it will supply qualities which the
object in question does not in fact have. But as a rule objects do
have the qualities added by perception, which is to be expected,
since experience of what is usual is the cause of the addition. If our
experience had been different, we should not fill out sensation in
the same way, except in so far as the filling out is instinctive,
not acquired. It would seem that, in man, all that makes up space
perception, including the correlation of sight and touch and so on, is
almost entirely acquired. In that case there is a large mnemic element
in all the common perceptions by means of which we handle common
objects. And, to take another kind of instance, imagine what our
astonishment would be if we were to hear a cat bark or a dog mew. This
emotion would be dependent upon past experience, and would therefore be
a mnemic phenomenon according to the definition.

(e) MEMORY AS KNOWLEDGE.--The kind of memory of which I am now speaking
is definite knowledge of some past event in one's own experience.
From time to time we remember things that have happened to us, because
something in the present reminds us of them. Exactly the same present
fact would not call up the same memory if our past experience had been
different. Thus our remembering is caused by--

(1) The present stimulus,

(2) The past occurrence.

It is therefore a mnemic phenomenon according to our definition. A
definition of "mnemic phenomena" which did not include memory would,
of course, be a bad one. The point of the definition is not that it
includes memory, but that it includes it as one of a class of phenomena
which embrace all that is characteristic in the subject matter of
psychology.

(f) EXPERIENCE.--The word "experience" is often used very vaguely.
James, as we saw, uses it to cover the whole primal stuff of the world,
but this usage seems objection able, since, in a purely physical world,
things would happen without there being any experience. It is only
mnemic phenomena that embody experience. We may say that an animal
"experiences" an occurrence when this occurrence modifies the animal's
subsequent behaviour, i.e. when it is the mnemic portion of the cause of
future occurrences in the animal's life. The burnt child that fears the
fire has "experienced" the fire, whereas a stick that has been thrown on
and taken off again has not "experienced" anything, since it offers
no more resistance than before to being thrown on. The essence of
"experience" is the modification of behaviour produced by what is
experienced. We might, in fact, define one chain of experience, or one
biography, as a series of occurrences linked by mnemic causation. I
think it is this characteristic, more than any other, that distinguishes
sciences dealing with living organisms from physics.

The best writer on mnemic phenomena known to me is Richard Semon, the
fundamental part of whose theory I shall endeavour to summarize before
going further:

When an organism, either animal or plant, is subjected to a stimulus,
producing in it some state of excitement, the removal of the stimulus
allows it to return to a condition of equilibrium. But the new state
of equilibrium is different from the old, as may be seen by the changed
capacity for reaction. The state of equilibrium before the stimulus may
be called the "primary indifference-state"; that after the cessation
of the stimulus, the "secondary indifference-state." We define the
"engraphic effect" of a stimulus as the effect in making a difference
between the primary and secondary indifference-states, and this
difference itself we define as the "engram" due to the stimulus. "Mnemic
phenomena" are defined as those due to engrams; in animals, they are
specially associated with the nervous system, but not exclusively, even
in man.

When two stimuli occur together, one of them, occurring afterwards,
may call out the reaction for the other also. We call this an "ekphoric
influence," and stimuli having this character are called "ekphoric
stimuli." In such a case we call the engrams of the two stimuli
"associated." All simultaneously generated engrams are associated; there
is also association of successively aroused engrams, though this is
reducible to simultaneous association. In fact, it is not an isolated
stimulus that leaves an engram, but the totality of the stimuli at any
moment; consequently any portion of this totality tends, if it recurs,
to arouse the whole reaction which was aroused before. Semon holds that
engrams can be inherited, and that an animal's innate habits may be due
to the experience of its ancestors; on this subject he refers to Samuel
Butler.

Semon formulates two "mnemic principles." The first, or "Law of
Engraphy," is as follows: "All simultaneous excitements in an organism
form a connected simultaneous excitement-complex, which as such works
engraphically, i.e. leaves behind a connected engram-complex, which
in so far forms a whole" ("Die mnemischen Empfindungen," p. 146).
The second mnemic principle, or "Law of Ekphory," is as follows:
"The partial return of the energetic situation which formerly worked
engraphically operates ekphorically on a simultaneous engram-complex"
(ib., p. 173). These two laws together represent in part a hypothesis
(the engram), and in part an observable fact. The observable fact is
that, when a certain complex of stimuli has originally caused a certain
complex of reactions, the recurrence of part of the stimuli tends to
cause the recurrence of the whole of the reactions.

Semon's applications of his fundamental ideas in various directions are
interesting and ingenious. Some of them will concern us later, but for
the present it is the fundamental character of mnemic phenomena that is
in question.

Concerning the nature of an engram, Semon confesses that at present it
is impossible to say more than that it must consist in some material
alteration in the body of the organism ("Die mnemischen Empfindungen,"
p. 376). It is, in fact, hypothetical, invoked for theoretical uses, and
not an outcome of direct observation. No doubt physiology, especially
the disturbances of memory through lesions in the brain, affords grounds
for this hypothesis; nevertheless it does remain a hypothesis, the
validity of which will be discussed at the end of this lecture.

I am inclined to think that, in the present state of physiology, the
introduction of the engram does not serve to simplify the account of
mnemic phenomena. We can, I think, formulate the known laws of such
phenomena in terms, wholly, of observable facts, by recognizing
provisionally what we may call "mnemic causation." By this I mean that
kind of causation of which I spoke at the beginning of this lecture,
that kind, namely, in which the proximate cause consists not merely of a
present event, but of this together with a past event. I do not wish to
urge that this form of causation is ultimate, but that, in the present
state of our knowledge, it affords a simplification, and enables us
to state laws of behaviour in less hypothetical terms than we should
otherwise have to employ.

The clearest instance of what I mean is recollection of a past event.
What we observe is that certain present stimuli lead us to recollect
certain occurrences, but that at times when we are not recollecting
them, there is nothing discoverable in our minds that could be called
memory of them. Memories, as mental facts, arise from time to time,
but do not, so far as we can see, exist in any shape while they are
"latent." In fact, when we say that they are "latent," we mean merely
that they will exist under certain circumstances. If, then, there is
to be some standing difference between the person who can remember a
certain fact and the person who cannot, that standing difference must
be, not in anything mental, but in the brain. It is quite probable that
there is such a difference in the brain, but its nature is unknown and
it remains hypothetical. Everything that has, so far, been made matter
of observation as regards this question can be put together in the
statement: When a certain complex of sensations has occurred to a man,
the recurrence of part of the complex tends to arouse the recollection
of the whole. In like manner, we can collect all mnemic phenomena in
living organisms under a single law, which contains what is hitherto
verifiable in Semon's two laws. This single law is:

IF A COMPLEX STIMULUS A HAS CAUSED A COMPLEX REACTION B IN AN ORGANISM,
THE OCCURRENCE OF A PART OF A ON A FUTURE OCCASION TENDS TO CAUSE THE
WHOLE REACTION B.

This law would need to be supplemented by some account of the influence
of frequency, and so on; but it seems to contain the essential
characteristic of mnemic phenomena, without admixture of anything
hypothetical.

Whenever the effect resulting from a stimulus to an organism differs
according to the past history of the organism, without our being able
actually to detect any relevant difference in its present structure,
we will speak of "mnemic causation," provided we can discover laws
embodying the influence of the past. In ordinary physical causation,
as it appears to common sense, we have approximate uniformities of
sequence, such as "lightning is followed by thunder," "drunkenness
is followed by headache," and so on. None of these sequences are
theoretically invariable, since something may intervene to disturb
them. In order to obtain invariable physical laws, we have to proceed to
differential equations, showing the direction of change at each moment,
not the integral change after a finite interval, however short. But
for the purposes of daily life many sequences are to all in tents and
purposes invariable. With the behaviour of human beings, however, this
is by no means the case. If you say to an Englishman, "You have a smut
on your nose," he will proceed to remove it, but there will be no such
effect if you say the same thing to a Frenchman who knows no English.
The effect of words upon the hearer is a mnemic phenomena, since it
depends upon the past experience which gave him understanding of the
words. If there are to be purely psychological causal laws, taking no
account of the brain and the rest of the body, they will have to be of
the form, not "X now causes Y now," but--

"A, B, C,... in the past, together with X now, cause Y now." For it
cannot be successfully maintained that our understanding of a word, for
example, is an actual existent content of the mind at times when we
are not thinking of the word. It is merely what may be called a
"disposition," i.e. it is capable of being aroused whenever we hear the
word or happen to think of it. A "disposition" is not something actual,
but merely the mnemic portion of a mnemic causal law.

In such a law as "A, B, C,... in the past, together with X now, cause
Y now," we will call A, B, C,... the mnemic cause, X the occasion or
stimulus, and Y the reaction. All cases in which experience influences
behaviour are instances of mnemic causation.

Believers in psycho-physical parallelism hold that psychology can
theoretically be freed entirely from all dependence on physiology or
physics. That is to say, they believe that every psychical event has
a psychical cause and a physical concomitant. If there is to be
parallelism, it is easy to prove by mathematical logic that the
causation in physical and psychical matters must be of the same sort,
and it is impossible that mnemic causation should exist in psychology
but not in physics. But if psychology is to be independent of
physiology, and if physiology can be reduced to physics, it would seem
that mnemic causation is essential in psychology. Otherwise we shall be
compelled to believe that all our knowledge, all our store of images
and memories, all our mental habits, are at all times existing in some
latent mental form, and are not merely aroused by the stimuli which lead
to their display. This is a very difficult hypothesis. It seems to me
that if, as a matter of method rather than metaphysics, we desire to
obtain as much independence for psychology as is practically feasible,
we shall do better to accept mnemic causation in psychology protem,
and therefore reject parallelism, since there is no good ground for
admitting mnemic causation in physics.

It is perhaps worth while to observe that mnemic causation is what led
Bergson to deny that there is causation at all in the psychical sphere.
He points out, very truly, that the same stimulus, repeated, does not
have the same consequences, and he argues that this is contrary to the
maxim, "same cause, same effect." It is only necessary, however, to take
account of past occurrences and include them with the cause, in order
to re-establish the maxim, and the possibility of psychological causal
laws. The metaphysical conception of a cause lingers in our manner of
viewing causal laws: we want to be able to FEEL a connection between
cause and effect, and to be able to imagine the cause as "operating."
This makes us unwilling to regard causal laws as MERELY observed
uniformities of sequence; yet that is all that science has to offer.
To ask why such-and-such a kind of sequence occurs is either to ask a
meaningless question, or to demand some more general kind of sequence
which includes the one in question. The widest empirical laws of
sequence known at any time can only be "explained" in the sense of being
subsumed by later discoveries under wider laws; but these wider laws,
until they in turn are subsumed, will remain brute facts, resting solely
upon observation, not upon some supposed inherent rationality.

There is therefore no a priori objection to a causal law in which part
of the cause has ceased to exist. To argue against such a law on the
ground that what is past cannot operate now, is to introduce the old
metaphysical notion of cause, for which science can find no place. The
only reason that could be validly alleged against mnemic causation would
be that, in fact, all the phenomena can be explained without it. They
are explained without it by Semon's "engram," or by any theory which
regards the results of experience as embodied in modifications of
the brain and nerves. But they are not explained, unless with extreme
artificiality, by any theory which regards the latent effects of
experience as psychical rather than physical. Those who desire to make
psychology as far as possible independent of physiology would do well,
it seems to me, if they adopted mnemic causation. For my part, however,
I have no such desire, and I shall therefore endeavour to state the
grounds which occur to me in favour of some such view as that of the
"engram."

One of the first points to be urged is that mnemic phenomena are just
as much to be found in physiology as in psychology. They are even to
be found in plants, as Sir Francis Darwin pointed out (cf. Semon, "Die
Mneme," 2nd edition, p. 28 n.). Habit is a characteristic of the body
at least as much as of the mind. We should, therefore, be compelled
to allow the intrusion of mnemic causation, if admitted at all, into
non-psychological regions, which ought, one feels, to be subject only to
causation of the ordinary physical sort. The fact is that a great deal
of what, at first sight, distinguishes psychology from physics is found,
on examination, to be common to psychology and physiology; this whole
question of the influence of experience is a case in point. Now it
is possible, of course, to take the view advocated by Professor J. S.
Haldane, who contends that physiology is not theoretically reducible to
physics and chemistry.* But the weight of opinion among physiologists
appears to be against him on this point; and we ought certainly to
require very strong evidence before admitting any such breach of
continuity as between living and dead matter. The argument from the
existence of mnemic phenomena in physiology must therefore be allowed a
certain weight against the hypothesis that mnemic causation is ultimate.

     * See his "The New Physiology and Other Addresses," Griffin,
     1919, also the symposium, "Are Physical, Biological and
     Psychological Categories Irreducible?" in "Life and Finite
     Individuality," edited for the Aristotelian Society, with an
     Introduction. By H. Wildon Carr, Williams & Norgate, 1918.

The argument from the connection of brain-lesions with loss of memory is
not so strong as it looks, though it has also, some weight. What we
know is that memory, and mnemic phenomena generally, can be disturbed or
destroyed by changes in the brain. This certainly proves that the brain
plays an essential part in the causation of memory, but does not prove
that a certain state of the brain is, by itself, a sufficient condition
for the existence of memory. Yet it is this last that has to be proved.
The theory of the engram, or any similar theory, has to maintain that,
given a body and brain in a suitable state, a man will have a certain
memory, without the need of any further conditions. What is known,
however, is only that he will not have memories if his body and brain
are not in a suitable state. That is to say, the appropriate state
of body and brain is proved to be necessary for memory, but not to be
sufficient. So far, therefore, as our definite knowledge goes, memory
may require for its causation a past occurrence as well as a certain
present state of the brain.

In order to prove conclusively that mnemic phenomena arise whenever
certain physiological conditions are fulfilled, we ought to be able
actually to see differences between the brain of a man who speaks
English and that of a man who speaks French, between the brain of a man
who has seen New York and can recall it, and that of a man who has never
seen that city. It may be that the time will come when this will be
possible, but at present we are very far removed from it. At present,
there is, so far as I am aware, no good evidence that every difference
between the knowledge possessed by A and that possessed by B is
paralleled by some difference in their brains. We may believe that
this is the case, but if we do, our belief is based upon analogies
and general scientific maxims, not upon any foundation of detailed
observation. I am myself inclined, as a working hypothesis, to adopt
the belief in question, and to hold that past experience only affects
present behaviour through modifications of physiological structure. But
the evidence seems not quite conclusive, so that I do not think we ought
to forget the other hypothesis, or to reject entirely the possibility
that mnemic causation may be the ultimate explanation of mnemic
phenomena. I say this, not because I think it LIKELY that mnemic
causation is ultimate, but merely because I think it POSSIBLE, and
because it often turns out important to the progress of science to
remember hypotheses which have previously seemed improbable.




LECTURE V. PSYCHOLOGICAL AND PHYSICAL CAUSAL LAWS

The traditional conception of cause and effect is one which modern
science shows to be fundamentally erroneous, and requiring to be
replaced by a quite different notion, that of LAWS OF CHANGE. In the
traditional conception, a particular event A caused a particular event
B, and by this it was implied that, given any event B, some earlier
event A could be discovered which had a relation to it, such that--

(1) Whenever A occurred, it was followed by B;

(2) In this sequence, there was something "necessary," not a mere de
facto occurrence of A first and then B.

The second point is illustrated by the old discussion as to whether
it can be said that day causes night, on the ground that day is always
followed by night. The orthodox answer was that day could not be called
the cause of night, because it would not be followed by night if the
earth's rotation were to cease, or rather to grow so slow that one
complete rotation would take a year. A cause, it was held, must be such
that under no conceivable circumstances could it fail to be followed by
its effect.

As a matter of fact, such sequences as were sought by believers in the
traditional form of causation have not so far been found in nature.
Everything in nature is apparently in a state of continuous change,* so
that what we call one "event" turns out to be really a process. If this
event is to cause another event, the two will have to be contiguous in
time; for if there is any interval between them, something may happen
during that interval to prevent the expected effect. Cause and effect,
therefore, will have to be temporally contiguous processes. It is
difficult to believe, at any rate where physical laws are concerned,
that the earlier part of the process which is the cause can make any
difference to the effect, so long as the later part of the process which
is the cause remains unchanged. Suppose, for example, that a man dies
of arsenic poisoning, we say that his taking arsenic was the cause
of death. But clearly the process by which he acquired the arsenic
is irrelevant: everything that happened before he swallowed it may be
ignored, since it cannot alter the effect except in so far as it alters
his condition at the moment of taking the dose. But we may go further:
swallowing arsenic is not really the proximate cause of death, since a
man might be shot through the head immediately after taking the dose,
and then it would not be of arsenic that he would die. The arsenic
produces certain physiological changes, which take a finite time before
they end in death. The earlier parts of these changes can be ruled out
in the same way as we can rule out the process by which the arsenic was
acquired. Proceeding in this way, we can shorten the process which we
are calling the cause more and more. Similarly we shall have to shorten
the effect. It may happen that immediately after the man's death his
body is blown to pieces by a bomb. We cannot say what will happen after
the man's death, through merely knowing that he has died as the result
of arsenic poisoning. Thus, if we are to take the cause as one event and
the effect as another, both must be shortened indefinitely. The result
is that we merely have, as the embodiment of our causal law, a certain
direction of change at each moment. Hence we are brought to differential
equations as embodying causal laws. A physical law does not say "A will
be followed by B," but tells us what acceleration a particle will have
under given circumstances, i.e. it tells us how the particle's motion is
changing at each moment, not where the particle will be at some future
moment.

     * The theory of quanta suggests that the continuity is only
     apparent. If so, we shall be able theoretically to reach
     events which are not processes. But in what is directly
     observable there is still apparent continuity, which
     justifies the above remarks for the prevent.

Laws embodied in differential equations may possibly be exact,
but cannot be known to be so. All that we can know empirically is
approximate and liable to exceptions; the exact laws that are assumed in
physics are known to be somewhere near the truth, but are not known to
be true just as they stand. The laws that we actually know empirically
have the form of the traditional causal laws, except that they are not
to be regarded as universal or necessary. "Taking arsenic is followed by
death" is a good empirical generalization; it may have exceptions, but
they will be rare. As against the professedly exact laws of physics,
such empirical generalizations have the advantage that they deal with
observable phenomena. We cannot observe infinitesimals, whether in time
or space; we do not even know whether time and space are infinitely
divisible. Therefore rough empirical generalizations have a definite
place in science, in spite of not being exact of universal. They are the
data for more exact laws, and the grounds for believing that they are
USUALLY true are stronger than the grounds for believing that the more
exact laws are ALWAYS true.

Science starts, therefore, from generalizations of the form, "A is
usually followed by B." This is the nearest approach that can be made
to a causal law of the traditional sort. It may happen in any particular
instance that A is ALWAYS followed by B, but we cannot know this, since
we cannot foresee all the perfectly possible circumstances that might
make the sequence fail, or know that none of them will actually occur.
If, however, we know of a very large number of cases in which A is
followed by B, and few or none in which the sequence fails, we shall in
PRACTICE be justified in saying "A causes B," provided we do not attach
to the notion of cause any of the metaphysical superstitions that have
gathered about the word.

There is another point, besides lack of universality and necessity,
which it is important to realize as regards causes in the above sense,
and that is the lack of uniqueness. It is generally assumed that, given
any event, there is some one phenomenon which is THE cause of the event
in question. This seems to be a mere mistake. Cause, in the only
sense in which it can be practically applied, means "nearly invariable
antecedent." We cannot in practice obtain an antecedent which is QUITE
invariable, for this would require us to take account of the whole
universe, since something not taken account of may prevent the expected
effect. We cannot distinguish, among nearly invariable antecedents, one
as THE cause, and the others as merely its concomitants: the attempt to
do this depends upon a notion of cause which is derived from will, and
will (as we shall see later) is not at all the sort of thing that it is
generally supposed to be, nor is there any reason to think that in the
physical world there is anything even remotely analogous to what will is
supposed to be. If we could find one antecedent, and only one, that was
QUITE invariable, we could call that one THE cause without introducing
any notion derived from mistaken ideas about will. But in fact we cannot
find any antecedent that we know to be quite invariable, and we can find
many that are nearly so. For example, men leave a factory for dinner
when the hooter sounds at twelve o'clock. You may say the hooter is
THE cause of their leaving. But innumerable other hooters in other
factories, which also always sound at twelve o'clock, have just as
good a right to be called the cause. Thus every event has many nearly
invariable antecedents, and therefore many antecedents which may be
called its cause.

The laws of traditional physics, in the form in which they deal with
movements of matter or electricity, have an apparent simplicity which
somewhat conceals the empirical character of what they assert. A piece
of matter, as it is known empirically, is not a single existing thing,
but a system of existing things. When several people simultaneously see
the same table, they all see something different; therefore "the" table,
which they are supposed all to see, must be either a hypothesis or
a construction. "The" table is to be neutral as between different
observers: it does not favour the aspect seen by one man at the expense
of that seen by another. It was natural, though to my mind mistaken, to
regard the "real" table as the common cause of all the appearances which
the table presents (as we say) to different observers. But why should we
suppose that there is some one common cause of all these appearances? As
we have just seen, the notion of "cause" is not so reliable as to allow
us to infer the existence of something that, by its very nature, can
never be observed.

Instead of looking for an impartial source, we can secure neutrality by
the equal representation of all parties. Instead of supposing that there
is some unknown cause, the "real" table, behind the different sensations
of those who are said to be looking at the table, we may take the
whole set of these sensations (together possibly with certain other
particulars) as actually BEING the table. That is to say, the table
which is neutral as between different observers (actual and possible)
is the set of all those particulars which would naturally be called
"aspects" of the table from different points of view. (This is a first
approximation, modified later.)

It may be said: If there is no single existent which is the source of
all these "aspects," how are they collected together? The answer is
simple: Just as they would be if there were such a single existent. The
supposed "real" table underlying its appearances is, in any case, not
itself perceived, but inferred, and the question whether such-and-such
a particular is an "aspect" of this table is only to be settled by
the connection of the particular in question with the one or more
particulars by which the table is defined. That is to say, even if we
assume a "real" table, the particulars which are its aspects have to be
collected together by their relations to each other, not to it, since
it is merely inferred from them. We have only, therefore, to notice how
they are collected together, and we can then keep the collection
without assuming any "real" table as distinct from the collection. When
different people see what they call the same table, they see things
which are not exactly the same, owing to difference of point of view,
but which are sufficiently alike to be described in the same words, so
long as no great accuracy or minuteness is sought. These closely similar
particulars are collected together by their similarity primarily
and, more correctly, by the fact that they are related to each other
approximately according to the laws of perspective and of reflection and
diffraction of light. I suggest, as a first approximation, that these
particulars, together with such correlated others as are unperceived,
jointly ARE the table; and that a similar definition applies to all
physical objects.*

     *See "Our Knowledge of the External World" (Allen & Unwin),
     chaps. iii and iv.

In order to eliminate the reference to our perceptions, which introduces
an irrelevant psychological suggestion, I will take a different
illustration, namely, stellar photography. A photographic plate exposed
on a clear night reproduces the appearance of the portion of the sky
concerned, with more or fewer stars according to the power of the
telescope that is being used. Each separate star which is photographed
produces its separate effect on the plate, just as it would upon
ourselves if we were looking at the sky. If we assume, as science
normally does, the continuity of physical processes, we are forced
to conclude that, at the place where the plate is, and at all places
between it and a star which it photographs, SOMETHING is happening which
is specially connected with that star. In the days when the aether was
less in doubt, we should have said that what was happening was a certain
kind of transverse vibration in the aether. But it is not necessary
or desirable to be so explicit: all that we need say is that SOMETHING
happens which is specially connected with the star in question. It
must be something specially connected with that star, since that star
produces its own special effect upon the plate. Whatever it is must be
the end of a process which starts from the star and radiates outwards,
partly on general grounds of continuity, partly to account for the fact
that light is transmitted with a certain definite velocity. We thus
arrive at the conclusion that, if a certain star is visible at a certain
place, or could be photographed by a sufficiently sensitive plate at
that place, something is happening there which is specially connected
with that star. Therefore in every place at all times a vast multitude
of things must be happening, namely, at least one for every physical
object which can be seen or photographed from that place. We can
classify such happenings on either of two principles:

(1) We can collect together all the happenings in one place, as is done
by photography so far as light is concerned;

(2) We can collect together all the happenings, in different places,
which are connected in the way that common sense regards as being due to
their emanating from one object.

Thus, to return to the stars, we can collect together either--

(1) All the appearances of different stars in a given place, or,

(2) All the appearances of a given star in different places.

But when I speak of "appearances," I do so only for brevity: I do not
mean anything that must "appear" to somebody, but only that happening,
whatever it may be, which is connected, at the place in question, with a
given physical object--according to the old orthodox theory, it would be
a transverse vibration in the aether. Like the different appearances
of the table to a number of simultaneous observers, the different
particulars that belong to one physical object are to be collected
together by continuity and inherent laws of correlation, not by their
supposed causal connection with an unknown assumed existent called a
piece of matter, which would be a mere unnecessary metaphysical thing in
itself. A piece of matter, according to the definition that I propose,
is, as a first approximation,* the collection of all those correlated
particulars which would normally be regarded as its appearances or
effects in different places. Some further elaborations are desirable,
but we can ignore them for the present. I shall return to them at the
end of this lecture.

     *The exact definition of a piece of matter as a construction
     will be given later.

According to the view that I am suggesting, a physical object or piece
of matter is the collection of all those correlated particulars which
would be regarded by common sense as its effects or appearances in
different places. On the other hand, all the happenings in a given place
represent what common sense would regard as the appearances of a number
of different objects as viewed from that place. All the happenings in
one place may be regarded as the view of the world from that place. I
shall call the view of the world from a given place a "perspective." A
photograph represents a perspective. On the other hand, if photographs
of the stars were taken in all points throughout space, and in all such
photographs a certain star, say Sirius, were picked out whenever it
appeared, all the different appearances of Sirius, taken together,
would represent Sirius. For the understanding of the difference between
psychology and physics it is vital to understand these two ways of
classifying particulars, namely:

(1) According to the place where they occur;

(2) According to the system of correlated particulars in different
places to which they belong, such system being defined as a physical
object.

Given a system of particulars which is a physical object, I shall
define that one of the system which is in a given place (if any) as the
"appearance of that object in that place."

When the appearance of an object in a given place changes, it is found
that one or other of two things occurs. The two possibilities may be
illustrated by an example. You are in a room with a man, whom you see:
you may cease to see him either by shutting your eyes or by his going
out of the room. In the first case, his appearance to other people
remains unchanged; in the second, his appearance changes from all
places. In the first case, you say that it is not he who has changed,
but your eyes; in the second, you say that he has changed. Generalizing,
we distinguish--

(1) Cases in which only certain appearances of the object change, while
others, and especially appearances from places very near to the object,
do not change;

(2) Cases where all, or almost all, the appearances of the object
undergo a connected change.

In the first case, the change is attributed to the medium between the
object and the place; in the second, it is attributed to the object
itself.*

     * The application of this distinction to motion raises
     complications due to relativity, but we may ignore these for
     our present purposes.

It is the frequency of the latter kind of change, and the comparatively
simple nature of the laws governing the simultaneous alterations
of appearances in such cases, that have made it possible to treat a
physical object as one thing, and to overlook the fact that it is a
system of particulars. When a number of people at a theatre watch an
actor, the changes in their several perspectives are so similar and so
closely correlated that all are popularly regarded as identical with
each other and with the changes of the actor himself. So long as all
the changes in the appearances of a body are thus correlated there is no
pressing prima facie need to break up the system of appearances, or to
realize that the body in question is not really one thing but a set of
correlated particulars. It is especially and primarily such changes that
physics deals with, i.e. it deals primarily with processes in which
the unity of a physical object need not be broken up because all its
appearances change simultaneously according to the same law--or, if not
all, at any rate all from places sufficiently near to the object, with
in creasing accuracy as we approach the object.

The changes in appearances of an object which are due to changes in the
intervening medium will not affect, or will affect only very slightly,
the appearances from places close to the object. If the appearances
from sufficiently neighbouring places are either wholly un changed,
or changed to a diminishing extent which has zero for its limit, it
is usually found that the changes can be accounted for by changes in
objects which are between the object in question and the places from
which its appearance has changed appreciably. Thus physics is able
to reduce the laws of most changes with which it deals to changes in
physical objects, and to state most of its fundamental laws in terms of
matter. It is only in those cases in which the unity of the system of
appearances constituting a piece of matter has to be broken up, that the
statement of what is happening cannot be made exclusively in terms of
matter. The whole of psychology, we shall find, is included among such
cases; hence their importance for our purposes.

We can now begin to understand one of the fundamental differences
between physics and psychology. Physics treats as a unit the whole
system of appearances of a piece of matter, whereas psychology is
interested in certain of these appearances themselves. Confining
ourselves for the moment to the psychology of perceptions, we observe
that perceptions are certain of the appearances of physical objects.
From the point of view that we have been hitherto adopting, we
might define them as the appearances of objects at places from which
sense-organs and the suitable parts of the nervous system form part
of the intervening medium. Just as a photographic plate receives a
different impression of a cluster of stars when a telescope is part of
the intervening medium, so a brain receives a different impression
when an eye and an optic nerve are part of the intervening medium.
An impression due to this sort of intervening medium is called a
perception, and is interesting to psychology on its own account, not
merely as one of the set of correlated particulars which is the physical
object of which (as we say) we are having a perception.

We spoke earlier of two ways of classifying particulars. One way
collects together the appearances commonly regarded as a given object
from different places; this is, broadly speaking, the way of physics,
leading to the construction of physical objects as sets of such
appearances. The other way collects together the appearances of
different objects from a given place, the result being what we call a
perspective. In the particular case where the place concerned is a
human brain, the perspective belonging to the place consists of all the
perceptions of a certain man at a given time. Thus classification by
perspectives is relevant to psychology, and is essential in defining
what we mean by one mind.

I do not wish to suggest that the way in which I have been defining
perceptions is the only possible way, or even the best way. It is the
way that arose naturally out of our present topic. But when we approach
psychology from a more introspective standpoint, we have to distinguish
sensations and perceptions, if possible, from other mental occurrences,
if any. We have also to consider the psychological effects of
sensations, as opposed to their physical causes and correlates. These
problems are quite distinct from those with which we have been concerned
in the present lecture, and I shall not deal with them until a later
stage.

It is clear that psychology is concerned essentially with actual
particulars, not merely with systems of particulars. In this it differs
from physics, which, broadly speaking, is concerned with the cases
in which all the particulars which make up one physical object can be
treated as a single causal unit, or rather the particulars which are
sufficiently near to the object of which they are appearances can be so
treated. The laws which physics seeks can, broadly speaking, be stated
by treating such systems of particulars as causal units. The laws which
psychology seeks cannot be so stated, since the particulars themselves
are what interests the psychologist. This is one of the fundamental
differences between physics and psychology; and to make it clear has
been the main purpose of this lecture.

I will conclude with an attempt to give a more precise definition of
a piece of matter. The appearances of a piece of matter from different
places change partly according to intrinsic laws (the laws of
perspective, in the case of visual shape), partly according to the
nature of the intervening medium--fog, blue spectacles, telescopes,
microscopes, sense-organs, etc. As we approach nearer to the object, the
effect of the intervening medium grows less. In a generalized sense,
all the intrinsic laws of change of appearance may be called "laws
of perspective." Given any appearance of an object, we can construct
hypothetically a certain system of appearances to which the appearance
in question would belong if the laws of perspective alone were
concerned. If we construct this hypothetical system for each appearance
of the object in turn, the system corresponding to a given appearance
x will be independent of any distortion due to the medium beyond x, and
will only embody such distortion as is due to the medium between x and
the object. Thus, as the appearance by which our hypothetical system
is defined is moved nearer and nearer to the object, the hypothetical
system of appearances defined by its means embodies less and less of the
effect of the medium. The different sets of appearances resulting from
moving x nearer and nearer to the object will approach to a limiting
set, and this limiting set will be that system of appearances which the
object would present if the laws of perspective alone were operative
and the medium exercised no distorting effect. This limiting set of
appearances may be defined, for purposes of physics, as the piece of
matter concerned.




LECTURE VI. INTROSPECTION

One of the main purposes of these lectures is to give grounds for
the belief that the distinction between mind and matter is not so
fundamental as is commonly supposed. In the preceding lecture I dealt in
outline with the physical side of this problem. I attempted to show
that what we call a material object is not itself a substance, but is
a system of particulars analogous in their nature to sensations, and in
fact often including actual sensations among their number. In this
way the stuff of which physical objects are composed is brought into
relation with the stuff of which part, at least, of our mental life is
composed.

There is, however, a converse task which is equally necessary for our
thesis, and that is, to show that the stuff of our mental life is devoid
of many qualities which it is commonly supposed to have, and is not
possessed of any attributes which make it incapable of forming part of
the world of matter. In the present lecture I shall begin the arguments
for this view.

Corresponding to the supposed duality of matter and mind, there are, in
orthodox psychology, two ways of knowing what exists. One of these, the
way of sensation and external perception, is supposed to furnish data
for our knowledge of matter, the other, called "introspection," is
supposed to furnish data for knowledge of our mental processes. To
common sense, this distinction seems clear and easy. When you see a
friend coming along the street, you acquire knowledge of an external,
physical fact; when you realize that you are glad to meet him, you
acquire knowledge of a mental fact. Your dreams and memories and
thoughts, of which you are often conscious, are mental facts, and the
process by which you become aware of them SEEMS to be different from
sensation. Kant calls it the "inner sense"; sometimes it is spoken of
as "consciousness of self"; but its commonest name in modern English
psychology is "introspection." It is this supposed method of acquiring
knowledge of our mental processes that I wish to analyse and examine in
this lecture.

I will state at the outset the view which I shall aim at establishing.
I believe that the stuff of our mental life, as opposed to its relations
and structure, consists wholly of sensations and images. Sensations are
connected with matter in the way that I tried to explain in Lecture V,
i.e. each is a member of a system which is a certain physical object.
Images, though they USUALLY have certain characteristics, especially
lack of vividness, that distinguish them from sensations, are not
INVARIABLY so distinguished, and cannot therefore be defined by these
characteristics. Images, as opposed to sensations, can only be defined
by their different causation: they are caused by association with a
sensation, not by a stimulus external to the nervous system--or perhaps
one should say external to the brain, where the higher animals are
concerned. The occurrence of a sensation or image does not in itself
constitute knowledge but any sensation or image may come to be known
if the conditions are suitable. When a sensation--like the hearing of a
clap of thunder--is normally correlated with closely similar sensations
in our neighbours, we regard it as giving knowledge of the external
world, since we regard the whole set of similar sensations as due to
a common external cause. But images and bodily sensations are not so
correlated. Bodily sensations can be brought into a correlation by
physiology, and thus take their place ultimately among sources of
knowledge of the physical world. But images cannot be made to fit in
with the simultaneous sensations and images of others. Apart from their
hypothetical causes in the brain, they have a causal connection
with physical objects, through the fact that they are copies of past
sensations; but the physical objects with which they are thus connected
are in the past, not in the present. These images remain private in
a sense in which sensations are not. A sensation SEEMS to give us
knowledge of a present physical object, while an image does not, except
when it amounts to a hallucination, and in this case the seeming is
deceptive. Thus the whole context of the two occurrences is different.
But in themselves they do not differ profoundly, and there is no reason
to invoke two different ways of knowing for the one and for the other.
Consequently introspection as a separate kind of knowledge disappears.

The criticism of introspection has been in the main the work of American
psychologists. I will begin by summarizing an article which seems to me
to afford a good specimen of their arguments, namely, "The Case against
Introspection," by Knight Dunlap ("Psychological Review," vol xix, No.
5, pp. 404-413, September, 1912). After a few historical quotations,
he comes to two modern defenders of introspection, Stout and James. He
quotes from Stout such statements as the following: "Psychical states as
such become objects only when we attend to them in an introspective way.
Otherwise they are not themselves objects, but only constituents of the
process by which objects are recognized" ("Manual," 2nd edition, p. 134.
The word "recognized" in Dunlap's quotation should be "cognized.") "The
object itself can never be identified with the present modification of
the individual's consciousness by which it is cognized" (ib. p. 60).
This is to be true even when we are thinking about modifications of
our own consciousness; such modifications are to be always at least
partially distinct from the conscious experience in which we think of
them.

At this point I wish to interrupt the account of Knight Dunlap's article
in order to make some observations on my own account with reference to
the above quotations from Stout. In the first place, the conception of
"psychical states" seems to me one which demands analysis of a somewhat
destructive character. This analysis I shall give in later lectures as
regards cognition; I have already given it as regards desire. In the
second place, the conception of "objects" depends upon a certain view
as to cognition which I believe to be wholly mistaken, namely, the view
which I discussed in my first lecture in connection with Brentano.
In this view a single cognitive occurrence contains both content and
object, the content being essentially mental, while the object is
physical except in introspection and abstract thought. I have already
criticized this view, and will not dwell upon it now, beyond saying
that "the process by which objects are cognized" appears to be a very
slippery phrase. When we "see a table," as common sense would say, the
table as a physical object is not the "object" (in the psychological
sense) of our perception. Our perception is made up of sensations,
images and beliefs, but the supposed "object" is something inferential,
externally related, not logically bound up with what is occurring in us.
This question of the nature of the object also affects the view we take
of self-consciousness. Obviously, a "conscious experience" is different
from a physical object; therefore it is natural to assume that a thought
or perception whose object is a conscious experience must be different
from a thought or perception whose object is a physical object. But if
the relation to the object is inferential and external, as I maintain,
the difference between two thoughts may bear very little relation to
the difference between their objects. And to speak of "the present
modification of the individual's consciousness by which an object is
cognized" is to suggest that the cognition of objects is a far more
direct process, far more intimately bound up with the objects, than I
believe it to be. All these points will be amplified when we come to the
analysis of knowledge, but it is necessary briefly to state them now in
order to suggest the atmosphere in which our analysis of "introspection"
is to be carried on.

Another point in which Stout's remarks seem to me to suggest what I
regard as mistakes is his use of "consciousness." There is a view which
is prevalent among psychologists, to the effect that one can speak of "a
conscious experience" in a curious dual sense, meaning, on the one hand,
an experience which is conscious of something, and, on the other hand,
an experience which has some intrinsic nature characteristic of what
is called "consciousness." That is to say, a "conscious experience" is
characterized on the one hand by relation to its object and on the
other hand by being composed of a certain peculiar stuff, the stuff of
"consciousness." And in many authors there is yet a third confusion: a
"conscious experience," in this third sense, is an experience of
which we are conscious. All these, it seems to me, need to be clearly
separated. To say that one occurrence is "conscious" of another is, to
my mind, to assert an external and rather remote relation between them.
I might illustrate it by the relation of uncle and nephew a man becomes
an uncle through no effort of his own, merely through an occurrence
elsewhere. Similarly, when you are said to be "conscious" of a table,
the question whether this is really the case cannot be decided by
examining only your state of mind: it is necessary also to ascertain
whether your sensation is having those correlates which past experience
causes you to assume, or whether the table happens, in this case, to be
a mirage. And, as I explained in my first lecture, I do not believe that
there is any "stuff" of consciousness, so that there is no intrinsic
character by which a "conscious" experience could be distinguished from
any other.

After these preliminaries, we can return to Knight Dunlap's article.
His criticism of Stout turns on the difficulty of giving any empirical
meaning to such notions as the "mind" or the "subject"; he quotes from
Stout the sentence: "The most important drawback is that the mind, in
watching its own workings, must necessarily have its attention divided
between two objects," and he concludes: "Without question, Stout is
bringing in here illicitly the concept of a single observer, and his
introspection does not provide for the observation of this observer;
for the process observed and the observer are distinct" (p. 407).
The objections to any theory which brings in the single observer were
considered in Lecture I, and were acknowledged to be cogent. In so
far, therefore, as Stout's theory of introspection rests upon this
assumption, we are compelled to reject it. But it is perfectly possible
to believe in introspection without supposing that there is a single
observer.

William James's theory of introspection, which Dunlap next examines,
does not assume a single observer. It changed after the publication
of his "Psychology," in consequence of his abandoning the dualism of
thought and things. Dunlap summarizes his theory as follows:

"The essential points in James's scheme of consciousness are SUBJECT,
OBJECT, and a KNOWING of the object by the subject. The difference
between James's scheme and other schemes involving the same terms is
that James considers subject and object to be the same thing, but at
different times In order to satisfy this requirement James supposes a
realm of existence which he at first called 'states of consciousness' or
'thoughts,' and later, 'pure experience,' the latter term including both
the 'thoughts' and the 'knowing.' This scheme, with all its magnificent
artificiality, James held on to until the end, simply dropping the
term consciousness and the dualism between the thought and an external
reality"(p. 409).

He adds: "All that James's system really amounts to is the
acknowledgment that a succession of things are known, and that they are
known by something. This is all any one can claim, except for the
fact that the things are known together, and that the knower for the
different items is one and the same" (ib.).

In this statement, to my mind, Dunlap concedes far more than James did
in his later theory. I see no reason to suppose that "the knower for
different items is one and the same," and I am convinced that this
proposition could not possibly be ascertained except by introspection of
the sort that Dunlap rejects. The first of these points must wait until
we come to the analysis of belief: the second must be considered now.
Dunlap's view is that there is a dualism of subject and object, but that
the subject can never become object, and therefore there is no awareness
of an awareness. He says in discussing the view that introspection
reveals the occurrence of knowledge: "There can be no denial of the
existence of the thing (knowing) which is alleged to be known or
observed in this sort of 'introspection.' The allegation that the
knowing is observed is that which may be denied. Knowing there certainly
is; known, the knowing certainly is not"(p. 410). And again: "I am
never aware of an awareness" (ib.). And on the next page: "It may sound
paradoxical to say that one cannot observe the process (or relation) of
observation, and yet may be certain that there is such a process: but
there is really no inconsistency in the saying. How do I know that there
is awareness? By being aware of something. There is no meaning in the
term 'awareness' which is not expressed in the statement 'I am aware of
a colour (or what-not).'"

But the paradox cannot be so lightly disposed of. The statement "I am
aware of a colour" is assumed by Knight Dunlap to be known to be true,
but he does not explain how it comes to be known. The argument against
him is not conclusive, since he may be able to show some valid way of
inferring our awareness. But he does not suggest any such way. There is
nothing odd in the hypothesis of beings which are aware of objects, but
not of their own awareness; it is, indeed, highly probable that young
children and the higher animals are such beings. But such beings cannot
make the statement "I am aware of a colour," which WE can make. We have,
therefore, some knowledge which they lack. It is necessary to Knight
Dunlap's position to maintain that this additional knowledge is purely
inferential, but he makes no attempt to show how the inference is
possible. It may, of course, be possible, but I cannot see how. To my
mind the fact (which he admits) that we know there is awareness, is ALL
BUT decisive against his theory, and in favour of the view that we can
be aware of an awareness.

Dunlap asserts (to return to James) that the real ground for James's
original belief in introspection was his belief in two sorts of
objects, namely, thoughts and things. He suggests that it was a
mere inconsistency on James's part to adhere to introspection after
abandoning the dualism of thoughts and things. I do not wholly agree
with this view, but it is difficult to disentangle the difference as to
introspection from the difference as to the nature of knowing. Dunlap
suggests (p. 411) that what is called introspection really consists of
awareness of "images," visceral sensations, and so on. This view, in
essence, seems to me sound. But then I hold that knowing itself consists
of such constituents suitably related, and that in being aware of them
we are sometimes being aware of instances of knowing. For this reason,
much as I agree with his view as to what are the objects of which
there is awareness, I cannot wholly agree with his conclusion as to the
impossibility of introspection.

The behaviourists have challenged introspection even more vigorously
than Knight Dunlap, and have gone so far as to deny the existence of
images. But I think that they have confused various things which
are very commonly confused, and that it is necessary to make several
distinctions before we can arrive at what is true and what false in the
criticism of introspection.

I wish to distinguish three distinct questions, any one of which may be
meant when we ask whether introspection is a source of knowledge. The
three questions are as follows:

(1) Can we observe anything about ourselves which we cannot observe
about other people, or is everything we can observe PUBLIC, in the sense
that another could also observe it if suitably placed?

(2) Does everything that we can observe obey the laws of physics and
form part of the physical world, or can we observe certain things that
lie outside physics?

(3) Can we observe anything which differs in its intrinsic nature from
the constituents of the physical world, or is everything that we can
observe composed of elements intrinsically similar to the constituents
of what is called matter?

Any one of these three questions may be used to define introspection. I
should favour introspection in the sense of the first question, i.e. I
think that some of the things we observe cannot, even theoretically, be
observed by any one else. The second question, tentatively and for
the present, I should answer in favour of introspection; I think that
images, in the actual condition of science, cannot be brought under the
causal laws of physics, though perhaps ultimately they may be. The
third question I should answer adversely to introspection I think that
observation shows us nothing that is not composed of sensations and
images, and that images differ from sensations in their causal laws, not
intrinsically. I shall deal with the three questions successively.

(1) PUBLICITY OR PRIVACY OF WHAT IS OBSERVED. Confining ourselves, for
the moment, to sensations, we find that there are different degrees
of publicity attaching to different sorts of sensations. If you feel a
toothache when the other people in the room do not, you are in no way
surprised; but if you hear a clap of thunder when they do not, you begin
to be alarmed as to your mental condition. Sight and hearing are the
most public of the senses; smell only a trifle less so; touch, again, a
trifle less, since two people can only touch the same spot successively,
not simultaneously. Taste has a sort of semi-publicity, since people
seem to experience similar taste-sensations when they eat similar foods;
but the publicity is incomplete, since two people cannot eat actually
the same piece of food.

But when we pass on to bodily sensations--headache, toothache, hunger,
thirst, the feeling of fatigue, and so on--we get quite away from
publicity, into a region where other people can tell us what they feel,
but we cannot directly observe their feeling. As a natural result of
this state of affairs, it has come to be thought that the public senses
give us knowledge of the outer world, while the private senses only give
us knowledge as to our own bodies. As regards privacy, all images, of
whatever sort, belong with the sensations which only give knowledge of
our own bodies, i.e. each is only observable by one observer. This is
the reason why images of sight and hearing are more obviously different
from sensations of sight and hearing than images of bodily sensations
are from bodily sensations; and that is why the argument in favour of
images is more conclusive in such cases as sight and hearing than in
such cases as inner speech.

The whole distinction of privacy and publicity, however, so long as we
confine ourselves to sensations, is one of degree, not of kind. No
two people, there is good empirical reason to think, ever have exactly
similar sensations related to the same physical object at the same
moment; on the other hand, even the most private sensation has
correlations which would theoretically enable another observer to infer
it.

That no sensation is ever completely public, results from differences of
point of view. Two people looking at the same table do not get the same
sensation, because of perspective and the way the light falls. They get
only correlated sensations. Two people listening to the same sound do
not hear exactly the same thing, because one is nearer to the source of
the sound than the other, one has better hearing than the other, and
so on. Thus publicity in sensations consists, not in having PRECISELY
similar sensations, but in having more or less similar sensations
correlated according to ascertainable laws. The sensations which strike
us as public are those where the correlated sensations are very similar
and the correlations are very easy to discover. But even the most
private sensations have correlations with things that others can
observe. The dentist does not observe your ache, but he can see the
cavity which causes it, and could guess that you are suffering even
if you did not tell him. This fact, however, cannot be used, as Watson
would apparently wish, to extrude from science observations which are
private to one observer, since it is by means of many such observations
that correlations are established, e.g. between toothaches and cavities.
Privacy, therefore does not by itself make a datum unamenable to
scientific treatment. On this point, the argument against introspection
must be rejected.

(2) DOES EVERYTHING OBSERVABLE OBEY THE LAWS OF PHYSICS? We come now to
the second ground of objection to introspection, namely, that its data
do not obey the laws of physics. This, though less emphasized, is,
I think, an objection which is really more strongly felt than the
objection of privacy. And we obtain a definition of introspection more
in harmony with usage if we define it as observation of data not subject
to physical laws than if we define it by means of privacy. No one would
regard a man as introspective because he was conscious of having a
stomach ache. Opponents of introspection do not mean to deny the obvious
fact that we can observe bodily sensations which others cannot observe.
For example, Knight Dunlap contends that images are really muscular
contractions,* and evidently regards our awareness of muscular
contractions as not coming under the head of introspection. I think it
will be found that the essential characteristic of introspective data,
in the sense which now concerns us, has to do with LOCALIZATION: either
they are not localized at all, or they are localized, like visual
images, in a place already physically occupied by something which would
be inconsistent with them if they were regarded as part of the physical
world. If you have a visual image of your friend sitting in a chair
which in fact is empty, you cannot locate the image in your body,
because it is visual, nor (as a physical phenomenon) in the chair,
because the chair, as a physical object, is empty. Thus it seems to
follow that the physical world does not include all that we are aware
of, and that images, which are introspective data, have to be regarded,
for the present, as not obeying the laws of physics; this is, I think,
one of the chief reasons why an attempt is made to reject them. I
shall try to show in Lecture VIII that the purely empirical reasons for
accepting images are overwhelming. But we cannot be nearly so certain
that they will not ultimately be brought under the laws of physics. Even
if this should happen, however, they would still be distinguishable
from sensations by their proximate causal laws, as gases remain
distinguishable from solids.

     * "Psychological Review," 1916, "Thought-Content and
     Feeling," p. 59. See also ib., 1912, "The Nature of
     Perceived Relations," where he says: "'Introspection,'
     divested of its mythological suggestion of the observing of
     consciousness, is really the observation of bodily
     sensations (sensibles) and feelings (feelables)"(p. 427 n.).

(3) CAN WE OBSERVE ANYTHING INTRINSICALLY DIFFERENT FROM SENSATIONS? We
come now to our third question concerning introspection. It is commonly
thought that by looking within we can observe all sorts of things that
are radically different from the constituents of the physical world,
e.g. thoughts, beliefs, desires, pleasures, pains and emotions. The
difference between mind and matter is increased partly by emphasizing
these supposed introspective data, partly by the supposition that matter
is composed of atoms or electrons or whatever units physics may at the
moment prefer. As against this latter supposition, I contend that
the ultimate constituents of matter are not atoms or electrons, but
sensations, and other things similar to sensations as regards extent and
duration. As against the view that introspection reveals a mental world
radically different from sensations, I propose to argue that thoughts,
beliefs, desires, pleasures, pains and emotions are all built up out
of sensations and images alone, and that there is reason to think that
images do not differ from sensations in their intrinsic character. We
thus effect a mutual rapprochement of mind and matter, and reduce the
ultimate data of introspection (in our second sense) to images alone. On
this third view of the meaning of introspection, therefore, our decision
is wholly against it.

There remain two points to be considered concerning introspection. The
first is as to how far it is trustworthy; the second is as to whether,
even granting that it reveals no radically different STUFF from that
revealed by what might be called external perception, it may not reveal
different RELATIONS, and thus acquire almost as much importance as is
traditionally assigned to it.

To begin with the trustworthiness of introspection. It is common among
certain schools to regard the knowledge of our own mental processes as
incomparably more certain than our knowledge of the "external" world;
this view is to be found in the British philosophy which descends from
Hume, and is present, somewhat veiled, in Kant and his followers.
There seems no reason whatever to accept this view. Our spontaneous,
unsophisticated beliefs, whether as to ourselves or as to the outer
world, are always extremely rash and very liable to error. The
acquisition of caution is equally necessary and equally difficult in
both directions. Not only are we often un aware of entertaining a
belief or desire which exists in us; we are often actually mistaken. The
fallibility of introspection as regards what we desire is made evident
by psycho-analysis; its fallibility as to what we know is easily
demonstrated. An autobiography, when confronted by a careful editor
with documentary evidence, is usually found to be full of obviously
inadvertent errors. Any of us confronted by a forgotten letter written
some years ago will be astonished to find how much more foolish our
opinions were than we had remembered them as being. And as to the
analysis of our mental operations--believing, desiring, willing, or what
not--introspection unaided gives very little help: it is necessary to
construct hypotheses and test them by their consequences, just as we do
in physical science. Introspection, therefore, though it is one among
our sources of knowledge, is not, in isolation, in any degree more
trustworthy than "external" perception.

I come now to our second question: Does introspection give us materials
for the knowledge of relations other than those arrived at by reflecting
upon external perception? It might be contended that the essence of what
is "mental" consists of relations, such as knowing for example, and that
our knowledge concerning these essentially mental relations is entirely
derived from introspection. If "knowing" were an unanalysable relation,
this view would be incontrovertible, since clearly no such relation
forms part of the subject matter of physics. But it would seem that
"knowing" is really various relations, all of them complex. Therefore,
until they have been analysed, our present question must remain
unanswered I shall return to it at the end of the present course of
lectures.




LECTURE VII. THE DEFINITION OF PERCEPTION

In Lecture V we found reason to think that the ultimate constituents*
of the world do not have the characteristics of either mind or matter
as ordinarily understood: they are not solid persistent objects moving
through space, nor are they fragments of "consciousness." But we found
two ways of grouping particulars, one into "things" or "pieces of
matter," the other into series of "perspectives," each series being what
may be called a "biography." Before we can define either sensations
or images, it is necessary to consider this twofold classification
in somewhat greater detail, and to derive from it a definition of
perception. It should be said that, in so far as the classification
assumes the whole world of physics (including its unperceived portions),
it contains hypothetical elements. But we will not linger on the grounds
for admitting these, which belong to the philosophy of physics rather
than of psychology.

     * When I speak of "ultimate constituents," I do not mean
     necessarily such as are theoretically incapable of analysis,
     but only such as, at present, we can see no means of
     analysing. I speak of such constituents as "particulars," or
     as "RELATIVE particulars" when I wish to emphasize the fact
     that they may be themselves complex.

The physical classification of particulars collects together all those
that are aspects of one "thing." Given any one particular, it is
found often (we do not say always) that there are a number of other
particulars differing from this one in gradually increasing degrees.
Those (or some of those) that differ from it only very slightly will
be found to differ approximately according to certain laws which may be
called, in a generalized sense, the laws of "perspective"; they include
the ordinary laws of perspective as a special case. This approximation
grows more and more nearly exact as the difference grows less; in
technical language, the laws of perspective account for the differences
to the first order of small quantities, and other laws are only
required to account for second-order differences. That is to say, as the
difference diminishes, the part of the difference which is not according
to the laws of perspective diminishes much more rapidly, and bears to
the total difference a ratio which tends towards zero as both are made
smaller and smaller. By this means we can theoretically collect together
a number of particulars which may be defined as the "aspects" or
"appearances" of one thing at one time. If the laws of perspective were
sufficiently known, the connection between different aspects would be
expressed in differential equations.

This gives us, so far, only those particulars which constitute one thing
at one time. This set of particulars may be called a "momentary
thing." To define that series of "momentary things" that constitute
the successive states of one thing is a problem involving the laws of
dynamics. These give the laws governing the changes of aspects from
one time to a slightly later time, with the same sort of differential
approximation to exactness as we obtained for spatially neighbouring
aspects through the laws of perspective. Thus a momentary thing is a set
of particulars, while a thing (which may be identified with the whole
history of the thing) is a series of such sets of particulars.
The particulars in one set are collected together by the laws of
perspective; the successive sets are collected together by the laws
of dynamics. This is the view of the world which is appropriate to
traditional physics.

The definition of a "momentary thing" involves problems concerning time,
since the particulars constituting a momentary thing will not be all
simultaneous, but will travel outward from the thing with the velocity
of light (in case the thing is in vacuo). There are complications
connected with relativity, but for our present purpose they are not
vital, and I shall ignore them.

Instead of first collecting together all the particulars constituting
a momentary thing, and then forming the series of successive sets,
we might have first collected together a series of successive aspects
related by the laws of dynamics, and then have formed the set of such
series related by the laws of perspective. To illustrate by the case of
an actor on the stage: our first plan was to collect together all the
aspects which he presents to different spectators at one time, and then
to form the series of such sets. Our second plan is first to collect
together all the aspects which he presents successively to a given
spectator, and then to do the same thing for the other spectators, thus
forming a set of series instead of a series of sets. The first plan
tells us what he does; the second the impressions he produces. This
second way of classifying particulars is one which obviously has more
relevance to psychology than the other. It is partly by this second
method of classification that we obtain definitions of one "experience"
or "biography" or "person." This method of classification is also
essential to the definition of sensations and images, as I shall
endeavour to prove later on. But we must first amplify the definition of
perspectives and biographies.

In our illustration of the actor, we spoke, for the moment, as though
each spectator's mind were wholly occupied by the one actor. If this
were the case, it might be possible to define the biography of one
spectator as a series of successive aspects of the actor related
according to the laws of dynamics. But in fact this is not the case.
We are at all times during our waking life receiving a variety of
impressions, which are aspects of a variety of things. We have to
consider what binds together two simultaneous sensations in one
person, or, more generally, any two occurrences which forte part of one
experience. We might say, adhering to the standpoint of physics, that
two aspects of different things belong to the same perspective when
they are in the same place. But this would not really help us, since a
"place" has not yet been defined. Can we define what is meant by saying
that two aspects are "in the same place," without introducing anything
beyond the laws of perspective and dynamics?

I do not feel sure whether it is possible to frame such a definition or
not; accordingly I shall not assume that it is possible, but shall
seek other characteristics by which a perspective or biography may be
defined.

When (for example) we see one man and hear another speaking at the
same time, what we see and what we hear have a relation which we
can perceive, which makes the two together form, in some sense, one
experience. It is when this relation exists that two occurrences become
associated. Semon's "engram" is formed by all that we experience at one
time. He speaks of two parts of this total as having the relation of
"Nebeneinander" (M. 118; M.E. 33 ff.), which is reminiscent of Herbart's
"Zusammen." I think the relation may be called simply "simultaneity." It
might be said that at any moment all sorts of things that are not part
of my experience are happening in the world, and that therefore the
relation we are seeking to define cannot be merely simultaneity.
This, however, would be an error--the sort of error that the theory
of relativity avoids. There is not one universal time, except by an
elaborate construction; there are only local times, each of which may
be taken to be the time within one biography. Accordingly, if I am (say)
hearing a sound, the only occurrences that are, in any simple sense,
simultaneous with my sensation are events in my private world, i.e. in
my biography. We may therefore define the "perspective" to which
the sensation in question belongs as the set of particulars that are
simultaneous with this sensation. And similarly we may define the
"biography" to which the sensation belongs as the set of particulars
that are earlier or later than, or simultaneous with, the given
sensation. Moreover, the very same definitions can be applied to
particulars which are not sensations. They are actually required for the
theory of relativity, if we are to give a philosophical explanation
of what is meant by "local time" in that theory The relations of
simultaneity and succession are known to us in our own experience;
they may be analysable, but that does not affect their suitability for
defining perspectives and biographies. Such time-relations as can be
constructed between events in different biographies are of a different
kind: they are not experienced, and are merely logical, being designed
to afford convenient ways of stating the correlations between different
biographies.

It is not only by time-relations that the parts of one biography are
collected together in the case of living beings. In this case there are
the mnemic phenomena which constitute the unity of one "experience," and
transform mere occurrences into "experiences." I have already dwelt upon
the importance of mnemic phenomena for psychology, and shall not
enlarge upon them now, beyond observing that they are what transforms a
biography (in our technical sense) into a life. It is they that give the
continuity of a "person" or a "mind." But there is no reason to suppose
that mnemic phenomena are associated with biographies except in the case
of animals and plants.

Our two-fold classification of particulars gives rise to the dualism of
body and biography in regard to everything in the universe, and not only
in regard to living things. This arises as follows. Every particular of
the sort considered by physics is a member of two groups (1) The group
of particulars constituting the other aspects of the same physical
object; (2) The group of particulars that have direct time-relations to
the given particular.

Each of these is associated with a place. When I look at a star, my
sensation is (1) A member of the group of particulars which is the star,
and which is associated with the place where the star is; (2) A
member of the group of particulars which is my biography, and which is
associated with the place where I am.*

     *I have explained elsewhere the manner in which space is
     constructed on this theory, and in which the position of a
     perspective is brought into relation with the position of a
     physical object ("Our Knowledge of the External World,"
     Lecture III, pp. 90, 91).

The result is that every particular of the kind relevant to physics is
associated with TWO places; e.g. my sensation of the star is associated
with the place where I am and with the place where the star is. This
dualism has nothing to do with any "mind" that I may be supposed to
possess; it exists in exactly the same sense if I am replaced by a
photographic plate. We may call the two places the active and passive
places respectively.* Thus in the case of a perception or photograph
of a star, the active place is the place where the star is, while the
passive place is the place where the percipient or photographic plate
is.

     * I use these as mere names; I do not want to introduce any
     notion of "activity."

We can thus, without departing from physics, collect together all the
particulars actively at a given place, or all the particulars passively
at a given place. In our own case, the one group is our body (or
our brain), while the other is our mind, in so far as it consists of
perceptions. In the case of the photographic plate, the first group is
the plate as dealt with by physics, the second the aspect of the heavens
which it photographs. (For the sake of schematic simplicity, I am
ignoring various complications connected with time, which require some
tedious but perfectly feasible elaborations.) Thus what may be called
subjectivity in the point of view is not a distinctive peculiarity of
mind: it is present just as much in the photographic plate. And the
photographic plate has its biography as well as its "matter." But
this biography is an affair of physics, and has none of the peculiar
characteristics by which "mental" phenomena are distinguished, with the
sole exception of subjectivity.

Adhering, for the moment, to the standpoint of physics, we may define a
"perception" of an object as the appearance of the object from a place
where there is a brain (or, in lower animals, some suitable nervous
structure), with sense-organs and nerves forming part of the intervening
medium. Such appearances of objects are distinguished from appearances
in other places by certain peculiarities, namely:

(1) They give rise to mnemic phenomena;

(2) They are themselves affected by mnemic phenomena.

That is to say, they may be remembered and associated or influence our
habits, or give rise to images, etc., and they are themselves different
from what they would have been if our past experience had been
different--for example, the effect of a spoken sentence upon the hearer
depends upon whether the hearer knows the language or not, which is
a question of past experience. It is these two characteristics, both
connected with mnemic phenomena, that distinguish perceptions from the
appearances of objects in places where there is no living being.

Theoretically, though often not practically, we can, in our perception
of an object, separate the part which is due to past experience from the
part which proceeds without mnemic influences out of the character of
the object. We may define as "sensation" that part which proceeds in
this way, while the remainder, which is a mnemic phenomenon, will have
to be added to the sensation to make up what is called the "perception."
According to this definition, the sensation is a theoretical core in
the actual experience; the actual experience is the perception. It
is obvious that there are grave difficulties in carrying out these
definitions, but we will not linger over them. We have to pass, as soon
as we can, from the physical standpoint, which we have been hitherto
adopting, to the standpoint of psychology, in which we make more use
of introspection in the first of the three senses discussed in the
preceding lecture.

But before making the transition, there are two points which must be
made clear. First: Everything outside my own personal biography is
outside my experience; therefore if anything can be known by me outside
my biography, it can only be known in one of two ways:

(1) By inference from things within my biography, or

(2) By some a priori principle independent of experience.

I do not myself believe that anything approaching certainty is to be
attained by either of these methods, and therefore whatever lies outside
my personal biography must be regarded, theoretically, as hypothesis.
The theoretical argument for adopting the hypothesis is that it
simplifies the statement of the laws according to which events happen
in our experience. But there is no very good ground for supposing that
a simple law is more likely to be true than a complicated law, though
there is good ground for assuming a simple law in scientific practice,
as a working hypothesis, if it explains the facts as well as another
which is less simple. Belief in the existence of things outside my own
biography exists antecedently to evidence, and can only be destroyed, if
at all, by a long course of philosophic doubt. For purposes of science,
it is justified practically by the simplification which it introduces
into the laws of physics. But from the standpoint of theoretical logic
it must be regarded as a prejudice, not as a well-grounded theory. With
this proviso, I propose to continue yielding to the prejudice.

The second point concerns the relating of our point of view to that
which regards sensations as caused by stimuli external to the nervous
system (or at least to the brain), and distinguishes images as
"centrally excited," i.e. due to causes in the brain which cannot be
traced back to anything affecting the sense-organs. It is clear that,
if our analysis of physical objects has been valid, this way of defining
sensations needs reinterpretation. It is also clear that we must be able
to find such a new interpretation if our theory is to be admissible.

To make the matter clear, we will take the simplest possible
illustration. Consider a certain star, and suppose for the moment
that its size is negligible. That is to say, we will regard it as, for
practical purposes, a luminous point. Let us further suppose that it
exists only for a very brief time, say a second. Then, according to
physics, what happens is that a spherical wave of light travels outward
from the star through space, just as, when you drop a stone into a
stagnant pond, ripples travel outward from the place where the stone hit
the water. The wave of light travels with a certain very nearly constant
velocity, roughly 300,000 kilometres per second. This velocity may be
ascertained by sending a flash of light to a mirror, and observing
how long it takes before the reflected flash reaches you, just as the
velocity of sound may be ascertained by means of an echo.

What it is that happens when a wave of light reaches a given place we
cannot tell, except in the sole case when the place in question is a
brain connected with an eye which is turned in the right direction. In
this one very special case we know what happens: we have the sensation
called "seeing the star." In all other cases, though we know (more or
less hypothetically) some of the correlations and abstract properties
of the appearance of the star, we do not know the appearance itself. Now
you may, for the sake of illustration, compare the different appearances
of the star to the conjugation of a Greek verb, except that the number
of its parts is really infinite, and not only apparently so to the
despairing schoolboy. In vacuo, the parts are regular, and can be
derived from the (imaginary) root according to the laws of grammar,
i.e. of perspective. The star being situated in empty space, it may be
defined, for purposes of physics, as consisting of all those appearances
which it presents in vacuo, together with those which, according to
the laws of perspective, it would present elsewhere if its appearances
elsewhere were regular. This is merely the adaptation of the definition
of matter which I gave in an earlier lecture. The appearance of a star
at a certain place, if it is regular, does not require any cause or
explanation beyond the existence of the star. Every regular appearance
is an actual member of the system which is the star, and its causation
is entirely internal to that system. We may express this by saying that
a regular appearance is due to the star alone, and is actually part of
the star, in the sense in which a man is part of the human race.

But presently the light of the star reaches our atmosphere. It begins
to be refracted, and dimmed by mist, and its velocity is slightly
diminished. At last it reaches a human eye, where a complicated process
takes place, ending in a sensation which gives us our grounds for
believing in all that has gone before. Now, the irregular appearances of
the star are not, strictly speaking, members of the system which is the
star, according to our definition of matter. The irregular appearances,
however, are not merely irregular: they proceed according to laws which
can be stated in terms of the matter through which the light has
passed on its way. The sources of an irregular appearance are therefore
twofold:

(1) The object which is appearing irregularly;

2) The intervening medium.

It should be observed that, while the conception of a regular appearance
is perfectly precise, the conception of an irregular appearance is one
capable of any degree of vagueness. When the distorting influence of the
medium is sufficiently great, the resulting particular can no longer be
regarded as an appearance of an object, but must be treated on its own
account. This happens especially when the particular in question cannot
be traced back to one object, but is a blend of two or more. This case
is normal in perception: we see as one what the microscope or telescope
reveals to be many different objects. The notion of perception is
therefore not a precise one: we perceive things more or less, but always
with a very considerable amount of vagueness and confusion.

In considering irregular appearances, there are certain very natural
mistakes which must be avoided. In order that a particular may count as
an irregular appearance of a certain object, it is not necessary that
it should bear any resemblance to the regular appearances as regard
its intrinsic qualities. All that is necessary is that it should be
derivable from the regular appearances by the laws which express
the distorting influence of the medium. When it is so derivable,
the particular in question may be regarded as caused by the regular
appearances, and therefore by the object itself, together with the
modifications resulting from the medium. In other cases, the particular
in question may, in the same sense, be regarded as caused by several
objects together with the medium; in this case, it may be called a
confused appearance of several objects. If it happens to be in a brain,
it may be called a confused perception of these objects. All actual
perception is confused to a greater or less extent.

We can now interpret in terms of our theory the distinction between
those mental occurrences which are said to have an external stimulus,
and those which are said to be "centrally excited," i.e. to have no
stimulus external to the brain. When a mental occurrence can be regarded
as an appearance of an object external to the brain, however irregular,
or even as a confused appearance of several such objects, then we may
regard it as having for its stimulus the object or objects in question,
or their appearances at the sense-organ concerned. When, on the other
hand, a mental occurrence has not sufficient connection with objects
external to the brain to be regarded as an appearance of such objects,
then its physical causation (if any) will have to be sought in the
brain. In the former case it can be called a perception; in the latter
it cannot be so called. But the distinction is one of degree, not of
kind. Until this is realized, no satisfactory theory of perception,
sensation, or imagination is possible.




LECTURE VIII. SENSATIONS AND IMAGES

The dualism of mind and matter, if we have been right so far, cannot be
allowed as metaphysically valid. Nevertheless, we seem to find a certain
dualism, perhaps not ultimate, within the world as we observe it. The
dualism is not primarily as to the stuff of the world, but as to causal
laws. On this subject we may again quote William James. He points out
that when, as we say, we merely "imagine" things, there are no such
effects as would ensue if the things were what we call "real." He takes
the case of imagining a fire.

"I make for myself an experience of blazing fire; I place it near my
body; but it does not warm me in the least. I lay a stick upon it and
the stick either burns or remains green, as I please. I call up water,
and pour it on the fire, and absolutely no difference ensues. I account
for all such facts by calling this whole train of experiences unreal, a
mental train. Mental fire is what won't burn real sticks; mental water
is what won't necessarily (though of course it may) put out even a
mental fire.... With 'real' objects, on the contrary, consequences
always accrue; and thus the real experiences get sifted from the mental
ones, the things from our thoughts of them, fanciful or true, and
precipitated together as the stable part of the whole experience--chaos,
under the name of the physical world."*

     * "Essays in Radical Empiricism," pp. 32-3.

In this passage James speaks, by mere inadvertence, as though the
phenomena which he is describing as "mental" had NO effects. This is, of
course, not the case: they have their effects, just as much as physical
phenomena do, but their effects follow different laws. For example,
dreams, as Freud has shown, are just as much subject to laws as are the
motions of the planets. But the laws are different: in a dream you may
be transported from one place to another in a moment, or one person
may turn into another under your eyes. Such differences compel you to
distinguish the world of dreams from the physical world.

If the two sorts of causal laws could be sharply distinguished, we could
call an occurrence "physical" when it obeys causal laws appropriate to
the physical world, and "mental" when it obeys causal laws appropriate
to the mental world. Since the mental world and the physical world
interact, there would be a boundary between the two: there would be
events which would have physical causes and mental effects, while there
would be others which would have mental causes and physical effects.
Those that have physical causes and mental effects we should define as
"sensations." Those that have mental causes and physical effects might
perhaps be identified with what we call voluntary movements; but they do
not concern us at present.

These definitions would have all the precision that could be desired if
the distinction between physical and psychological causation were clear
and sharp. As a matter of fact, however, this distinction is, as yet, by
no means sharp. It is possible that, with fuller knowledge, it will be
found to be no more ultimate than the distinction between the laws of
gases and the laws of rigid bodies. It also suffers from the fact that
an event may be an effect of several causes according to several causal
laws we cannot, in general, point to anything unique as THE cause of
such-and-such an event. And finally it is by no means certain that
the peculiar causal laws which govern mental events are not really
physiological. The law of habit, which is one of the most distinctive,
may be fully explicable in terms of the peculiarities of nervous tissue,
and these peculiarities, in turn, may be explicable by the laws of
physics. It seems, therefore, that we are driven to a different kind of
definition. It is for this reason that it was necessary to develop
the definition of perception. With this definition, we can define a
sensation as the non-mnemic elements in a perception.

When, following our definition, we try to decide what elements in our
experience are of the nature of sensations, we find more difficulty
than might have been expected. Prima facie, everything is sensation that
comes to us through the senses: the sights we see, the sounds we hear,
the smells we smell, and so on; also such things as headache or the
feeling of muscular strain. But in actual fact so much interpretation,
so much of habitual correlation, is mixed with all such experiences,
that the core of pure sensation is only to be extracted by careful
investigation. To take a simple illustration: if you go to the theatre
in your own country, you seem to hear equally well in the stalls or the
dress circle; in either case you think you miss nothing. But if you go
in a foreign country where you have a fair knowledge of the language,
you will seem to have grown partially deaf, and you will find it
necessary to be much nearer the stage than you would need to be in your
own country. The reason is that, in hearing our own language spoken, we
quickly and unconsciously fill out what we really hear with inferences
to what the man must be saying, and we never realize that we have not
heard the words we have merely inferred. In a foreign language, these
inferences are more difficult, and we are more dependent upon actual
sensation. If we found ourselves in a foreign world, where tables looked
like cushions and cushions like tables, we should similarly discover how
much of what we think we see is really inference. Every fairly familiar
sensation is to us a sign of the things that usually go with it, and
many of these things will seem to form part of the sensation. I remember
in the early days of motor-cars being with a friend when a tyre burst
with a loud report. He thought it was a pistol, and supported his
opinion by maintaining that he had seen the flash. But of course there
had been no flash. Nowadays no one sees a flash when a tyre bursts.

In order, therefore, to arrive at what really is sensation in an
occurrence which, at first sight, seems to contain nothing else, we have
to pare away all that is due to habit or expectation or interpretation.
This is a matter for the psychologist, and by no means an easy matter.
For our purposes, it is not important to determine what exactly is the
sensational core in any case; it is only important to notice that
there certainly is a sensational core, since habit, expectation and
interpretation are diversely aroused on diverse occasions, and the
diversity is clearly due to differences in what is presented to
the senses. When you open your newspaper in the morning, the actual
sensations of seeing the print form a very minute part of what goes
on in you, but they are the starting-point of all the rest, and it
is through them that the newspaper is a means of information or
mis-information. Thus, although it may be difficult to determine what
exactly is sensation in any given experience, it is clear that there is
sensation, unless, like Leibniz, we deny all action of the outer world
upon us.

Sensations are obviously the source of our knowledge of the world,
including our own body. It might seem natural to regard a sensation as
itself a cognition, and until lately I did so regard it. When, say, I
see a person I know coming towards me in the street, it SEEMS as
though the mere seeing were knowledge. It is of course undeniable that
knowledge comes THROUGH the seeing, but I think it is a mistake to
regard the mere seeing itself as knowledge. If we are so to regard it,
we must distinguish the seeing from what is seen: we must say that, when
we see a patch of colour of a certain shape, the patch of colour is one
thing and our seeing of it is another. This view, however, demands the
admission of the subject, or act, in the sense discussed in our first
lecture. If there is a subject, it can have a relation to the patch of
colour, namely, the sort of relation which we might call awareness. In
that case the sensation, as a mental event, will consist of awareness of
the colour, while the colour itself will remain wholly physical, and
may be called the sense-datum, to distinguish it from the sensation.
The subject, however, appears to be a logical fiction, like mathematical
points and instants. It is introduced, not because observation reveals
it, but because it is linguistically convenient and apparently demanded
by grammar. Nominal entities of this sort may or may not exist, but
there is no good ground for assuming that they do. The functions that
they appear to perform can always be performed by classes or series or
other logical constructions, consisting of less dubious entities. If we
are to avoid a perfectly gratuitous assumption, we must dispense with
the subject as one of the actual ingredients of the world. But when
we do this, the possibility of distinguishing the sensation from
the sense-datum vanishes; at least I see no way of preserving the
distinction. Accordingly the sensation that we have when we see a patch
of colour simply is that patch of colour, an actual constituent of the
physical world, and part of what physics is concerned with. A patch of
colour is certainly not knowledge, and therefore we cannot say that pure
sensation is cognitive. Through its psychological effects, it is the
cause of cognitions, partly by being itself a sign of things that
are correlated with it, as e.g. sensations of sight and touch are
correlated, and partly by giving rise to images and memories after the
sensation is faded. But in itself the pure sensation is not cognitive.

In the first lecture we considered the view of Brentano, that "we may
define psychical phenomena by saying that they are phenomena which
intentionally contain an object." We saw reasons to reject this view in
general; we are now concerned to show that it must be rejected in the
particular case of sensations. The kind of argument which formerly made
me accept Brentano's view in this case was exceedingly simple. When I
see a patch of colour, it seemed to me that the colour is not psychical,
but physical, while my seeing is not physical, but psychical. Hence
I concluded that the colour is something other than my seeing of
the colour. This argument, to me historically, was directed against
idealism: the emphatic part of it was the assertion that the colour is
physical, not psychical. I shall not trouble you now with the grounds
for holding as against Berkeley that the patch of colour is physical; I
have set them forth before, and I see no reason to modify them. But it
does not follow that the patch of colour is not also psychical, unless
we assume that the physical and the psychical cannot overlap, which I
no longer consider a valid assumption. If we admit--as I think we
should--that the patch of colour may be both physical and psychical, the
reason for distinguishing the sense-datum from the sensation disappears,
and we may say that the patch of colour and our sensation in seeing it
are identical.

This is the view of William James, Professor Dewey, and the American
realists. Perceptions, says Professor Dewey, are not per se cases of
knowledge, but simply natural events with no more knowledge status
than (say) a shower. "Let them [the realists] try the experiment of
conceiving perceptions as pure natural events, not cases of awareness or
apprehension, and they will be surprised to see how little they miss."*
I think he is right in this, except in supposing that the realists will
be surprised. Many of them already hold the view he is advocating, and
others are very sympathetic to it. At any rate, it is the view which I
shall adopt in these lectures.

     * Dewey, "Essays in Experimental Logic," pp. 253, 262.

The stuff of the world, so far as we have experience of it, consists, on
the view that I am advocating, of innumerable transient particulars such
as occur in seeing, hearing, etc., together with images more or less
resembling these, of which I shall speak shortly. If physics is true,
there are, besides the particulars that we experience, others, probably
equally (or almost equally) transient, which make up that part of the
material world that does not come into the sort of contact with a
living body that is required to turn it into a sensation. But this topic
belongs to the philosophy of physics, and need not concern us in our
present inquiry.

Sensations are what is common to the mental and physical worlds; they
may be defined as the intersection of mind and matter. This is by no
means a new view; it is advocated, not only by the American authors I
have mentioned, but by Mach in his Analysis of Sensations, which was
published in 1886. The essence of sensation, according to the view I am
advocating, is its independence of past experience. It is a core in our
actual experiences, never existing in isolation except possibly in very
young infants. It is not itself knowledge, but it supplies the data for
our knowledge of the physical world, including our own bodies.

There are some who believe that our mental life is built up out of
sensations alone. This may be true; but in any case I think the only
ingredients required in addition to sensations are images. What images
are, and how they are to be defined, we have now to inquire.

The distinction between images and sensations might seem at first sight
by no means difficult. When we shut our eyes and call up pictures of
familiar scenes, we usually have no difficulty, so long as we remain
awake, in discriminating between what we are imagining and what is
really seen. If we imagine some piece of music that we know, we can go
through it in our mind from beginning to end without any discoverable
tendency to suppose that we are really hearing it. But although such
cases are so clear that no confusion seems possible, there are many
others that are far more difficult, and the definition of images is by
no means an easy problem.

To begin with: we do not always know whether what we are experiencing is
a sensation or an image. The things we see in dreams when our eyes are
shut must count as images, yet while we are dreaming they seem like
sensations. Hallucinations often begin as persistent images, and only
gradually acquire that influence over belief that makes the patient
regard them as sensations. When we are listening for a faint sound--the
striking of a distant clock, or a horse's hoofs on the road--we think
we hear it many times before we really do, because expectation brings
us the image, and we mistake it for sensation. The distinction between
images and sensations is, therefore, by no means always obvious to
inspection.*

     * On the distinction between images and sensation, cf.
     Semon, "Die mnemischen Empfindungen," pp. 19-20.

We may consider three different ways in which it has been sought to
distinguish images from sensations, namely:

(1) By the less degree of vividness in images;

(2) By our absence of belief in their "physical reality";

(3) By the fact that their causes and effects are different from those
of sensations.

I believe the third of these to be the only universally applicable
criterion. The other two are applicable in very many cases, but
cannot be used for purposes of definition because they are liable to
exceptions. Nevertheless, they both deserve to be carefully considered.

(1) Hume, who gives the names "impressions" and "ideas" to what may,
for present purposes, be identified with our "sensations" and "images,"
speaks of impressions as "those perceptions which enter with most force
and violence" while he defines ideas as "the faint images of these (i.e.
of impressions) in thinking and reasoning." His immediately following
observations, however, show the inadequacy of his criteria of "force"
and "faintness." He says:

"I believe it will not be very necessary to employ many words in
explaining this distinction. Every one of himself will readily perceive
the difference betwixt feeling and thinking. The common degrees of these
are easily distinguished, though it is not impossible but in particular
instances they may very nearly approach to each other. Thus in sleep, in
a fever, in madness, or in any very violent emotions of soul, our ideas
may approach to our impressions; as, on the other hand, it sometimes
happens, that our impressions are so faint and low that we cannot
distinguish them from our ideas. But notwithstanding this near
resemblance in a few instances, they are in general so very different,
that no one can make a scruple to rank them under distinct heads, and
assign to each a peculiar name to mark the difference" ("Treatise of
Human Nature," Part I, Section I).

I think Hume is right in holding that they should be ranked under
distinct heads, with a peculiar name for each. But by his own confession
in the above passage, his criterion for distinguishing them is not
always adequate. A definition is not sound if it only applies in cases
where the difference is glaring: the essential purpose of a definition
is to provide a mark which is applicable even in marginal cases--except,
of course, when we are dealing with a conception, like, e.g. baldness,
which is one of degree and has no sharp boundaries. But so far we have
seen no reason to think that the difference between sensations and
images is only one of degree.

Professor Stout, in his "Manual of Psychology," after discussing various
ways of distinguishing sensations and images, arrives at a view which is
a modification of Hume's. He says (I quote from the second edition):

"Our conclusion is that at bottom the distinction between image
and percept, as respectively faint and vivid states, is based on a
difference of quality. The percept has an aggressiveness which does not
belong to the image. It strikes the mind with varying degrees of force
or liveliness according to the varying intensity of the stimulus. This
degree of force or liveliness is part of what we ordinarily mean by
the intensity of a sensation. But this constituent of the intensity of
sensations is absent in mental imagery"(p. 419).

This view allows for the fact that sensations may reach any degree of
faintness--e.g. in the case of a just visible star or a just audible
sound--without becoming images, and that therefore mere faintness cannot
be the characteristic mark of images. After explaining the sudden shock
of a flash of lightning or a steam-whistle, Stout says that "no mere
image ever does strike the mind in this manner"(p. 417). But I believe
that this criterion fails in very much the same instances as those in
which Hume's criterion fails in its original form. Macbeth speaks of--

               that suggestion
           Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair
     And make my seated heart knock at my ribs
     Against the use of nature.

The whistle of a steam-engine could hardly have a stronger effect than
this. A very intense emotion will often bring with it--especially
where some future action or some undecided issue is involved--powerful
compelling images which may determine the whole course of life, sweeping
aside all contrary solicitations to the will by their capacity for
exclusively possessing the mind. And in all cases where images,
originally recognized as such, gradually pass into hallucinations, there
must be just that "force or liveliness" which is supposed to be always
absent from images. The cases of dreams and fever-delirium are as
hard to adjust to Professor Stout's modified criterion as to Hume's. I
conclude therefore that the test of liveliness, however applicable in
ordinary instances, cannot be used to define the differences between
sensations and images.

(2) We might attempt to distinguish images from sensations by our
absence of belief in the "physical reality" of images. When we are aware
that what we are experiencing is an image, we do not give it the kind of
belief that we should give to a sensation: we do not think that it has
the same power of producing knowledge of the "external world." Images
are "imaginary"; in SOME sense they are "unreal." But this difference
is hard to analyse or state correctly. What we call the "unreality" of
images requires interpretation it cannot mean what would be expressed
by saying "there's no such thing." Images are just as truly part of the
actual world as sensations are. All that we really mean by calling an
image "unreal" is that it does not have the concomitants which it would
have if it were a sensation. When we call up a visual image of a chair,
we do not attempt to sit in it, because we know that, like Macbeth's
dagger, it is not "sensible to feeling as to sight"--i.e. it does not
have the correlations with tactile sensations which it would have if it
were a visual sensation and not merely a visual image. But this means
that the so-called "unreality" of images consists merely in their not
obeying the laws of physics, and thus brings us back to the causal
distinction between images and sensations.

This view is confirmed by the fact that we only feel images to be
"unreal" when we already know them to be images. Images cannot be
defined by the FEELING of unreality, because when we falsely believe an
image to be a sensation, as in the case of dreams, it FEELS just as real
as if it were a sensation. Our feeling of unreality results from our
having already realized that we are dealing with an image, and cannot
therefore be the definition of what we mean by an image. As soon as an
image begins to deceive us as to its status, it also deceives us as to
its correlations, which are what we mean by its "reality."

(3) This brings us to the third mode of distinguishing images from
sensations, namely, by their causes and effects. I believe this to be
the only valid ground of distinction. James, in the passage about the
mental fire which won't burn real sticks, distinguishes images by their
effects, but I think the more reliable distinction is by their causes.
Professor Stout (loc. cit., p. 127) says: "One characteristic mark of
what we agree in calling sensation is its mode of production. It is
caused by what we call a STIMULUS. A stimulus is always some condition
external to the nervous system itself and operating upon it." I think
that this is the correct view, and that the distinction between images
and sensations can only be made by taking account of their causation.
Sensations come through sense-organs, while images do not. We cannot
have visual sensations in the dark, or with our eyes shut, but we can
very well have visual images under these circumstances. Accordingly
images have been defined as "centrally excited sensations," i.e.
sensations which have their physiological cause in the brain only, not
also in the sense-organs and the nerves that run from the sense-organs
to the brain. I think the phrase "centrally excited sensations" assumes
more than is necessary, since it takes it for granted that an image must
have a proximate physiological cause. This is probably true, but it is
an hypothesis, and for our purposes an unnecessary one. It would seem to
fit better with what we can immediately observe if we were to say that
an image is occasioned, through association, by a sensation or another
image, in other words that it has a mnemic cause--which does not prevent
it from also having a physical cause. And I think it will be found that
the causation of an image always proceeds according to mnemic laws, i.e.
that it is governed by habit and past experience. If you listen to a man
playing the pianola without looking at him, you will have images of his
hands on the keys as if he were playing the piano; if you suddenly look
at him while you are absorbed in the music, you will experience a shock
of surprise when you notice that his hands are not touching the notes.
Your image of his hands is due to the many times that you have heard
similar sounds and at the same time seen the player's hands on the
piano. When habit and past experience play this part, we are in the
region of mnemic as opposed to ordinary physical causation. And I think
that, if we could regard as ultimately valid the difference between
physical and mnemic causation, we could distinguish images from
sensations as having mnemic causes, though they may also have physical
causes. Sensations, on the other hand, will only have physical causes.

However this may be, the practically effective distinction between
sensations and images is that in the causation of sensations, but not
of images, the stimulation of nerves carrying an effect into the brain,
usually from the surface of the body, plays an essential part. And
this accounts for the fact that images and sensations cannot always be
distinguished by their intrinsic nature.

Images also differ from sensations as regards their effects. Sensations,
as a rule, have both physical and mental effects. As you watch the train
you meant to catch leaving the station, there are both the successive
positions of the train (physical effects) and the successive waves
of fury and disappointment (mental effects). Images, on the contrary,
though they MAY produce bodily movements, do so according to mnemic
laws, not according to the laws of physics. All their effects, of
whatever nature, follow mnemic laws. But this difference is less
suitable for definition than the difference as to causes.

Professor Watson, as a logical carrying-out of his behaviourist theory,
denies altogether that there are any observable phenomena such as
images are supposed to be. He replaces them all by faint sensations, and
especially by pronunciation of words sotto voce. When we "think" of a
table (say), as opposed to seeing it, what happens, according to him, is
usually that we are making small movements of the throat and tongue
such as would lead to our uttering the word "table" if they were more
pronounced. I shall consider his view again in connection with words;
for the present I am only concerned to combat his denial of images. This
denial is set forth both in his book on "Behavior" and in an article
called "Image and Affection in Behavior" in the "Journal of Philosophy,
Psychology and Scientific Methods," vol. x (July, 1913). It seems to me
that in this matter he has been betrayed into denying plain facts in
the interests of a theory, namely, the supposed impossibility of
introspection. I dealt with the theory in Lecture VI; for the present I
wish to reinforce the view that the facts are undeniable.

Images are of various sorts, according to the nature of the sensations
which they copy. Images of bodily movements, such as we have when we
imagine moving an arm or, on a smaller scale, pronouncing a word,
might possibly be explained away on Professor Watson's lines, as really
consisting in small incipient movements such as, if magnified and
prolonged, would be the movements we are said to be imagining. Whether
this is the case or not might even be decided experimentally. If there
were a delicate instrument for recording small movements in the mouth
and throat, we might place such an instrument in a person's mouth and
then tell him to recite a poem to himself, as far as possible only in
imagination. I should not be at all surprised if it were found that
actual small movements take place while he is "mentally" saying over
the verses. The point is important, because what is called "thought"
consists mainly (though I think not wholly) of inner speech. If
Professor Watson is right as regards inner speech, this whole region
is transferred from imagination to sensation. But since the question
is capable of experimental decision, it would be gratuitous rashness to
offer an opinion while that decision is lacking.

But visual and auditory images are much more difficult to deal with in
this way, because they lack the connection with physical events in the
outer world which belongs to visual and auditory sensations. Suppose,
for example, that I am sitting in my room, in which there is an empty
arm-chair. I shut my eyes, and call up a visual image of a friend
sitting in the arm-chair. If I thrust my image into the world of
physics, it contradicts all the usual physical laws. My friend reached
the chair without coming in at the door in the usual way; subsequent
inquiry will show that he was somewhere else at the moment. If regarded
as a sensation, my image has all the marks of the supernatural. My
image, therefore, is regarded as an event in me, not as having that
position in the orderly happenings of the public world that belongs to
sensations. By saying that it is an event in me, we leave it possible
that it may be PHYSIOLOGICALLY caused: its privacy may be only due to
its connection with my body. But in any case it is not a public event,
like an actual person walking in at the door and sitting down in
my chair. And it cannot, like inner speech, be regarded as a SMALL
sensation, since it occupies just as large an area in my visual field as
the actual sensation would do.

Professor Watson says: "I should throw out imagery altogether
and attempt to show that all natural thought goes on in terms of
sensori-motor processes in the larynx." This view seems to me flatly to
contradict experience. If you try to persuade any uneducated person that
she cannot call up a visual picture of a friend sitting in a chair, but
can only use words describing what such an occurrence would be like,
she will conclude that you are mad. (This statement is based upon
experiment.) Galton, as every one knows, investigated visual imagery,
and found that education tends to kill it: the Fellows of the Royal
Society turned out to have much less of it than their wives. I see no
reason to doubt his conclusion that the habit of abstract pursuits makes
learned men much inferior to the average in power of visualizing, and
much more exclusively occupied with words in their "thinking." And
Professor Watson is a very learned man.

I shall henceforth assume that the existence of images is admitted, and
that they are to be distinguished from sensations by their causes,
as well as, in a lesser degree, by their effects. In their intrinsic
nature, though they often differ from sensations by being more dim
or vague or faint, yet they do not always or universally differ from
sensations in any way that can be used for defining them. Their privacy
need form no bar to the scientific study of them, any more than the
privacy of bodily sensations does. Bodily sensations are admitted by
even the most severe critics of introspection, although, like images,
they can only be observed by one observer. It must be admitted, however,
that the laws of the appearance and disappearance of images are little
known and difficult to discover, because we are not assisted, as in the
case of sensations, by our knowledge of the physical world.

There remains one very important point concerning images, which will
occupy us much hereafter, and that is, their resemblance to previous
sensations. They are said to be "copies" of sensations, always as
regards the simple qualities that enter into them, though not always
as regards the manner in which these are put together. It is generally
believed that we cannot imagine a shade of colour that we have never
seen, or a sound that we have never heard. On this subject Hume is the
classic. He says, in the definitions already quoted:

"Those perceptions, which enter with most force and violence, we may
name IMPRESSIONS; and under this name I comprehend all our sensations,
passions and emotions, as they make their first appearance in the soul.
By IDEAS I mean the faint images of these in thinking and reasoning."

He next explains the difference between simple and complex ideas, and
explains that a complex idea may occur without any similar complex
impression. But as regards simple ideas, he states that "every simple
idea has a simple impression, which resembles it, and every simple
impression a correspondent idea." He goes on to enunciate the general
principle "that all our simple ideas in their first appearance are
derived from simple impressions, which are correspondent to them, and
which they exactly represent" ("Treatise of Human Nature," Part I,
Section I).

It is this fact, that images resemble antecedent sensations, which
enables us to call them images "of" this or that. For the understanding
of memory, and of knowledge generally, the recognizable resemblance of
images and sensations is of fundamental importance.

There are difficulties in establishing Hume's principles, and doubts
as to whether it is exactly true. Indeed, he himself signalized an
exception immediately after stating his maxim. Nevertheless, it is
impossible to doubt that in the main simple images are copies of similar
simple sensations which have occurred earlier, and that the same is true
of complex images in all cases of memory as opposed to mere imagination.
Our power of acting with reference to what is sensibly absent is largely
due to this characteristic of images, although, as education advances,
images tend to be more and more replaced by words. We shall have much
to say in the next two lectures on the subject of images as copies of
sensations. What has been said now is merely by way of reminder that
this is their most notable characteristic.

I am by no means confident that the distinction between images and
sensations is ultimately valid, and I should be glad to be convinced
that images can be reduced to sensations of a peculiar kind. I think it
is clear, however, that, at any rate in the case of auditory and visual
images, they do differ from ordinary auditory and visual sensations, and
therefore form a recognizable class of occurrences, even if it should
prove that they can be regarded as a sub-class of sensations. This is
all that is necessary to validate the use of images to be made in the
sequel.




LECTURE IX. MEMORY

Memory, which we are to consider to-day, introduces us to knowledge in
one of its forms. The analysis of knowledge will occupy us until the end
of the thirteenth lecture, and is the most difficult part of our whole
enterprise.

I do not myself believe that the analysis of knowledge can be effected
entirely by means of purely external observation, such as behaviourists
employ. I shall discuss this question in later lectures. In the present
lecture I shall attempt the analysis of memory-knowledge, both as an
introduction to the problem of knowledge in general, and because memory,
in some form, is presupposed in almost all other knowledge. Sensation,
we decided, is not a form of knowledge. It might, however, have
been expected that we should begin our discussion of knowledge with
PERCEPTION, i.e. with that integral experience of things in the
environment, out of which sensation is extracted by psychological
analysis. What is called perception differs from sensation by the fact
that the sensational ingredients bring up habitual associates--images
and expectations of their usual correlates--all of which are
subjectively indistinguishable from the sensation. The FACT of past
experience is essential in producing this filling-out of sensation, but
not the RECOLLECTION of past experience. The non-sensational elements in
perception can be wholly explained as the result of habit, produced
by frequent correlations. Perception, according to our definition in
Lecture VII, is no more a form of knowledge than sensation is, except
in so far as it involves expectations. The purely psychological problems
which it raises are not very difficult, though they have sometimes been
rendered artificially obscure by unwillingness to admit the fallibility
of the non-sensational elements of perception. On the other hand, memory
raises many difficult and very important problems, which it is necessary
to consider at the first possible moment.

One reason for treating memory at this early stage is that it seems to
be involved in the fact that images are recognized as "copies" of
past sensible experience. In the preceding lecture I alluded to Hume's
principle "that all our simple ideas in their first appearance are
derived from simple impressions, which are correspondent to them, and
which they exactly represent." Whether or not this principle is liable
to exceptions, everyone would agree that is has a broad measure of
truth, though the word "exactly" might seem an overstatement, and
it might seem more correct to say that ideas APPROXIMATELY represent
impressions. Such modifications of Hume's principle, however, do not
affect the problem which I wish to present for your consideration,
namely: Why do we believe that images are, sometimes or always,
approximately or exactly, copies of sensations? What sort of evidence is
there? And what sort of evidence is logically possible? The difficulty
of this question arises through the fact that the sensation which an
image is supposed to copy is in the past when the image exists, and can
therefore only be known by memory, while, on the other hand, memory of
past sensations seems only possible by means of present images. How,
then, are we to find any way of comparing the present image and the past
sensation? The problem is just as acute if we say that images differ
from their prototypes as if we say that they resemble them; it is the
very possibility of comparison that is hard to understand.* We think
we can know that they are alike or different, but we cannot bring them
together in one experience and compare them. To deal with this problem,
we must have a theory of memory. In this way the whole status of images
as "copies" is bound up with the analysis of memory.

     * How, for example, can we obtain such knowledge as the
     following: "If we look at, say, a red nose and perceive it,
     and after a little while ekphore, its memory-image, we note
     immediately how unlike, in its likeness, this memory-image
     is to the original perception" (A. Wohlgemuth, "On the
     Feelings and their Neural Correlate with an Examination of
     the Nature of Pain," "Journal of Psychology," vol. viii,
     part iv, June, 1917).

In investigating memory-beliefs, there are certain points which must
be borne in mind. In the first place, everything constituting a
memory-belief is happening now, not in that past time to which the
belief is said to refer. It is not logically necessary to the existence
of a memory-belief that the event remembered should have occurred,
or even that the past should have existed at all. There is no logical
impossibility in the hypothesis that the world sprang into being five
minutes ago, exactly as it then was, with a population that "remembered"
a wholly unreal past. There is no logically necessary connection between
events at different times; therefore nothing that is happening now or
will happen in the future can disprove the hypothesis that the world
began five minutes ago. Hence the occurrences which are CALLED knowledge
of the past are logically independent of the past; they are wholly
analysable into present contents, which might, theoretically, be just
what they are even if no past had existed.

I am not suggesting that the non-existence of the past should be
entertained as a serious hypothesis. Like all sceptical hypotheses, it
is logically tenable, but uninteresting. All that I am doing is to use
its logical tenability as a help in the analysis of what occurs when we
remember.

In the second place, images without beliefs are insufficient to
constitute memory; and habits are still more insufficient. The
behaviourist, who attempts to make psychology a record of behaviour, has
to trust his memory in making the record. "Habit" is a concept involving
the occurrence of similar events at different times; if the behaviourist
feels confident that there is such a phenomenon as habit, that can only
be because he trusts his memory, when it assures him that there have
been other times. And the same applies to images. If we are to know as
it is supposed we do--that images are "copies," accurate or inaccurate,
of past events, something more than the mere occurrence of images must
go to constitute this knowledge. For their mere occurrence, by itself,
would not suggest any connection with anything that had happened before.

Can we constitute memory out of images together with suitable beliefs?
We may take it that memory-images, when they occur in true memory, are
(a) known to be copies, (b) sometimes known to be imperfect copies
(cf. footnote on previous page). How is it possible to know that a
memory-image is an imperfect copy, without having a more accurate copy
by which to replace it? This would SEEM to suggest that we have a way
of knowing the past which is independent of images, by means of which
we can criticize image-memories. But I do not think such an inference is
warranted.

What results, formally, from our knowledge of the past through images
of which we recognize the inaccuracy, is that such images must have two
characteristics by which we can arrange them in two series, of which one
corresponds to the more or less remote period in the past to which
they refer, and the other to our greater or less confidence in their
accuracy. We will take the second of these points first.

Our confidence or lack of confidence in the accuracy of a memory-image
must, in fundamental cases, be based upon a characteristic of the image
itself, since we cannot evoke the past bodily and compare it with the
present image. It might be suggested that vagueness is the required
characteristic, but I do not think this is the case. We sometimes
have images that are by no means peculiarly vague, which yet we do not
trust--for example, under the influence of fatigue we may see a friend's
face vividly and clearly, but horribly distorted. In such a case we
distrust our image in spite of its being unusually clear. I think
the characteristic by which we distinguish the images we trust is the
feeling of FAMILIARITY that accompanies them. Some images, like some
sensations, feel very familiar, while others feel strange. Familiarity
is a feeling capable of degrees. In an image of a well-known face,
for example, some parts may feel more familiar than others; when this
happens, we have more belief in the accuracy of the familiar parts than
in that of the unfamiliar parts. I think it is by this means that we
become critical of images, not by some imageless memory with which
we compare them. I shall return to the consideration of familiarity
shortly.

I come now to the other characteristic which memory-images must have
in order to account for our knowledge of the past. They must have some
characteristic which makes us regard them as referring to more or less
remote portions of the past. That is to say if we suppose that A is the
event remembered, B the remembering, and t the interval of time between
A and B, there must be some characteristic of B which is capable of
degrees, and which, in accurately dated memories, varies as t varies.
It may increase as t increases, or diminish as t increases. The question
which of these occurs is not of any importance for the theoretic
serviceability of the characteristic in question.

In actual fact, there are doubtless various factors that concur in
giving us the feeling of greater or less remoteness in some remembered
event. There may be a specific feeling which could be called the feeling
of "pastness," especially where immediate memory is concerned. But apart
from this, there are other marks. One of these is context. A recent
memory has, usually, more context than a more distant one. When a
remembered event has a remembered context, this may occur in two ways,
either (a) by successive images in the same order as their prototypes,
or (b) by remembering a whole process simultaneously, in the same way in
which a present process may be apprehended, through akoluthic sensations
which, by fading, acquire the mark of just-pastness in an increasing
degree as they fade, and are thus placed in a series while all sensibly
present. It will be context in this second sense, more specially, that
will give us a sense of the nearness or remoteness of a remembered
event.

There is, of course, a difference between knowing the temporal relation
of a remembered event to the present, and knowing the time-order of two
remembered events. Very often our knowledge of the temporal relation
of a remembered event to the present is inferred from its temporal
relations to other remembered events. It would seem that only rather
recent events can be placed at all accurately by means of feelings
giving their temporal relation to the present, but it is clear that such
feelings must play an essential part in the process of dating remembered
events.

We may say, then, that images are regarded by us as more or less
accurate copies of past occurrences because they come to us with two
sorts of feelings: (1) Those that may be called feelings of familiarity;
(2) those that may be collected together as feelings giving a sense of
pastness. The first lead us to trust our memories, the second to assign
places to them in the time-order.

We have now to analyse the memory-belief, as opposed to the
characteristics of images which lead us to base memory-beliefs upon
them.

If we had retained the "subject" or "act" in knowledge, the whole
problem of memory would have been comparatively simple. We could then
have said that remembering is a direct relation between the present act
or subject and the past occurrence remembered: the act of remembering
is present, though its object is past. But the rejection of the subject
renders some more complicated theory necessary. Remembering has to be
a present occurrence in some way resembling, or related to, what is
remembered. And it is difficult to find any ground, except a pragmatic
one, for supposing that memory is not sheer delusion, if, as seems to be
the case, there is not, apart from memory, any way of ascertaining that
there really was a past occurrence having the required relation to our
present remembering. What, if we followed Meinong's terminology, we
should call the "object" in memory, i.e. the past event which we are
said to be remembering, is unpleasantly remote from the "content," i.e.
the present mental occurrence in remembering. There is an awkward gulf
between the two, which raises difficulties for the theory of knowledge.
But we must not falsify observation to avoid theoretical difficulties.
For the present, therefore, let us forget these problems, and try to
discover what actually occurs in memory.

Some points may be taken as fixed, and such as any theory of memory must
arrive at. In this case, as in most others, what may be taken as certain
in advance is rather vague. The study of any topic is like the continued
observation of an object which is approaching us along a road: what is
certain to begin with is the quite vague knowledge that there is SOME
object on the road. If you attempt to be less vague, and to assert that
the object is an elephant, or a man, or a mad dog, you run a risk of
error; but the purpose of continued observation is to enable you to
arrive at such more precise knowledge. In like manner, in the study of
memory, the certainties with which you begin are very vague, and the
more precise propositions at which you try to arrive are less certain
than the hazy data from which you set out. Nevertheless, in spite of the
risk of error, precision is the goal at which we must aim.

The first of our vague but indubitable data is that there is knowledge
of the past. We do not yet know with any precision what we mean by
"knowledge," and we must admit that in any given instance our memory may
be at fault. Nevertheless, whatever a sceptic might urge in theory,
we cannot practically doubt that we got up this morning, that we did
various things yesterday, that a great war has been taking place, and so
on. How far our knowledge of the past is due to memory, and how far to
other sources, is of course a matter to be investigated, but there can
be no doubt that memory forms an indispensable part of our knowledge of
the past.

The second datum is that we certainly have more capacity for knowing the
past than for knowing the future. We know some things about the future,
for example what eclipses there will be; but this knowledge is a matter
of elaborate calculation and inference, whereas some of our knowledge of
the past comes to us without effort, in the same sort of immediate way
in which we acquire knowledge of occurrences in our present environment.
We might provisionally, though perhaps not quite correctly, define
"memory" as that way of knowing about the past which has no analogue in
our knowledge of the future; such a definition would at least serve to
mark the problem with which we are concerned, though some expectations
may deserve to rank with memory as regards immediacy.

A third point, perhaps not quite so certain as our previous two, is that
the truth of memory cannot be wholly practical, as pragmatists wish
all truth to be. It seems clear that some of the things I remember are
trivial and without any visible importance for the future, but that my
memory is true (or false) in virtue of a past event, not in virtue of
any future consequences of my belief. The definition of truth as the
correspondence between beliefs and facts seems peculiarly evident in the
case of memory, as against not only the pragmatist definition but also
the idealist definition by means of coherence. These considerations,
however, are taking us away from psychology, to which we must now
return.

It is important not to confuse the two forms of memory which Bergson
distinguishes in the second chapter of his "Matter and Memory,"
namely the sort that consists of habit, and the sort that consists of
independent recollection. He gives the instance of learning a lesson
by heart: when I know it by heart I am said to "remember" it, but this
merely means that I have acquired certain habits; on the other hand,
my recollection of (say) the second time I read the lesson while I was
learning it is the recollection of a unique event, which occurred only
once. The recollection of a unique event cannot, so Bergson contends,
be wholly constituted by habit, and is in fact something radically
different from the memory which is habit. The recollection alone is true
memory. This distinction is vital to the understanding of memory. But
it is not so easy to carry out in practice as it is to draw in theory.
Habit is a very intrusive feature of our mental life, and is often
present where at first sight it seems not to be. There is, for example,
a habit of remembering a unique event. When we have once described the
event, the words we have used easily become habitual. We may even have
used words to describe it to ourselves while it was happening; in that
case, the habit of these words may fulfil the function of Bergson's true
memory, while in reality it is nothing but habit-memory. A gramophone,
by the help of suitable records, might relate to us the incidents of its
past; and people are not so different from gramophones as they like to
believe.

In spite, however, of a difficulty in distinguishing the two forms of
memory in practice, there can be no doubt that both forms exist. I can
set to work now to remember things I never remembered before, such
as what I had to eat for breakfast this morning, and it can hardly be
wholly habit that enables me to do this. It is this sort of occurrence
that constitutes the essence of memory Until we have analysed what
happens in such a case as this, we have not succeeded in understanding
memory.

The sort of memory with which we are here concerned is the sort which is
a form of knowledge. Whether knowledge itself is reducible to habit is
a question to which I shall return in a later lecture; for the present
I am only anxious to point out that, whatever the true analysis of
knowledge may be, knowledge of past occurrences is not proved by
behaviour which is due to past experience. The fact that a man can
recite a poem does not show that he remembers any previous occasion on
which he has recited or read it. Similarly, the performances of animals
in getting out of cages or mazes to which they are accustomed do not
prove that they remember having been in the same situation before.
Arguments in favour of (for example) memory in plants are only arguments
in favour of habit-memory, not of knowledge-memory. Samuel Butler's
arguments in favour of the view that an animal remembers something of
the lives of its ancestors* are, when examined, only arguments in favour
of habit-memory. Semon's two books, mentioned in an earlier lecture, do
not touch knowledge-memory at all closely. They give laws according to
which images of past occurrences come into our minds, but do not discuss
our belief that these images refer to past occurrences, which is what
constitutes knowledge-memory. It is this that is of interest to theory
of knowledge. I shall speak of it as "true" memory, to distinguish it
from mere habit acquired through past experience. Before considering
true memory, it will be well to consider two things which are on the way
towards memory, namely the feeling of familiarity and recognition.

     * See his "Life and Habit and Unconscious Memory."

We often feel that something in our sensible environment is familiar,
without having any definite recollection of previous occasions on which
we have seen it. We have this feeling normally in places where we have
often been before--at home, or in well-known streets. Most people and
animals find it essential to their happiness to spend a good deal of
their time in familiar surroundings, which are especially comforting
when any danger threatens. The feeling of familiarity has all sorts
of degrees, down to the stage where we dimly feel that we have seen a
person before. It is by no means always reliable; almost everybody
has at some time experienced the well-known illusion that all that is
happening now happened before at some time. There are occasions when
familiarity does not attach itself to any definite object, when there is
merely a vague feeling that SOMETHING is familiar. This is illustrated
by Turgenev's "Smoke," where the hero is long puzzled by a haunting
sense that something in his present is recalling something in his past,
and at last traces it to the smell of heliotrope. Whenever the sense of
familiarity occurs without a definite object, it leads us to search the
environment until we are satisfied that we have found the appropriate
object, which leads us to the judgment: "THIS is familiar." I think
we may regard familiarity as a definite feeling, capable of existing
without an object, but normally standing in a specific relation to some
feature of the environment, the relation being that which we express in
words by saying that the feature in question is familiar. The judgment
that what is familiar has been experienced before is a product of
reflection, and is no part of the feeling of familiarity, such as a
horse may be supposed to have when he returns to his stable. Thus
no knowledge as to the past is to be derived from the feeling of
familiarity alone.

A further stage is RECOGNITION. This may be taken in two senses,
the first when a thing not merely feels familiar, but we know it is
such-and-such. We recognize our friend Jones, we know cats and dogs
when we see them, and so on. Here we have a definite influence of past
experience, but not necessarily any actual knowledge of the past. When
we see a cat, we know it is a cat because of previous cats we have
seen, but we do not, as a rule, recollect at the moment any particular
occasion when we have seen a cat. Recognition in this sense does not
necessarily involve more than a habit of association: the kind of object
we are seeing at the moment is associated with the word "cat," or with
an auditory image of purring, or whatever other characteristic we may
happen to recognize in the cat of the moment. We are, of course, in
fact able to judge, when we recognize an object, that we have seen it
before, but this judgment is something over and above recognition in
this first sense, and may very probably be impossible to animals that
nevertheless have the experience of recognition in this first sense of
the word.

There is, however, another sense of the word, in which we mean by
recognition, not knowing the name of a thing or some other property of
it, but knowing that we have seen it before In this sense recognition
does involve knowledge about the Fast. This knowledge is memory in
one sense, though in another it is not. It does not involve a definite
memory of a definite past event, but only the knowledge that something
happening now is similar to something that happened before. It differs
from the sense of familiarity by being cognitive; it is a belief or
judgment, which the sense of familiarity is not. I do not wish to
undertake the analysis of belief at present, since it will be the
subject of the twelfth lecture; for the present I merely wish to
emphasize the fact that recognition, in our second sense, consists in
a belief, which we may express approximately in the words: "This has
existed before."

There are, however, several points in which such an account of
recognition is inadequate. To begin with, it might seem at first sight
more correct to define recognition as "I have seen this before" than
as "this has existed before." We recognize a thing (it may be urged) as
having been in our experience before, whatever that may mean; we do not
recognize it as merely having been in the world before. I am not sure
that there is anything substantial in this point. The definition of "my
experience" is difficult; broadly speaking, it is everything that is
connected with what I am experiencing now by certain links, of which
the various forms of memory are among the most important. Thus, if I
recognize a thing, the occasion of its previous existence in virtue
of which I recognize it forms part of "my experience" by DEFINITION:
recognition will be one of the marks by which my experience is singled
out from the rest of the world. Of course, the words "this has existed
before" are a very inadequate translation of what actually happens when
we form a judgment of recognition, but that is unavoidable: words are
framed to express a level of thought which is by no means primitive,
and are quite incapable of expressing such an elementary occurrence as
recognition. I shall return to what is virtually the same question in
connection with true memory, which raises exactly similar problems.

A second point is that, when we recognize something, it was not in fact
the very same thing, but only something similar, that we experienced on
a former occasion. Suppose the object in question is a friend's face. A
person's face is always changing, and is not exactly the same on any two
occasions. Common sense treats it as one face with varying expressions;
but the varying expressions actually exist, each at its proper time,
while the one face is merely a logical construction. We regard two
objects as the same, for common-sense purposes, when the reaction they
call for is practically the same. Two visual appearances, to both
of which it is appropriate to say: "Hullo, Jones!" are treated as
appearances of one identical object, namely Jones. The name "Jones" is
applicable to both, and it is only reflection that shows us that many
diverse particulars are collected together to form the meaning of the
name "Jones." What we see on any one occasion is not the whole series of
particulars that make up Jones, but only one of them (or a few in quick
succession). On another occasion we see another member of the series,
but it is sufficiently similar to count as the same from the standpoint
of common sense. Accordingly, when we judge "I have seen THIS
before," we judge falsely if "this" is taken as applying to the actual
constituent of the world that we are seeing at the moment. The
word "this" must be interpreted vaguely so as to include anything
sufficiently like what we are seeing at the moment. Here, again, we
shall find a similar point as regards true memory; and in connection
with true memory we will consider the point again. It is sometimes
suggested, by those who favour behaviourist views, that recognition
consists in behaving in the same way when a stimulus is repeated as we
behaved on the first occasion when it occurred. This seems to be the
exact opposite of the truth. The essence of recognition is in the
DIFFERENCE between a repeated stimulus and a new one. On the first
occasion there is no recognition; on the second occasion there is. In
fact, recognition is another instance of the peculiarity of causal laws
in psychology, namely, that the causal unit is not a single event, but
two or more events Habit is the great instance of this, but recognition
is another. A stimulus occurring once has a certain effect; occurring
twice, it has the further effect of recognition. Thus the phenomenon
of recognition has as its cause the two occasions when the stimulus has
occurred; either alone is insufficient. This complexity of causes
in psychology might be connected with Bergson's arguments against
repetition in the mental world. It does not prove that there are no
causal laws in psychology, as Bergson suggests; but it does prove that
the causal laws of psychology are Prima facie very different from those
of physics. On the possibility of explaining away the difference as due
to the peculiarities of nervous tissue I have spoken before, but this
possibility must not be forgotten if we are tempted to draw unwarranted
metaphysical deductions.

True memory, which we must now endeavour to understand, consists of
knowledge of past events, but not of all such knowledge. Some knowledge
of past events, for example what we learn through reading history, is
on a par with the knowledge we can acquire concerning the future: it
is obtained by inference, not (so to speak) spontaneously. There is
a similar distinction in our knowledge of the present: some of it is
obtained through the senses, some in more indirect ways. I know that
there are at this moment a number of people in the streets of New York,
but I do not know this in the immediate way in which I know of the
people whom I see by looking out of my window. It is not easy to state
precisely wherein the difference between these two sorts of knowledge
consists, but it is easy to feel the difference. For the moment, I shall
not stop to analyse it, but shall content myself with saying that, in
this respect, memory resembles the knowledge derived from the senses.
It is immediate, not inferred, not abstract; it differs from perception
mainly by being referred to the past.

In regard to memory, as throughout the analysis of knowledge, there are
two very distinct problems, namely (1) as to the nature of the present
occurrence in knowing; (2) as to the relation of this occurrence to what
is known. When we remember, the knowing is now, while what is known is
in the past. Our two questions are, in the case of memory:

(1) What is the present occurrence when we remember?

(2) What is the relation of this present occurrence to the past event
which is remembered?

Of these two questions, only the first concerns the psychologist; the
second belongs to theory of knowledge. At the same time, if we accept
the vague datum with which we began, to the effect that, in some sense,
there is knowledge of the past, we shall have to find, if we can, such
an account of the present occurrence in remembering as will make it not
impossible for remembering to give us knowledge of the past. For the
present, however, we shall do well to forget the problems concerning
theory of knowledge, and concentrate upon the purely psychological
problem of memory.

Between memory-image and sensation there is an intermediate experience
concerning the immediate past. For example, a sound that we have just
heard is present to us in a way which differs both from the sensation
while we are hearing the sound and from the memory-image of something
heard days or weeks ago. James states that it is this way of
apprehending the immediate past that is "the ORIGINAL of our experience
of pastness, from whence we get the meaning of the term"("Psychology,"
i, p. 604). Everyone knows the experience of noticing (say) that
the clock HAS BEEN striking, when we did not notice it while it was
striking. And when we hear a remark spoken, we are conscious of the
earlier words while the later ones are being uttered, and this retention
feels different from recollection of something definitely past. A
sensation fades gradually, passing by continuous gradations to the
status of an image. This retention of the immediate past in a condition
intermediate between sensation and image may be called "immediate
memory." Everything belonging to it is included with sensation in what
is called the "specious present." The specious present includes elements
at all stages on the journey from sensation to image. It is this fact
that enables us to apprehend such things as movements, or the order of
the words in a spoken sentence. Succession can occur within the specious
present, of which we can distinguish some parts as earlier and others as
later. It is to be supposed that the earliest parts are those that have
faded most from their original force, while the latest parts are those
that retain their full sensational character. At the beginning of a
stimulus we have a sensation; then a gradual transition; and at the
end an image. Sensations while they are fading are called "akoluthic"
sensations.* When the process of fading is completed (which happens very
quickly), we arrive at the image, which is capable of being revived on
subsequent occasions with very little change. True memory, as opposed to
"immediate memory," applies only to events sufficiently distant to
have come to an end of the period of fading. Such events, if they are
represented by anything present, can only be represented by images, not
by those intermediate stages, between sensations and images, which occur
during the period of fading.

     * See Semon, "Die mnemischen Empfindungen," chap. vi.

Immediate memory is important both because it provides experience of
succession, and because it bridges the gulf between sensations and
the images which are their copies. But it is now time to resume the
consideration of true memory.

Suppose you ask me what I ate for breakfast this morning. Suppose,
further, that I have not thought about my breakfast in the meantime, and
that I did not, while I was eating it, put into words what it consisted
of. In this case my recollection will be true memory, not habit-memory.
The process of remembering will consist of calling up images of my
breakfast, which will come to me with a feeling of belief such as
distinguishes memory-images from mere imagination-images. Or sometimes
words may come without the intermediary of images; but in this case
equally the feeling of belief is essential.

Let us omit from our consideration, for the present, the memories
in which words replace images. These are always, I think, really
habit-memories, the memories that use images being the typical true
memories.

Memory-images and imagination-images do not differ in their intrinsic
qualities, so far as we can discover. They differ by the fact that
the images that constitute memories, unlike those that constitute
imagination, are accompanied by a feeling of belief which may be
expressed in the words "this happened." The mere occurrence of images,
without this feeling of belief, constitutes imagination; it is the
element of belief that is the distinctive thing in memory.*

     * For belief of a specific kind, cf. Dorothy Wrinch "On the
     Nature of Memory," "Mind," January, 1920.

There are, if I am not mistaken, at least three different kinds of
belief-feeling, which we may call respectively memory, expectation and
bare assent. In what I call bare assent, there is no time-element in
the feeling of belief, though there may be in the content of what is
believed. If I believe that Caesar landed in Britain in B.C. 55, the
time-determination lies, not in the feeling of belief, but in what is
believed. I do not remember the occurrence, but have the same feeling
towards it as towards the announcement of an eclipse next year. But when
I have seen a flash of lightning and am waiting for the thunder, I
have a belief-feeling analogous to memory, except that it refers to the
future: I have an image of thunder, combined with a feeling which may be
expressed in the words: "this will happen." So, in memory, the pastness
lies, not in the content of what is believed, but in the nature of
the belief-feeling. I might have just the same images and expect their
realization; I might entertain them without any belief, as in reading a
novel; or I might entertain them together with a time-determination, and
give bare assent, as in reading history. I shall return to this subject
in a later lecture, when we come to the analysis of belief. For the
present, I wish to make it clear that a certain special kind of belief
is the distinctive characteristic of memory.


The problem as to whether memory can be explained as habit or
association requires to be considered afresh in connection with the
causes of our remembering something. Let us take again the case of my
being asked what I had for breakfast this morning. In this case the
question leads to my setting to work to recollect. It is a little
strange that the question should instruct me as to what it is that I am
to recall. This has to do with understanding words, which will be the
topic of the next lecture; but something must be said about it now. Our
understanding of the words "breakfast this morning" is a habit, in spite
of the fact that on each fresh day they point to a different occasion.
"This morning" does not, whenever it is used, mean the same thing, as
"John" or "St. Paul's" does; it means a different period of time on
each different day. It follows that the habit which constitutes
our understanding of the words "this morning" is not the habit of
associating the words with a fixed object, but the habit of associating
them with something having a fixed time-relation to our present. This
morning has, to-day, the same time-relation to my present that yesterday
morning had yesterday. In order to understand the phrase "this morning"
it is necessary that we should have a way of feeling time-intervals,
and that this feeling should give what is constant in the meaning of the
words "this morning." This appreciation of time-intervals is, however,
obviously a product of memory, not a presupposition of it. It will be
better, therefore, if we wish to analyse the causation of memory by
something not presupposing memory, to take some other instance than that
of a question about "this morning."

Let us take the case of coming into a familiar room where something has
been changed--say a new picture hung on the wall. We may at first
have only a sense that SOMETHING is unfamiliar, but presently we shall
remember, and say "that picture was not on the wall before." In order to
make the case definite, we will suppose that we were only in the room
on one former occasion. In this case it seems fairly clear what happens.
The other objects in the room are associated, through the former
occasion, with a blank space of wall where now there is a picture. They
call up an image of a blank wall, which clashes with perception of the
picture. The image is associated with the belief-feeling which we found
to be distinctive of memory, since it can neither be abolished nor
harmonized with perception. If the room had remained unchanged, we
might have had only the feeling of familiarity without the definite
remembering; it is the change that drives us from the present to memory
of the past.

We may generalize this instance so as to cover the causes of many
memories. Some present feature of the environment is associated, through
past experiences, with something now absent; this absent something comes
before us as an image, and is contrasted with present sensation. In
cases of this sort, habit (or association) explains why the present
feature of the environment brings up the memory-image, but it does
not explain the memory-belief. Perhaps a more complete analysis could
explain the memory-belief also on lines of association and habit, but
the causes of beliefs are obscure, and we cannot investigate them
yet. For the present we must content ourselves with the fact that the
memory-image can be explained by habit. As regards the memory-belief,
we must, at least provisionally, accept Bergson's view that it cannot be
brought under the head of habit, at any rate when it first occurs, i.e.
when we remember something we never remembered before.

We must now consider somewhat more closely the content of a
memory-belief. The memory-belief confers upon the memory-image something
which we may call "meaning;" it makes us feel that the image points to
an object which existed in the past. In order to deal with this topic
we must consider the verbal expression of the memory-belief. We might
be tempted to put the memory-belief into the words: "Something like
this image occurred." But such words would be very far from an accurate
translation of the simplest kind of memory-belief. "Something like this
image" is a very complicated conception. In the simplest kind of memory
we are not aware of the difference between an image and the sensation
which it copies, which may be called its "prototype." When the image
is before us, we judge rather "this occurred." The image is not
distinguished from the object which existed in the past: the word "this"
covers both, and enables us to have a memory-belief which does not
introduce the complicated notion "something like this."

It might be objected that, if we judge "this occurred" when in fact
"this" is a present image, we judge falsely, and the memory-belief,
so interpreted, becomes deceptive. This, however, would be a mistake,
produced by attempting to give to words a precision which they do not
possess when used by unsophisticated people. It is true that the image
is not absolutely identical with its prototype, and if the word "this"
meant the image to the exclusion of everything else, the judgment "this
occurred" would be false. But identity is a precise conception, and no
word, in ordinary speech, stands for anything precise. Ordinary speech
does not distinguish between identity and close similarity. A word
always applies, not only to one particular, but to a group of associated
particulars, which are not recognized as multiple in common thought or
speech. Thus primitive memory, when it judges that "this occurred," is
vague, but not false.

Vague identity, which is really close similarity, has been a source
of many of the confusions by which philosophy has lived. Of a vague
subject, such as a "this," which is both an image and its prototype,
contradictory predicates are true simultaneously: this existed and does
not exist, since it is a thing remembered, but also this exists and did
not exist, since it is a present image. Hence Bergson's
interpenetration of the present by the past, Hegelian continuity and
identity-in-diversity, and a host of other notions which are thought to
be profound because they are obscure and confused. The contradictions
resulting from confounding image and prototype in memory force us to
precision. But when we become precise, our remembering becomes different
from that of ordinary life, and if we forget this we shall go wrong in
the analysis of ordinary memory.

Vagueness and accuracy are important notions, which it is very necessary
to understand. Both are a matter of degree. All thinking is vague
to some extent, and complete accuracy is a theoretical ideal not
practically attainable. To understand what is meant by accuracy, it will
be well to consider first instruments of measurement, such as a balance
or a thermometer. These are said to be accurate when they give different
results for very slightly different stimuli.* A clinical thermometer
is accurate when it enables us to detect very slight differences in the
temperature of the blood. We may say generally that an instrument
is accurate in proportion as it reacts differently to very slightly
different stimuli. When a small difference of stimulus produces a great
difference of reaction, the instrument is accurate; in the contrary case
it is not.

     * This is a necessary but not a sufficient condition. The
     subject of accuracy and vagueness will be considered again
     in Lecture XIII.

Exactly the same thing applies in defining accuracy of thought
or perception. A musician will respond differently to very minute
differences in playing which would be quite imperceptible to the
ordinary mortal. A negro can see the difference between one negro and
another one is his friend, another his enemy. But to us such different
responses are impossible: we can merely apply the word "negro"
indiscriminately. Accuracy of response in regard to any particular kind
of stimulus is improved by practice. Understanding a language is a
case in point. Few Frenchmen can hear any difference between the sounds
"hall" and "hole," which produce quite different impressions upon us.
The two statements "the hall is full of water" and "the hole is full
of water" call for different responses, and a hearing which cannot
distinguish between them is inaccurate or vague in this respect.

Precision and vagueness in thought, as in perception, depend upon the
degree of difference between responses to more or less similar stimuli.
In the case of thought, the response does not follow immediately upon
the sensational stimulus, but that makes no difference as regards our
present question. Thus to revert to memory: A memory is "vague" when
it is appropriate to many different occurrences: for instance, "I met a
man" is vague, since any man would verify it. A memory is "precise" when
the occurrences that would verify it are narrowly circumscribed: for
instance, "I met Jones" is precise as compared to "I met a man." A
memory is "accurate" when it is both precise and true, i.e. in the above
instance, if it was Jones I met. It is precise even if it is false,
provided some very definite occurrence would have been required to make
it true.

It follows from what has been said that a vague thought has more
likelihood of being true than a precise one. To try and hit an object
with a vague thought is like trying to hit the bull's eye with a lump of
putty: when the putty reaches the target, it flattens out all over it,
and probably covers the bull's eye along with the rest. To try and hit
an object with a precise thought is like trying to hit the bull's
eye with a bullet. The advantage of the precise thought is that it
distinguishes between the bull's eye and the rest of the target. For
example, if the whole target is represented by the fungus family and the
bull's eye by mushrooms, a vague thought which can only hit the target
as a whole is not much use from a culinary point of view. And when I
merely remember that I met a man, my memory may be very inadequate to my
practical requirements, since it may make a great difference whether I
met Brown or Jones. The memory "I met Jones" is relatively precise. It
is accurate if I met Jones, inaccurate if I met Brown, but precise in
either case as against the mere recollection that I met a man.

The distinction between accuracy and precision is however, not
fundamental. We may omit precision from out thoughts and confine
ourselves to the distinction between accuracy and vagueness. We may then
set up the following definitions:

An instrument is "reliable" with respect to a given set of stimuli when
to stimuli which are not relevantly different it gives always responses
which are not relevantly different.

An instrument is a "measure" of a set of stimuli which are serially
ordered when its responses, in all cases where they are relevantly
different, are arranged in a series in the same order.

The "degree of accuracy" of an instrument which is a reliable measurer
is the ratio of the difference of response to the difference of stimulus
in cases where the difference of stimulus is small.* That is to say, if
a small difference of stimulus produces a great difference of response,
the instrument is very accurate; in the contrary case, very inaccurate.

     * Strictly speaking, the limit of this, i.e. the derivative
     of the response with respect to the stimulus.

A mental response is called "vague" in proportion to its lack of
accuracy, or rather precision.

These definitions will be found useful, not only in the case of memory,
but in almost all questions concerned with knowledge.

It should be observed that vague beliefs, so far from being necessarily
false, have a better chance of truth than precise ones, though their
truth is less valuable than that of precise beliefs, since they do not
distinguish between occurrences which may differ in important ways.

The whole of the above discussion of vagueness and accuracy was
occasioned by the attempt to interpret the word "this" when we judge in
verbal memory that "this occurred." The word "this," in such a judgment,
is a vague word, equally applicable to the present memory-image and to
the past occurrence which is its prototype. A vague word is not to be
identified with a general word, though in practice the distinction
may often be blurred. A word is general when it is understood to be
applicable to a number of different objects in virtue of some common
property. A word is vague when it is in fact applicable to a number of
different objects because, in virtue of some common property, they
have not appeared, to the person using the word, to be distinct. I
emphatically do not mean that he has judged them to be identical, but
merely that he has made the same response to them all and has not judged
them to be different. We may compare a vague word to a jelly and
a general word to a heap of shot. Vague words precede judgments
of identity and difference; both general and particular words are
subsequent to such judgments. The word "this" in the primitive
memory-belief is a vague word, not a general word; it covers both the
image and its prototype because the two are not distinguished.*

     * On the vague and the general cf. Ribot: "Evolution of
     General Ideas," Open Court Co., 1899, p. 32: "The sole
     permissible formula is this: Intelligence progresses from
     the indefinite to the definite. If 'indefinite' is taken as
     synonymous with general, it may be said that the particular
     does not appear at the outset, but neither does the general
     in any exact sense: the vague would be more appropriate. In
     other words, no sooner has the intellect progressed beyond
     the moment of perception and of its immediate reproduction
     in memory, than the generic image makes its appearance, i.e.
     a state intermediate between the particular and the general,
     participating in the nature of the one and of the other--a
     confused simplification."

But we have not yet finished our analysis of the memory-belief. The
tense in the belief that "this occurred" is provided by the nature of
the belief-feeling involved in memory; the word "this," as we have seen,
has a vagueness which we have tried to describe. But we must still ask
what we mean by "occurred." The image is, in one sense, occurring now;
and therefore we must find some other sense in which the past event
occurred but the image does not occur.

There are two distinct questions to be asked: (1) What causes us to say
that a thing occurs? (2) What are we feeling when we say this? As to the
first question, in the crude use of the word, which is what concerns us,
memory-images would not be said to occur; they would not be noticed
in themselves, but merely used as signs of the past event. Images are
"merely imaginary"; they have not, in crude thought, the sort of reality
that belongs to outside bodies. Roughly speaking, "real" things would
be those that can cause sensations, those that have correlations of the
sort that constitute physical objects. A thing is said to be "real"
or to "occur" when it fits into a context of such correlations. The
prototype of our memory-image did fit into a physical context, while
our memory-image does not. This causes us to feel that the prototype was
"real," while the image is "imaginary."

But the answer to our second question, namely as to what we are feeling
when we say a thing "occurs" or is "real," must be somewhat different.
We do not, unless we are unusually reflective, think about the presence
or absence of correlations: we merely have different feelings which,
intellectualized, may be represented as expectations of the presence
or absence of correlations. A thing which "feels real" inspires us with
hopes or fears, expectations or curiosities, which are wholly absent
when a thing "feels imaginary." The feeling of reality is a feeling akin
to respect: it belongs PRIMARILY to whatever can do things to us without
our voluntary co-operation. This feeling of reality, related to
the memory-image, and referred to the past by the specific kind of
belief-feeling that is characteristic of memory, seems to be what
constitutes the act of remembering in its pure form.

We may now summarize our analysis of pure memory.

Memory demands (a) an image, (b) a belief in past existence. The belief
may be expressed in the words "this existed."

The belief, like every other, may be analysed into (1) the believing,
(2) what is believed. The believing is a specific feeling or sensation
or complex of sensations, different from expectation or bare assent in
a way that makes the belief refer to the past; the reference to the
past lies in the belief-feeling, not in the content believed. There is
a relation between the belief-feeling and the content, making the
belief-feeling refer to the content, and expressed by saying that the
content is what is believed.

The content believed may or may not be expressed in words. Let us
take first the case when it is not. In that case, if we are merely
remembering that something of which we now have an image occurred,
the content consists of (a) the image, (b) the feeling, analogous
to respect, which we translate by saying that something is "real" as
opposed to "imaginary," (c) a relation between the image and the feeling
of reality, of the sort expressed when we say that the feeling refers
to the image. This content does not contain in itself any
time-determination.

The time-determination lies in the nature of the belief feeling, which
is that called "remembering" or (better) "recollecting." It is only
subsequent reflection upon this reference to the past that makes us
realize the distinction between the image and the event recollected.
When we have made this distinction, we can say that the image "means"
the past event.

The content expressed in words is best represented by the words "the
existence of this," since these words do not involve tense, which
belongs to the belief-feeling, not to the content. Here "this" is
a vague term, covering the memory-image and anything very like it,
including its prototype. "Existence" expresses the feeling of a
"reality" aroused primarily by whatever can have effects upon us without
our voluntary co-operation. The word "of" in the phrase "the existence
of this" represents the relation which subsists between the feeling of
reality and the "this."

This analysis of memory is probably extremely faulty, but I do not know
how to improve it.

NOTE.-When I speak of a FEELING of belief, I use the word "feeling" in
a popular sense, to cover a sensation or an image or a complex of
sensations or images or both; I use this word because I do not wish to
commit myself to any special analysis of the belief-feeling.




LECTURE X. WORDS AND MEANING

The problem with which we shall be concerned in this lecture is the
problem of determining what is the relation called "meaning." The word
"Napoleon," we say, "means" a certain person. In saying this, we are
asserting a relation between the word "Napoleon" and the person so
designated. It is this relation that we must now investigate.

Let us first consider what sort of object a word is when considered
simply as a physical thing, apart from its meaning. To begin with, there
are many instances of a word, namely all the different occasions when it
is employed. Thus a word is not something unique and particular, but a
set of occurrences. If we confine ourselves to spoken words, a word has
two aspects, according as we regard it from the point of view of the
speaker or from that of the hearer. From the point of view of the
speaker, a single instance of the use of a word consists of a certain
set of movements in the throat and mouth, combined with breath. From
the point of view of the hearer, a single instance of the use of a
word consists of a certain series of sounds, each being approximately
represented by a single letter in writing, though in practice a letter
may represent several sounds, or several letters may represent one
sound. The connection between the spoken word and the word as it reaches
the hearer is causal. Let us confine ourselves to the spoken word, which
is the more important for the analysis of what is called "thought."
Then we may say that a single instance of the spoken word consists of
a series of movements, and the word consists of a whole set of such
series, each member of the set being very similar to each other member.
That is to say, any two instances of the word "Napoleon" are very
similar, and each instance consists of a series of movements in the
mouth.

A single word, accordingly, is by no means simple it is a class of
similar series of movements (confining ourselves still to the spoken
word). The degree of similarity required cannot be precisely defined:
a man may pronounce the word "Napoleon" so badly that it can hardly be
determined whether he has really pronounced it or not. The instances
of a word shade off into other movements by imperceptible degrees. And
exactly analogous observations apply to words heard or written or read.
But in what has been said so far we have not even broached the
question of the DEFINITION of a word, since "meaning" is clearly what
distinguishes a word from other sets of similar movements, and "meaning"
remains to be defined.

It is natural to think of the meaning of a word as something
conventional. This, however, is only true with great limitations. A new
word can be added to an existing language by a mere convention, as
is done, for instance, with new scientific terms. But the basis of
a language is not conventional, either from the point of view of the
individual or from that of the community. A child learning to speak is
learning habits and associations which are just as much determined by
the environment as the habit of expecting dogs to bark and cocks to
crow. The community that speaks a language has learnt it, and modified
it by processes almost all of which are not deliberate, but the results
of causes operating according to more or less ascertainable laws. If
we trace any Indo-European language back far enough, we arrive
hypothetically (at any rate according to some authorities) at the stage
when language consisted only of the roots out of which subsequent words
have grown. How these roots acquired their meanings is not known, but a
conventional origin is clearly just as mythical as the social contract
by which Hobbes and Rousseau supposed civil government to have been
established. We can hardly suppose a parliament of hitherto speechless
elders meeting together and agreeing to call a cow a cow and a wolf a
wolf. The association of words with their meanings must have grown up
by some natural process, though at present the nature of the process is
unknown.

Spoken and written words are, of course, not the only way of conveying
meaning. A large part of one of Wundt's two vast volumes on language in
his "Volkerpsychologie" is concerned with gesture-language. Ants appear
to be able to communicate a certain amount of information by means of
their antennae. Probably writing itself, which we now regard as merely
a way of representing speech, was originally an independent language,
as it has remained to this day in China. Writing seems to have consisted
originally of pictures, which gradually became conventionalized, coming
in time to represent syllables, and finally letters on the telephone
principle of "T for Tommy." But it would seem that writing nowhere
began as an attempt to represent speech it began as a direct pictorial
representation of what was to be expressed. The essence of language
lies, not in the use of this or that special means of communication,
but in the employment of fixed associations (however these may have
originated) in order that something now sensible--a spoken word, a
picture, a gesture, or what not--may call up the "idea" of something
else. Whenever this is done, what is now sensible may be called a "sign"
or "symbol," and that of which it is intended to call up the "idea" may
be called its "meaning." This is a rough outline of what constitutes
"meaning." But we must fill in the outline in various ways. And,
since we are concerned with what is called "thought," we must pay more
attention than we otherwise should do to the private as opposed to the
social use of language. Language profoundly affects our thoughts, and
it is this aspect of language that is of most importance to us in our
present inquiry. We are almost more concerned with the internal speech
that is never uttered than we are with the things said out loud to other
people.

When we ask what constitutes meaning, we are not asking what is the
meaning of this or that particular word. The word "Napoleon" means a
certain individual; but we are asking, not who is the individual meant,
but what is the relation of the word to the individual which makes the
one mean the other. But just as it is useful to realize the nature of a
word as part of the physical world, so it is useful to realize the sort
of thing that a word may mean. When we are clear both as to what a word
is in its physical aspect, and as to what sort of thing it can mean, we
are in a better position to discover the relation of the two which is
meaning.

The things that words mean differ more than words do. There are
different sorts of words, distinguished by the grammarians; and there
are logical distinctions, which are connected to some extent, though not
so closely as was formerly supposed, with the grammatical distinctions
of parts of speech. It is easy, however, to be misled by grammar,
particularly if all the languages we know belong to one family. In some
languages, according to some authorities, the distinction of parts of
speech does not exist; in many languages it is widely different from
that to which we are accustomed in the Indo-European languages. These
facts have to be borne in mind if we are to avoid giving metaphysical
importance to mere accidents of our own speech.

In considering what words mean, it is natural to start with proper
names, and we will again take "Napoleon" as our instance. We commonly
imagine, when we use a proper name, that we mean one definite entity,
the particular individual who was called "Napoleon." But what we know
as a person is not simple. There MAY be a single simple ego which was
Napoleon, and remained strictly identical from his birth to his death.
There is no way of proving that this cannot be the case, but there is
also not the slightest reason to suppose that it is the case. Napoleon
as he was empirically known consisted of a series of gradually changing
appearances: first a squalling baby, then a boy, then a slim and
beautiful youth, then a fat and slothful person very magnificently
dressed This series of appearances, and various occurrences having
certain kinds of causal connections with them, constitute Napoleon as
empirically known, and therefore are Napoleon in so far as he forms
part of the experienced world. Napoleon is a complicated series of
occurrences, bound together by causal laws, not, like instances of a
word, by similarities. For although a person changes gradually, and
presents similar appearances on two nearly contemporaneous occasions,
it is not these similarities that constitute the person, as appears from
the "Comedy of Errors" for example.

Thus in the case of a proper name, while the word is a set of similar
series of movements, what it means is a series of occurrences bound
together by causal laws of that special kind that makes the occurrences
taken together constitute what we call one person, or one animal or
thing, in case the name applies to an animal or thing instead of to
a person. Neither the word nor what it names is one of the ultimate
indivisible constituents of the world. In language there is no direct
way of designating one of the ultimate brief existents that go to make
up the collections we call things or persons. If we want to speak of
such existents--which hardly happens except in philosophy--we have to do
it by means of some elaborate phrase, such as "the visual sensation
which occupied the centre of my field of vision at noon on January 1,
1919." Such ultimate simples I call "particulars." Particulars MIGHT
have proper names, and no doubt would have if language had been invented
by scientifically trained observers for purposes of philosophy and
logic. But as language was invented for practical ends, particulars have
remained one and all without a name.

We are not, in practice, much concerned with the actual particulars
that come into our experience in sensation; we are concerned rather
with whole systems to which the particulars belong and of which they
are signs. What we see makes us say "Hullo, there's Jones," and the fact
that what we see is a sign of Jones (which is the case because it is one
of the particulars that make up Jones) is more interesting to us than
the actual particular itself. Hence we give the name "Jones" to the
whole set of particulars, but do not trouble to give separate names to
the separate particulars that make up the set.

Passing on from proper names, we come next to general names, such as
"man," "cat," "triangle." A word such as "man" means a whole class
of such collections of particulars as have proper names. The several
members of the class are assembled together in virtue of some similarity
or common property. All men resemble each other in certain important
respects; hence we want a word which shall be equally applicable to all
of them. We only give proper names to the individuals of a species when
they differ inter se in practically important respects. In other cases
we do not do this. A poker, for instance, is just a poker; we do not
call one "John" and another "Peter."

There is a large class of words, such as "eating," "walking,"
"speaking," which mean a set of similar occurrences. Two instances of
walking have the same name because they resemble each other, whereas
two instances of Jones have the same name because they are causally
connected. In practice, however, it is difficult to make any precise
distinction between a word such as "walking" and a general name such as
"man." One instance of walking cannot be concentrated into an instant:
it is a process in time, in which there is a causal connection between
the earlier and later parts, as between the earlier and later parts
of Jones. Thus an instance of walking differs from an instance of man
solely by the fact that it has a shorter life. There is a notion that an
instance of walking, as compared with Jones, is unsubstantial, but this
seems to be a mistake. We think that Jones walks, and that there could
not be any walking unless there were somebody like Jones to perform
the walking. But it is equally true that there could be no Jones unless
there were something like walking for him to do. The notion that actions
are performed by an agent is liable to the same kind of criticism as
the notion that thinking needs a subject or ego, which we rejected in
Lecture I. To say that it is Jones who is walking is merely to say that
the walking in question is part of the whole series of occurrences which
is Jones. There is no LOGICAL impossibility in walking occurring as an
isolated phenomenon, not forming part of any such series as we call a
"person."

We may therefore class with "eating," "walking," "speaking" words
such as "rain," "sunrise," "lightning," which do not denote what would
commonly be called actions. These words illustrate, incidentally, how
little we can trust to the grammatical distinction of parts of speech,
since the substantive "rain" and the verb "to rain" denote precisely the
same class of meteorological occurrences. The distinction between the
class of objects denoted by such a word and the class of objects denoted
by a general name such as "man," "vegetable," or "planet," is that the
sort of object which is an instance of (say) "lightning" is much simpler
than (say) an individual man. (I am speaking of lightning as a sensible
phenomenon, not as it is described in physics.) The distinction is one
of degree, not of kind. But there is, from the point of view of ordinary
thought, a great difference between a process which, like a flash of
lightning, can be wholly comprised within one specious present and a
process which, like the life of a man, has to be pieced together by
observation and memory and the apprehension of causal connections.
We may say broadly, therefore, that a word of the kind we have been
discussing denotes a set of similar occurrences, each (as a rule) much
more brief and less complex than a person or thing. Words themselves, as
we have seen, are sets of similar occurrences of this kind. Thus there
is more logical affinity between a word and what it means in the case of
words of our present sort than in any other case.

There is no very great difference between such words as we have just
been considering and words denoting qualities, such as "white" or
"round." The chief difference is that words of this latter sort do not
denote processes, however brief, but static features of the world. Snow
falls, and is white; the falling is a process, the whiteness is not.
Whether there is a universal, called "whiteness," or whether white
things are to be defined as those having a certain kind of similarity to
a standard thing, say freshly fallen snow, is a question which need
not concern us, and which I believe to be strictly insoluble. For our
purposes, we may take the word "white" as denoting a certain set of
similar particulars or collections of particulars, the similarity being
in respect of a static quality, not of a process.

From the logical point of view, a very important class of words
are those that express relations, such as "in," "above," "before,"
"greater," and so on. The meaning of one of these words differs very
fundamentally from the meaning of one of any of our previous classes,
being more abstract and logically simpler than any of them. If our
business were logic, we should have to spend much time on these words.
But as it is psychology that concerns us, we will merely note their
special character and pass on, since the logical classification of words
is not our main business.

We will consider next the question what is implied by saying that a
person "understands" a word, in the sense in which one understands
a word in one's own language, but not in a language of which one is
ignorant. We may say that a person understands a word when (a) suitable
circumstances make him use it, (b) the hearing of it causes suitable
behaviour in him. We may call these two active and passive understanding
respectively. Dogs often have passive understanding of some words, but
not active understanding, since they cannot use words.

It is not necessary, in order that a man should "understand" a word,
that he should "know what it means," in the sense of being able to say
"this word means so-and-so." Understanding words does not consist in
knowing their dictionary definitions, or in being able to specify the
objects to which they are appropriate. Such understanding as this may
belong to lexicographers and students, but not to ordinary mortals
in ordinary life. Understanding language is more like understanding
cricket*: it is a matter of habits, acquired in oneself and rightly
presumed in others. To say that a word has a meaning is not to say that
those who use the word correctly have ever thought out what the meaning
is: the use of the word comes first, and the meaning is to be distilled
out of it by observation and analysis. Moreover, the meaning of a word
is not absolutely definite: there is always a greater or less degree of
vagueness. The meaning is an area, like a target: it may have a bull's
eye, but the outlying parts of the target are still more or less within
the meaning, in a gradually diminishing degree as we travel further from
the bull's eye. As language grows more precise, there is less and less
of the target outside the bull's eye, and the bull's eye itself grows
smaller and smaller; but the bull's eye never shrinks to a point, and
there is always a doubtful region, however small, surrounding it.**

     * This point of view, extended to the analysis of "thought"
     is urged with great force by J. B. Watson, both in his
     "Behavior," and in "Psychology from the Standpoint of a
     Behaviorist" (Lippincott. 1919), chap. ix.

     ** On the understanding of words, a very admirable little
     book is Ribot's "Evolution of General Ideas," Open Court
     Co., 1899. Ribot says (p. 131): "We learn to understand a
     concept as we learn to walk, dance, fence or play a musical
     instrument: it is a habit, i.e. an organized memory. General
     terms cover an organized, latent knowledge which is the
     hidden capital without which we should be in a state of
     bankruptcy, manipulating false money or paper of no value.
     General ideas are habits in the intellectual order."

A word is used "correctly" when the average hearer will be affected
by it in the way intended. This is a psychological, not a literary,
definition of "correctness." The literary definition would substitute,
for the average hearer, a person of high education living a long time
ago; the purpose of this definition is to make it difficult to speak or
write correctly.

The relation of a word to its meaning is of the nature of a causal law
governing our use of the word and our actions when we hear it used.
There is no more reason why a person who uses a word correctly should
be able to tell what it means than there is why a planet which is moving
correctly should know Kepler's laws.

To illustrate what is meant by "understanding" words and sentences, let
us take instances of various situations.

Suppose you are walking in London with an absent-minded friend, and
while crossing a street you say, "Look out, there's a motor coming."
He will glance round and jump aside without the need of any "mental"
intermediary. There need be no "ideas," but only a stiffening of the
muscles, followed quickly by action. He "understands" the words, because
he does the right thing. Such "understanding" may be taken to belong to
the nerves and brain, being habits which they have acquired while the
language was being learnt. Thus understanding in this sense may be
reduced to mere physiological causal laws.

If you say the same thing to a Frenchman with a slight knowledge of
English he will go through some inner speech which may be represented by
"Que dit-il? Ah, oui, une automobile!" After this, the rest follows as
with the Englishman. Watson would contend that the inner speech must be
incipiently pronounced; we should argue that it MIGHT be merely imaged.
But this point is not important in the present connection.

If you say the same thing to a child who does not yet know the word
"motor," but does know the other words you are using, you produce a
feeling of anxiety and doubt you will have to point and say, "There,
that's a motor." After that the child will roughly understand the word
"motor," though he may include trains and steam-rollers If this is the
first time the child has heard the word "motor," he may for a long time
continue to recall this scene when he hears the word.

So far we have found four ways of understanding words:

(1) On suitable occasions you use the word properly.

(2) When you hear it you act appropriately.

(3) You associate the word with another word (say in a different
language) which has the appropriate effect on behaviour.

(4) When the word is being first learnt, you may associate it with an
object, which is what it "means," or a representative of various objects
that it "means."

In the fourth case, the word acquires, through association, some of the
same causal efficacy as the object. The word "motor" can make you
leap aside, just as the motor can, but it cannot break your bones. The
effects which a word can share with its object are those which proceed
according to laws other than the general laws of physics, i.e. those
which, according to our terminology, involve vital movements as opposed
to merely mechanical movements. The effects of a word that we understand
are always mnemic phenomena in the sense explained in Lecture IV, in
so far as they are identical with, or similar to, the effects which the
object itself might have.

So far, all the uses of words that we have considered can be accounted
for on the lines of behaviourism.

But so far we have only considered what may be called the
"demonstrative" use of language, to point out some feature in the
present environment. This is only one of the ways in which language
may be used. There are also its narrative and imaginative uses, as
in history and novels. Let us take as an instance the telling of some
remembered event.

We spoke a moment ago of a child who hears the word "motor" for
the first time when crossing a street along which a motor-car is
approaching. On a later occasion, we will suppose, the child remembers
the incident and relates it to someone else. In this case, both the
active and passive understanding of words is different from what it is
when words are used demonstratively. The child is not seeing a motor,
but only remembering one; the hearer does not look round in expectation
of seeing a motor coming, but "understands" that a motor came at some
earlier time. The whole of this occurrence is much more difficult to
account for on behaviourist lines. It is clear that, in so far as the
child is genuinely remembering, he has a picture of the past occurrence,
and his words are chosen so as to describe the picture; and in so far
as the hearer is genuinely apprehending what is said, the hearer is
acquiring a picture more or less like that of the child. It is true that
this process may be telescoped through the operation of the word-habit.
The child may not genuinely remember the incident, but only have the
habit of the appropriate words, as in the case of a poem which we know
by heart, though we cannot remember learning it. And the hearer also
may only pay attention to the words, and not call up any corresponding
picture. But it is, nevertheless, the possibility of a memory-image in
the child and an imagination-image in the hearer that makes the essence
of the narrative "meaning" of the words. In so far as this is absent,
the words are mere counters, capable of meaning, but not at the moment
possessing it.

Yet this might perhaps be regarded as something of an overstatement. The
words alone, without the use of images, may cause appropriate emotions
and appropriate behaviour. The words have been used in an environment
which produced certain emotions; by a telescoped process, the words
alone are now capable of producing similar emotions. On these lines it
might be sought to show that images are unnecessary. I do not believe,
however, that we could account on these lines for the entirely different
response produced by a narrative and by a description of present facts.
Images, as contrasted with sensations, are the response expected during
a narrative; it is understood that present action is not called
for. Thus it seems that we must maintain our distinction words used
demonstratively describe and are intended to lead to sensations, while
the same words used in narrative describe and are only intended to lead
to images.

We have thus, in addition to our four previous ways in which words can
mean, two new ways, namely the way of memory and the way of imagination.
That is to say:

(5) Words may be used to describe or recall a memory-image: to describe
it when it already exists, or to recall it when the words exist as a
habit and are known to be descriptive of some past experience.

(6) Words may be used to describe or create an imagination-image: to
describe it, for example, in the case of a poet or novelist, or to
create it in the ordinary case for giving information-though, in the
latter case, it is intended that the imagination-image, when created,
shall be accompanied by belief that something of the sort occurred.

These two ways of using words, including their occurrence in inner
speech, may be spoken of together as the use of words in "thinking."
If we are right, the use of words in thinking depends, at least in its
origin, upon images, and cannot be fully dealt with on behaviourist
lines. And this is really the most essential function of words, namely
that, originally through their connection with images, they bring us
into touch with what is remote in time or space. When they operate
without the medium of images, this seems to be a telescoped process.
Thus the problem of the meaning of words is brought into connection with
the problem of the meaning of images.

To understand the function that words perform in what is called
"thinking," we must understand both the causes and the effects of their
occurrence. The causes of the occurrence of words require somewhat
different treatment according as the object designated by the word is
sensibly present or absent. When the object is present, it may itself
be taken as the cause of the word, through association. But when it is
absent there is more difficulty in obtaining a behaviourist theory of
the occurrence of the word. The language-habit consists not merely
in the use of words demonstratively, but also in their use to express
narrative or desire. Professor Watson, in his account of the acquisition
of the language-habit, pays very little attention to the use of words in
narrative and desire. He says ("Behavior," pp. 329-330):

"The stimulus (object) to which the child often responds, a box, e.g. by
movements such as opening and closing and putting objects into it, may
serve to illustrate our argument. The nurse, observing that the child
reacts with his hands, feet, etc., to the box, begins to say 'box' when
the child is handed the box, 'open box' when the child opens it, 'close
box' when he closes it, and 'put doll in box' when that act is executed.
This is repeated over and over again. In the process of time it comes
about that without any other stimulus than that of the box which
originally called out the bodily habits, he begins to say 'box' when he
sees it, 'open box' when he opens it, etc. The visible box now becomes
a stimulus capable of releasing either the bodily habits or the
word-habit, i.e. development has brought about two things: (1) a series
of functional connections among arcs which run from visual receptor to
muscles of throat, and (2) a series of already earlier connected arcs
which run from the same receptor to the bodily muscles.... The object
meets the child's vision. He runs to it and tries to reach it and says
'box.'... Finally the word is uttered without the movement of going
towards the box being executed.... Habits are formed of going to the
box when the arms are full of toys. The child has been taught to deposit
them there. When his arms are laden with toys and no box is there, the
word-habit arises and he calls 'box'; it is handed to him, and he opens
it and deposits the toys therein. This roughly marks what we would call
the genesis of a true language-habit."(pp. 329-330).*

     * Just the same account of language is given in Professor
     Watson's more recent book (reference above).

We need not linger over what is said in the above passage as to the use
of the word "box" in the presence of the box. But as to its use in the
absence of the box, there is only one brief sentence, namely: "When his
arms are laden with toys and no box is there, the word-habit arises and
he calls 'box.'" This is inadequate as it stands, since the habit has
been to use the word when the box is present, and we have to explain its
extension to cases in which the box is absent.

Having admitted images, we may say that the word "box," in the absence
of the box, is caused by an image of the box. This may or may not
be true--in fact, it is true in some cases but not in others. Even,
however, if it were true in all cases, it would only slightly shift our
problem: we should now have to ask what causes an image of the box to
arise. We might be inclined to say that desire for the box is the cause.
But when this view is investigated, it is found that it compels us to
suppose that the box can be desired without the child's having either an
image of the box or the word "box." This will require a theory of desire
which may be, and I think is, in the main true, but which removes desire
from among things that actually occur, and makes it merely a convenient
fiction, like force in mechanics.* With such a view, desire is no longer
a true cause, but merely a short way of describing certain processes.

     * See Lecture III, above.

In order to explain the occurrence of either the word or the image
in the absence of the box, we have to assume that there is something,
either in the environment or in our own sensations, which has frequently
occurred at about the same time as the word "box." One of the laws which
distinguish psychology (or nerve-physiology?) from physics is the
law that, when two things have frequently existed in close temporal
contiguity, either comes in time to cause the other.* This is the basis
both of habit and of association. Thus, in our case, the arms full of
toys have frequently been followed quickly by the box, and the box in
turn by the word "box." The box itself is subject to physical laws, and
does not tend to be caused by the arms full of toys, however often it
may in the past have followed them--always provided that, in the case in
question, its physical position is such that voluntary movements cannot
lead to it. But the word "box" and the image of the box are subject to
the law of habit; hence it is possible for either to be caused by the
arms full of toys. And we may lay it down generally that, whenever we
use a word, either aloud or in inner speech, there is some sensation
or image (either of which may be itself a word) which has frequently
occurred at about the same time as the word, and now, through habit,
causes the word. It follows that the law of habit is adequate to account
for the use of words in the absence of their objects; moreover, it would
be adequate even without introducing images. Although, therefore, images
seem undeniable, we cannot derive an additional argument in their favour
from the use of words, which could, theoretically, be explained without
introducing images.

     *For a more exact statement of this law, with the
     limitations suggested by experiment, see A. Wohlgemuth, "On
     Memory and the Direction of Associations," "British Journal
     of Psychology," vol. v, part iv (March, 1913).

When we understand a word, there is a reciprocal association between
it and the images of what it "means." Images may cause us to use words
which mean them, and these words, heard or read, may in turn cause the
appropriate images. Thus speech is a means of producing in our hearers
the images which are in us. Also, by a telescoped process, words come in
time to produce directly the effects which would have been produced
by the images with which they were associated. The general law of
telescoped processes is that, if A causes B and B causes C, it will
happen in time that A will cause C directly, without the intermediary
of B. This is a characteristic of psychological and neural causation.
In virtue of this law, the effects of images upon our actions come to
be produced by words, even when the words do not call up appropriate
images. The more familiar we are with words, the more our "thinking"
goes on in words instead of images. We may, for example, be able to
describe a person's appearance correctly without having at any time had
any image of him, provided, when we saw him, we thought of words which
fitted him; the words alone may remain with us as a habit, and enable
us to speak as if we could recall a visual image of the man. In this and
other ways the understanding of a word often comes to be quite free from
imagery; but in first learning the use of language it would seem that
imagery always plays a very important part.

Images as well as words may be said to have "meaning"; indeed, the
meaning of images seems more primitive than the meaning of words. What
we call (say) an image of St. Paul's may be said to "mean" St. Paul's.
But it is not at all easy to say exactly what constitutes the meaning of
an image. A memory-image of a particular occurrence, when accompanied
by a memory-belief, may be said to mean the occurrence of which it is an
image. But most actual images do not have this degree of definiteness.
If we call up an image of a dog, we are very likely to have a vague
image, which is not representative of some one special dog, but of dogs
in general. When we call up an image of a friend's face, we are not
likely to reproduce the expression he had on some one particular
occasion, but rather a compromise expression derived from many
occasions. And there is hardly any limit to the vagueness of which
images are capable. In such cases, the meaning of the image, if defined
by relation to the prototype, is vague: there is not one definite
prototype, but a number, none of which is copied exactly.*

     * Cf. Semon, Mnemische Empfindungen, chap. xvi, especially
     pp. 301-308.

There is, however, another way of approaching the meaning of images,
namely through their causal efficacy. What is called an image "of"
some definite object, say St. Paul's, has some of the effects which the
object would have. This applies especially to the effects that depend
upon association. The emotional effects, also, are often similar:
images may stimulate desire almost as strongly as do the objects they
represent. And conversely desire may cause images*: a hungry man will
have images of food, and so on. In all these ways the causal laws
concerning images are connected with the causal laws concerning the
objects which the images "mean." An image may thus come to fulfil the
function of a general idea. The vague image of a dog, which we spoke of
a moment ago, will have effects which are only connected with dogs in
general, not the more special effects which would be produced by some
dogs but not by others. Berkeley and Hume, in their attack on general
ideas, do not allow for the vagueness of images: they assume that every
image has the definiteness that a physical object would have This is not
the case, and a vague image may well have a meaning which is general.

     * This phrase is in need of interpretation, as appears from
     the analysis of desire. But the reader can easily supply the
     interpretation for himself.

In order to define the "meaning" of an image, we have to take account
both of its resemblance to one or more prototypes, and of its causal
efficacy. If there were such a thing as a pure imagination-image,
without any prototype whatever, it would be destitute of meaning. But
according to Hume's principle, the simple elements in an image,
at least, are derived from prototypes-except possibly in very rare
exceptional cases. Often, in such instances as our image of a friend's
face or of a nondescript dog, an image is not derived from one
prototype, but from many; when this happens, the image is vague, and
blurs the features in which the various prototypes differ. To arrive
at the meaning of the image in such a case, we observe that there are
certain respects, notably associations, in which the effects of images
resemble those of their prototypes. If we find, in a given case, that
our vague image, say, of a nondescript dog, has those associative
effects which all dogs would have, but not those belonging to any
special dog or kind of dog, we may say that our image means "dog" in
general. If it has all the associations appropriate to spaniels but
no others, we shall say it means "spaniel"; while if it has all the
associations appropriate to one particular dog, it will mean that dog,
however vague it may be as a picture. The meaning of an image, according
to this analysis, is constituted by a combination of likeness and
associations. It is not a sharp or definite conception, and in many
cases it will be impossible to decide with any certainty what an image
means. I think this lies in the nature of things, and not in defective
analysis.

We may give somewhat more precision to the above account of the meaning
of images, and extend it to meaning in general. We find sometimes that,
IN MNEMIC CAUSATION, an image or word, as stimulus, has the same effect
(or very nearly the same effect) as would belong to some object, say,
a certain dog. In that case we say that the image or word means that
object. In other cases the mnemic effects are not all those of one
object, but only those shared by objects of a certain kind, e.g. by all
dogs. In this case the meaning of the image or word is general: it means
the whole kind. Generality and particularity are a matter of degree. If
two particulars differ sufficiently little, their mnemic effects will be
the same; therefore no image or word can mean the one as opposed to the
other; this sets a bound to the particularity of meaning. On the other
hand, the mnemic effects of a number of sufficiently dissimilar objects
will have nothing discoverable in common; hence a word which aims at
complete generality, such as "entity" for example, will have to be
devoid of mnemic effects, and therefore of meaning. In practice, this is
not the case: such words have VERBAL associations, the learning of which
constitutes the study of metaphysics.

The meaning of a word, unlike that of an image, is wholly constituted
by mnemic causal laws, and not in any degree by likeness (except in
exceptional cases). The word "dog" bears no resemblance to a dog, but
its effects, like those of an image of a dog, resemble the effects of an
actual dog in certain respects. It is much easier to say definitely
what a word means than what an image means, since words, however they
originated, have been framed in later times for the purpose of having
meaning, and men have been engaged for ages in giving increased
precision to the meanings of words. But although it is easier to
say what a word means than what an image means, the relation which
constitutes meaning is much the same in both cases. A word, like an
image, has the same associations as its meaning has. In addition to
other associations, it is associated with images of its meaning, so that
the word tends to call up the image and the image tends to call up the
word., But this association is not essential to the intelligent use of
words. If a word has the right associations with other objects, we shall
be able to use it correctly, and understand its use by others, even if
it evokes no image. The theoretical understanding of words involves only
the power of associating them correctly with other words; the practical
understanding involves associations with other bodily movements.

The use of words is, of course, primarily social, for the purpose of
suggesting to others ideas which we entertain or at least wish them to
entertain. But the aspect of words that specially concerns us is their
power of promoting our own thought. Almost all higher intellectual
activity is a matter of words, to the nearly total exclusion of
everything else. The advantages of words for purposes of thought are so
great that I should never end if I were to enumerate them. But a few of
them deserve to be mentioned.

In the first place, there is no difficulty in producing a word, whereas
an image cannot always be brought into existence at will, and when it
comes it often contains much irrelevant detail. In the second place,
much of our thinking is concerned with abstract matters which do not
readily lend themselves to imagery, and are apt to be falsely conceived
if we insist upon finding images that may be supposed to represent them.
The word is always concrete and sensible, however abstract its
meaning may be, and thus by the help of words we are able to dwell on
abstractions in a way which would otherwise be impossible. In the third
place, two instances of the same word are so similar that neither has
associations not capable of being shared by the other. Two instances of
the word "dog" are much more alike than (say) a pug and a great dane;
hence the word "dog" makes it much easier to think about dogs in
general. When a number of objects have a common property which is
important but not obvious, the invention of a name for the common
property helps us to remember it and to think of the whole set of
objects that possess it. But it is unnecessary to prolong the catalogue
of the uses of language in thought.

At the same time, it is possible to conduct rudimentary thought by
means of images, and it is important, sometimes, to check purely verbal
thought by reference to what it means. In philosophy especially the
tyranny of traditional words is dangerous, and we have to be on our
guard against assuming that grammar is the key to metaphysics, or that
the structure of a sentence corresponds at all accurately with the
structure of the fact that it asserts. Sayce maintained that all
European philosophy since Aristotle has been dominated by the fact that
the philosophers spoke Indo-European languages, and therefore supposed
the world, like the sentences they were used to, necessarily divisible
into subjects and predicates. When we come to the consideration of truth
and falsehood, we shall see how necessary it is to avoid assuming too
close a parallelism between facts and the sentences which assert them.
Against such errors, the only safeguard is to be able, once in a way, to
discard words for a moment and contemplate facts more directly through
images. Most serious advances in philosophic thought result from some
such comparatively direct contemplation of facts. But the outcome has
to be expressed in words if it is to be communicable. Those who have
a relatively direct vision of facts are often incapable of translating
their vision into words, while those who possess the words have
usually lost the vision. It is partly for this reason that the highest
philosophical capacity is so rare: it requires a combination of vision
with abstract words which is hard to achieve, and too quickly lost in
the few who have for a moment achieved it.




LECTURE XI. GENERAL IDEAS AND THOUGHT

It is said to be one of the merits of the human mind that it is capable
of framing abstract ideas, and of conducting nonsensational thought.
In this it is supposed to differ from the mind of animals. From Plato
onward the "idea" has played a great part in the systems of idealizing
philosophers. The "idea" has been, in their hands, always something
noble and abstract, the apprehension and use of which by man confers
upon him a quite special dignity.

The thing we have to consider to-day is this: seeing that there
certainly are words of which the meaning is abstract, and seeing that we
can use these words intelligently, what must be assumed or inferred, or
what can be discovered by observation, in the way of mental content to
account for the intelligent use of abstract words?

Taken as a problem in logic, the answer is, of course, that absolutely
nothing in the way of abstract mental content is inferable from the
mere fact that we can use intelligently words of which the meaning
is abstract. It is clear that a sufficiently ingenious person could
manufacture a machine moved by olfactory stimuli which, whenever a dog
appeared in its neighbourhood, would say, "There is a dog," and when
a cat appeared would throw stones at it. The act of saying "There is a
dog," and the act of throwing stones, would in such a case be equally
mechanical. Correct speech does not of itself afford any better evidence
of mental content than the performance of any other set of biologically
useful movements, such as those of flight or combat. All that is
inferable from language is that two instances of a universal, even when
they differ very greatly, may cause the utterance of two instances
of the same word which only differ very slightly. As we saw in the
preceding lecture, the word "dog" is useful, partly, because two
instances of this word are much more similar than (say) a pug and a
great dane. The use of words is thus a method of substituting for two
particulars which differ widely, in spite of being instances of the same
universal, two other particulars which differ very little, and which
are also instances of a universal, namely the name of the previous
universal. Thus, so far as logic is concerned, we are entirely free to
adopt any theory as to general ideas which empirical observation may
recommend.

Berkeley and Hume made a vigorous onslaught on "abstract ideas." They
meant by an idea approximately what we should call an image. Locke
having maintained that he could form an idea of triangle in general,
without deciding what sort of triangle it was to be, Berkeley contended
that this was impossible. He says:

"Whether others, have this wonderful faculty of abstracting their ideas,
they best can tell: for myself, I dare be confident I have it not. I
find, indeed, I have indeed a faculty of imagining, or representing to
myself, the ideas of those particular things I have perceived, and of
variously compounding and dividing them. I can imagine a man with two
heads, or the upper parts of a man joined to the body of a horse. I
can consider the hand, the eye, the nose, each by itself abstracted or
separated from the rest of the body. But, then, whatever hand or eye
I imagine, it must have some particular shape and colour. Likewise the
idea of a man that I frame to myself must be either of a white, or a
black, or a tawny, a straight, or a crooked, a tall, or a low, or
a middle-sized man. I cannot by any effort of thought conceive the
abstract idea above described. And it is equally impossible for me to
form the abstract idea of motion distinct from the body moving, and
which is neither swift nor slow, curvilinear nor rectilinear; and the
like may be said of all other abstract general ideas whatsoever. To be
plain, I own myself able to abstract in one sense, as when I consider
some particular parts of qualities separated from others, with which,
though they are united in some object, yet it is possible they may
really exist without them. But I deny that I can abstract from one
another, or conceive separately, those qualities which it is impossible
should exist so separated; or that I can frame a general notion, by
abstracting from particulars in the manner aforesaid--which last are
the two proper acceptations of ABSTRACTION. And there is ground to think
most men will acknowledge themselves to be in my case. The generality of
men which are simple and illiterate never pretend to ABSTRACT NOTIONS.
It is said they are difficult and not to be attained without pains and
study; we may therefore reasonably conclude that, if such there be, they
are confined only to the learned.

"I proceed to examine what can be alleged in defence of the doctrine of
abstraction, and try if I can discover what it is that inclines the men
of speculation to embrace an opinion so remote from common sense as that
seems to be. There has been a late excellent and deservedly esteemed
philosopher who, no doubt, has given it very much countenance, by
seeming to think the having abstract general ideas is what puts the
widest difference in point of understanding betwixt man and beast.
'The having of general ideas,' saith he, 'is that which puts a perfect
distinction betwixt man and brutes, and is an excellency which the
faculties of brutes do by no means attain unto. For, it is evident
we observe no footsteps in them of making use of general signs for
universal ideas; from which we have reason to imagine that they have not
the faculty of abstracting, or making general ideas, since they have
no use of words or any other general signs.' And a little after:
'Therefore, I think, we may suppose that it is in this that the species
of brutes are discriminated from men, and it is that proper difference
wherein they are wholly separated, and which at last widens to so wide a
distance. For, if they have any ideas at all, and are not bare machines
(as some would have them), we cannot deny them to have some reason. It
seems as evident to me that they do, some of them, in certain instances
reason as that they have sense; but it is only in particular ideas, just
as they receive them from their senses. They are the best of them tied
up within those narrow bounds, and have not (as I think) the faculty
to enlarge them by any kind of abstraction.* ("Essay on Human
Understanding," Bk. II, chap. xi, paragraphs 10 and 11.) I readily agree
with this learned author, that the faculties of brutes can by no means
attain to abstraction. But, then, if this be made the distinguishing
property of that sort of animals, I fear a great many of those that
pass for men must be reckoned into their number. The reason that is here
assigned why we have no grounds to think brutes have abstract general
ideas is, that we observe in them no use of words or any other general
signs; which is built on this supposition-that the making use of words
implies the having general ideas. From which it follows that men who use
language are able to abstract or generalize their ideas. That this is
the sense and arguing of the author will further appear by his answering
the question he in another place puts: 'Since all things that exist are
only particulars, how come we by general terms?' His answer is: 'Words
become general by being made the signs of general ideas.' ("Essay on
Human Understanding," Bk. III, chap. III, paragraph 6.) But it seems
that a word becomes general by being made the sign, not of an abstract
general idea, but of several particular ideas, any one of which it
indifferently suggests to the mind. For example, when it is said 'the
change of motion is proportional to the impressed force,' or that
'whatever has extension is divisible,' these propositions are to be
understood of motion and extension in general; and nevertheless it will
not follow that they suggest to my thoughts an idea of motion without
a body moved, or any determinate direction and velocity, or that I must
conceive an abstract general idea of extension, which is neither line,
surface, nor solid, neither great nor small, black, white, nor red,
nor of any other determinate colour. It is only implied that
whatever particular motion I consider, whether it be swift or slow,
perpendicular, horizontal, or oblique, or in whatever object, the axiom
concerning it holds equally true. As does the other of every particular
extension, it matters not whether line, surface, or solid, whether of
this or that magnitude or figure.

"By observing how ideas become general, we may the better judge how
words are made so. And here it is to be noted that I do not deny
absolutely there are general ideas, but only that there are any ABSTRACT
general ideas; for, in the passages we have quoted wherein there is
mention of general ideas, it is always supposed that they are formed by
abstraction, after the manner set forth in sections 8 and 9. Now, if
we will annex a meaning to our words, and speak only of what we can
conceive, I believe we shall acknowledge that an idea which, considered
in itself, is particular, becomes general by being made to represent
or stand for all other particular ideas of the same sort. To make this
plain by an example, suppose a geometrician is demonstrating the method
of cutting a line in two equal parts. He draws, for instance, a black
line of an inch in length: this, which in itself is a particular line,
is nevertheless with regard to its signification general, since, as it
is there used, it represents all particular lines whatsoever; so that
what is demonstrated of it is demonstrated of all lines, or, in other
words, of a line in general. And, as THAT PARTICULAR LINE becomes
general by being made a sign, so the NAME 'line,' which taken absolutely
is particular, by being a sign is made general. And as the former owes
its generality not to its being the sign of an abstract or general line,
but of all particular right lines that may possibly exist, so the latter
must be thought to derive its generality from the same cause, namely,
the various particular lines which it indifferently denotes." *

     * Introduction to "A Treatise concerning the Principles of
     Human Knowledge," paragraphs 10, 11, and 12.

Berkeley's view in the above passage, which is essentially the same as
Hume's, does not wholly agree with modern psychology, although it comes
nearer to agreement than does the view of those who believe that there
are in the mind single contents which can be called abstract ideas. The
way in which Berkeley's view is inadequate is chiefly in the fact that
images are as a rule not of one definite prototype, but of a number of
related similar prototypes. On this subject Semon has written well.
In "Die Mneme," pp. 217 ff., discussing the effect of repeated similar
stimuli in producing and modifying our images, he says: "We choose a
case of mnemic excitement whose existence we can perceive for ourselves
by introspection, and seek to ekphore the bodily picture of our nearest
relation in his absence, and have thus a pure mnemic excitement before
us. At first it may seem to us that a determinate quite concrete picture
becomes manifest in us, but just when we are concerned with a person
with whom we are in constant contact, we shall find that the ekphored
picture has something so to speak generalized. It is something like
those American photographs which seek to display what is general about a
type by combining a great number of photographs of different heads over
each other on one plate. In our opinion, the generalizations happen by
the homophonic working of different pictures of the same face which we
have come across in the most different conditions and situations, once
pale, once reddened, once cheerful, once earnest, once in this
light, and once in that. As soon as we do not let the whole series
of repetitions resound in us uniformly, but give our attention to one
particular moment out of the many... this particular mnemic stimulus at
once overbalances its simultaneously roused predecessors and successors,
and we perceive the face in question with concrete definiteness in that
particular situation." A little later he says: "The result is--at least
in man, but probably also in the higher animals--the development of a
sort of PHYSIOLOGICAL abstraction. Mnemic homophony gives us, without
the addition of other processes of thought, a picture of our friend
X which is in a certain sense abstract, not the concrete in any one
situation, but X cut loose from any particular point of time. If the
circle of ekphored engrams is drawn even more widely, abstract pictures
of a higher order appear: for instance, a white man or a negro. In my
opinion, the first form of abstract concepts in general is based upon
such abstract pictures. The physiological abstraction which takes
place in the above described manner is a predecessor of purely logical
abstraction. It is by no means a monopoly of the human race, but shows
itself in various ways also among the more highly organized animals."
The same subject is treated in more detail in Chapter xvi of "Die
mnemischen Empfindungen," but what is said there adds nothing vital to
what is contained in the above quotations.

It is necessary, however, to distinguish between the vague and the
general. So long as we are content with Semon's composite image, we MAY
get no farther than the vague. The question whether this image takes us
to the general or not depends, I think, upon the question whether, in
addition to the generalized image, we have also particular images
of some of the instances out of which it is compounded. Suppose, for
example, that on a number of occasions you had seen one negro, and
that you did not know whether this one was the same or different on
the different occasions. Suppose that in the end you had an abstract
memory-image of the different appearances presented by the negro on
different occasions, but no memory-image of any one of the single
appearances. In that case your image would be vague. If, on the other
hand, you have, in addition to the generalized image, particular images
of the several appearances, sufficiently clear to be recognized as
different, and as instances of the generalized picture, you will then
not feel the generalized picture to be adequate to any one particular
appearance, and you will be able to make it function as a general
idea rather than a vague idea. If this view is correct, no new general
content needs to be added to the generalized image. What needs to be
added is particular images compared and contrasted with the generalized
image. So far as I can judge by introspection, this does occur in
practice. Take for example Semon's instance of a friend's face. Unless
we make some special effort of recollection, the face is likely to come
before us with an average expression, very blurred and vague, but we can
at will recall how our friend looked on some special occasion when he
was pleased or angry or unhappy, and this enables us to realize the
generalized character of the vague image.

There is, however, another way of distinguishing between the vague, the
particular and the general, and this is not by their content, but by
the reaction which they produce. A word, for example, may be said to be
vague when it is applicable to a number of different individuals, but to
each as individuals; the name Smith, for example, is vague: it is always
meant to apply to one man, but there are many men to each of whom it
applies.* The word "man," on the other hand, is general. We say, "This
is Smith," but we do not say "This is man," but "This is a man." Thus
we may say that a word embodies a vague idea when its effects are
appropriate to an individual, but are the same for various similar
individuals, while a word embodies a general idea when its effects are
different from those appropriate to individuals. In what this difference
consists it is, however, not easy to say. I am inclined to think that it
consists merely in the knowledge that no one individual is represented,
so that what distinguishes a general idea from a vague idea is merely
the presence of a certain accompanying belief. If this view is correct,
a general idea differs from a vague one in a way analogous to that in
which a memory-image differs from an imagination-image. There also
we found that the difference consists merely of the fact that a
memory-image is accompanied by a belief, in this case as to the past.

     * "Smith" would only be a quite satisfactory representation
     of vague words if we failed to discriminate between
     different people called Smith.

It should also be said that our images even of quite particular
occurrences have always a greater or a less degree of vagueness. That is
to say, the occurrence might have varied within certain limits without
causing our image to vary recognizably. To arrive at the general it
is necessary that we should be able to contrast it with a number of
relatively precise images or words for particular occurrences; so long
as all our images and words are vague, we cannot arrive at the contrast
by which the general is defined. This is the justification for the
view which I quoted on p. 184 from Ribot (op. cit., p. 32), viz. that
intelligence progresses from the indefinite to the definite, and that
the vague appears earlier than either the particular or the general.

I think the view which I have been advocating, to the effect that a
general idea is distinguished from a vague one by the presence of a
judgment, is also that intended by Ribot when he says (op. cit., p. 92):
"The generic image is never, the concept is always, a judgment. We know
that for logicians (formerly at any rate) the concept is the simple
and primitive element; next comes the judgment, uniting two or several
concepts; then ratiocination, combining two or several judgments. For
the psychologists, on the contrary, affirmation is the fundamental
act; the concept is the result of judgment (explicit or implicit), of
similarities with exclusion of differences."

A great deal of work professing to be experimental has been done in
recent years on the psychology of thought. A good summary of such
work up to the year agog is contained in Titchener's "Lectures on the
Experimental Psychology of the Thought Processes" (1909). Three articles
in the "Archiv fur die gesammte Psychologie" by Watt,* Messer** and
Buhler*** contain a great deal of the material amassed by the methods
which Titchener calls experimental.

     * Henry J. Watt, "Experimentelle Beitrage zu einer Theorie
     des Denkens," vol. iv (1905) pp. 289-436.

     ** August Messer, "Experimentell-psychologische Untersuchu
     gen uber das Denken," vol. iii (1906), pp. 1-224.

     *** Karl Buhler, "Uber Gedanken," vol. ix (1907), pp. 297-365.

For my part I am unable to attach as much importance to this work as
many psychologists do. The method employed appears to me hardly to
fulfil the conditions of scientific experiment. Broadly speaking, what
is done is, that a set of questions are asked of various people, their
answers are recorded, and likewise their own accounts, based upon
introspection, of the processes of thought which led them to give
those answers. Much too much reliance seems to me to be placed upon the
correctness of their introspection. On introspection as a method I have
spoken earlier (Lecture VI). I am not prepared, like Professor Watson,
to reject it wholly, but I do consider that it is exceedingly fallible
and quite peculiarly liable to falsification in accordance with
preconceived theory. It is like depending upon the report of a
shortsighted person as to whom he sees coming along the road at a moment
when he is firmly convinced that Jones is sure to come. If everybody
were shortsighted and obsessed with beliefs as to what was going to be
visible, we might have to make the best of such testimony, but we should
need to correct its errors by taking care to collect the simultaneous
evidence of people with the most divergent expectations. There is no
evidence that this was done in the experiments in question, nor indeed
that the influence of theory in falsifying the introspection was at all
adequately recognized. I feel convinced that if Professor Watson had
been one of the subjects of the questionnaires, he would have given
answers totally different from those recorded in the articles in
question. Titchener quotes an opinion of Wundt on these investigations,
which appears to me thoroughly justified. "These experiments," he says,
"are not experiments at all in the sense of a scientific methodology;
they are counterfeit experiments, that seem methodical simply because
they are ordinarily performed in a psychological laboratory, and involve
the co-operation of two persons, who purport to be experimenter and
observer. In reality, they are as unmethodical as possible; they possess
none of the special features by which we distinguish the introspections
of experimental psychology from the casual introspections of everyday
life."* Titchener, of course, dissents from this opinion, but I cannot
see that his reasons for dissent are adequate. My doubts are only
increased by the fact that Buhler at any rate used trained psychologists
as his subjects. A trained psychologist is, of course, supposed to have
acquired the habit of observation, but he is at least equally likely to
have acquired a habit of seeing what his theories require. We may take
Buhler's "Uber Gedanken" to illustrate the kind of results arrived at
by such methods. Buhler says (p. 303): "We ask ourselves the general
question: 'WHAT DO WE EXPERIENCE WHEN WE THINK?' Then we do not at all
attempt a preliminary determination of the concept 'thought,' but choose
for analysis only such processes as everyone would describe as
processes of thought." The most important thing in thinking, he says, is
"awareness that..." (Bewusstheit dass), which he calls a thought. It
is, he says, thoughts in this sense that are essential to thinking.
Thinking, he maintains, does not need language or sensuous
presentations. "I assert rather that in principle every object can be
thought (meant) distinctly, without any help from sensuous presentation
(Anschauungshilfen). Every individual shade of blue colour on the
picture that hangs in my room I can think with complete distinctness
unsensuously (unanschaulich), provided it is possible that the object
should be given to me in another manner than by the help of sensations.
How that is possible we shall see later." What he calls a thought
(Gedanke) cannot be reduced, according to him, to other psychic
occurrences. He maintains that thoughts consist for the most part of
known rules (p. 342). It is clearly essential to the interest of this
theory that the thought or rule alluded to by Buhler should not need to
be expressed in words, for if it is expressed in words it is immediately
capable of being dealt with on the lines with which the behaviourists
have familiarized us. It is clear also that the supposed absence of
words rests solely upon the introspective testimony of the persons
experimented upon. I cannot think that there is sufficient certainty
of their reliability in this negative observation to make us accept a
difficult and revolutionary view of thought, merely because they have
failed to observe the presence of words or their equivalent in their
thinking. I think it far more likely, especially in view of the fact
that the persons concerned were highly educated, that we are concerned
with telescoped processes, in which habit has caused a great many
intermediate terms to be elided or to be passed over so quickly as to
escape observation.

     * Titchener, op. cit., p. 79.

I am inclined to think that similar remarks apply to the general idea of
"imageless thinking," concerning which there has been much controversy.
The advocates of imageless thinking are not contending merely that there
can be thinking which is purely verbal; they are contending that there
can be thinking which proceeds neither in words nor in images. My own
feeling is that they have rashly assumed the presence of thinking in
cases where habit has rendered thinking unnecessary. When Thorndike
experimented with animals in cages, he found that the associations
established were between a sensory stimulus and a bodily movement (not
the idea of it), without the need of supposing any non-physiological
intermediary (op. cit., p. 100 ff.). The same thing, it seems to me,
applies to ourselves. A certain sensory situation produces in us a
certain bodily movement. Sometimes this movement consists in uttering
words. Prejudice leads us to suppose that between the sensory
stimulus and the utterance of the words a process of thought must have
intervened, but there seems no good reason for such a supposition. Any
habitual action, such as eating or dressing, may be performed on the
appropriate occasion, without any need of thought, and the same seems
to be true of a painfully large proportion of our talk. What applies to
uttered speech applies of course equally to the internal speech which is
not uttered. I remain, therefore, entirely unconvinced that there is
any such phenomenon as thinking which consists neither of images nor of
words, or that "ideas" have to be added to sensations and images as part
of the material out of which mental phenomena are built.

The question of the nature of our consciousness of the universal is
much affected by our view as to the general nature of the relation of
consciousness to its object. If we adopt the view of Brentano, according
to which all mental content has essential reference to an object, it
is then natural to suppose that there is some peculiar kind of mental
content of which the object is a universal, as oppose to a particular.
According to this view, a particular cat can be PERceived or imagined,
while the universal "cat" is CONceived. But this whole manner of viewing
our dealings with universals has to be abandoned when the relation of
a mental occurrence to its "object" is regarded as merely indirect and
causal, which is the view that we have adopted. The mental content is,
of course, always particular, and the question as to what it "means"
(in case it means anything) is one which cannot be settled by merely
examining the intrinsic character of the mental content, but only by
knowing its causal connections in the case of the person concerned. To
say that a certain thought "means" a universal as opposed to either a
vague or a particular, is to say something exceedingly complex. A horse
will behave in a certain manner whenever he smells a bear, even if
the smell is derived from a bearskin. That is to say, any environment
containing an instance of the universal "smell of a bear" produces
closely similar behaviour in the horse, but we do not say that the horse
is conscious of this universal. There is equally little reason to
regard a man as conscious of the same universal, because under the same
circumstances he can react by saying, "I smell a bear." This reaction,
like that of the horse, is merely closely similar on different occasions
where the environment affords instances of the same universal. Words
of which the logical meaning is universal can therefore be employed
correctly, without anything that could be called consciousness of
universals. Such consciousness in the only sense in which it can be
said to exist is a matter of reflective judgment consisting in the
observation of similarities and differences. A universal never appears
before the mind as a single object in the sort of way in which something
perceived appears. I THINK a logical argument could be produced to show
that universals are part of the structure of the world, but they are
an inferred part, not a part of our data. What exists in us consists of
various factors, some open to external observation, others only visible
to introspection. The factors open to external observation are primarily
habits, having the peculiarity that very similar reactions are produced
by stimuli which are in many respects very different from each other. Of
this the reaction of the horse to the smell of the bear is an instance,
and so is the reaction of the man who says "bear" under the same
circumstances. The verbal reaction is, of course, the most important
from the point of view of what may be called knowledge of universals. A
man who can always use the word "dog" when he sees a dog may be said,
in a certain sense, to know the meaning of the word "dog," and IN THAT
SENSE to have knowledge of the universal "dog." But there is, of course,
a further stage reached by the logician in which he not merely reacts
with the word "dog," but sets to work to discover what it is in the
environment that causes in him this almost identical reaction on
different occasions. This further stage consists in knowledge of
similarities and differences: similarities which are necessary to the
applicability of the word "dog," and differences which are compatible
with it. Our knowledge of these similarities and differences is never
exhaustive, and therefore our knowledge of the meaning of a universal is
never complete.

In addition to external observable habits (including the habit of
words), there is also the generic image produced by the superposition,
or, in Semon's phrase, homophony, of a number of similar perceptions.
This image is vague so long as the multiplicity of its prototypes is not
recognized, but becomes universal when it exists alongside of the more
specific images of its instances, and is knowingly contrasted with them.
In this case we find again, as we found when we were discussing words
in general in the preceding lecture, that images are not logically
necessary in order to account for observable behaviour, i.e. in this
case intelligent speech. Intelligent speech could exist as a motor
habit, without any accompaniment of images, and this conclusion applies
to words of which the meaning is universal, just as much as to words of
which the meaning is relatively particular. If this conclusion is valid,
it follows that behaviourist psychology, which eschews introspective
data, is capable of being an independent science, and of accounting
for all that part of the behaviour of other people which is commonly
regarded as evidence that they think. It must be admitted that this
conclusion considerably weakens the reliance which can be placed upon
introspective data. They must be accepted simply on account of the
fact that we seem to perceive them, not on account of their supposed
necessity for explaining the data of external observation.

This, at any rate, is the conclusion to which we are forced, so long
as, with the behaviourists, we accept common-sense views of the physical
world. But if, as I have urged, the physical world itself, as known,
is infected through and through with subjectivity, if, as the theory
of relativity suggests, the physical universe contains the diversity of
points of view which we have been accustomed to regard as distinctively
psychological, then we are brought back by this different road to the
necessity for trusting observations which are in an important sense
private. And it is the privacy of introspective data which causes much
of the behaviourists' objection to them.

This is an example of the difficulty of constructing an adequate
philosophy of any one science without taking account of other sciences.
The behaviourist philosophy of psychology, though in many respects
admirable from the point of view of method, appears to me to fail in
the last analysis because it is based upon an inadequate philosophy of
physics. In spite, therefore, of the fact that the evidence for images,
whether generic or particular, is merely introspective, I cannot
admit that images should be rejected, or that we should minimize their
function in our knowledge of what is remote in time or space.




LECTURE XII. BELIEF

Belief, which is our subject to-day, is the central problem in the
analysis of mind. Believing seems the most "mental" thing we do,
the thing most remote from what is done by mere matter. The whole
intellectual life consists of beliefs, and of the passage from one
belief to another by what is called "reasoning." Beliefs give knowledge
and error; they are the vehicles of truth and falsehood. Psychology,
theory of knowledge and metaphysics revolve about belief, and on the
view we take of belief our philosophical outlook largely depends.

Before embarking upon the detailed analysis of belief, we shall do well
to note certain requisites which any theory must fulfil.

(1) Just as words are characterized by meaning, so beliefs are
characterized by truth or falsehood. And just as meaning consists in
relation to the object meant, so truth and falsehood consist in
relation to something that lies outside the belief. You may believe that
such-and-such a horse will win the Derby. The time comes, and your horse
wins or does not win; according to the outcome, your belief was true or
false. You may believe that six times nine is fifty-six; in this case
also there is a fact which makes your belief false. You may believe that
America was discovered in 1492, or that it was discovered in 1066. In
the one case your belief is true, in the other false; in either case
its truth or falsehood depends upon the actions of Columbus, not upon
anything present or under your control. What makes a belief true or
false I call a "fact." The particular fact that makes a given belief
true or false I call its "objective,"* and the relation of the belief to
its objective I call the "reference" or the "objective reference" of the
belief. Thus, if I believe that Columbus crossed the Atlantic in 1492,
the "objective" of my belief is Columbus's actual voyage, and the
"reference" of my belief is the relation between my belief and the
voyage--that relation, namely, in virtue of which the voyage makes my
belief true (or, in another case, false). "Reference" of beliefs differs
from "meaning" of words in various ways, but especially in the fact that
it is of two kinds, "true" reference and "false" reference. The truth
or falsehood of a belief does not depend upon anything intrinsic to
the belief, but upon the nature of its relation to its objective. The
intrinsic nature of belief can be treated without reference to what
makes it true or false. In the remainder of the present lecture I shall
ignore truth and falsehood, which will be the subject of Lecture XIII.
It is the intrinsic nature of belief that will concern us to-day.

     * This terminology is suggested by Meinong, but is not
     exactly the same as his.

(2) We must distinguish between believing and what is believed. I may
believe that Columbus crossed the Atlantic, that all Cretans are liars,
that two and two are four, or that nine times six is fifty-six; in
all these cases the believing is just the same, and only the contents
believed are different. I may remember my breakfast this morning, my
lecture last week, or my first sight of New York. In all these cases the
feeling of memory-belief is just the same, and only what is remembered
differs. Exactly similar remarks apply to expectations. Bare assent,
memory and expectation are forms of belief; all three are different from
what is believed, and each has a constant character which is independent
of what is believed.

In Lecture I we criticized the analysis of a presentation into act,
content and object. But our analysis of belief contains three very
similar elements, namely the believing, what is believed and the
objective. The objections to the act (in the case of presentations)
are not valid against the believing in the case of beliefs, because the
believing is an actual experienced feeling, not something postulated,
like the act. But it is necessary first to complete our preliminary
requisites, and then to examine the content of a belief. After that, we
shall be in a position to return to the question as to what constitutes
believing.

(3) What is believed, and the believing, must both consist of present
occurrences in the believer, no matter what may be the objective of
the belief. Suppose I believe, for example, "that Caesar crossed the
Rubicon." The objective of my belief is an event which happened long
ago, which I never saw and do not remember. This event itself is not in
my mind when I believe that it happened. It is not correct to say that
I am believing the actual event; what I am believing is something now
in my mind, something related to the event (in a way which we shall
investigate in Lecture XIII), but obviously not to be confounded with
the event, since the event is not occurring now but the believing is.
What a man is believing at a given moment is wholly determinate if we
know the contents of his mind at that moment; but Caesar's crossing of
the Rubicon was an historical physical event, which is distinct from the
present contents of every present mind. What is believed, however true
it may be, is not the actual fact that makes the belief true, but a
present event related to the fact. This present event, which is what is
believed, I shall call the "content" of the belief. We have already had
occasion to notice the distinction between content and objective in the
case of memory-beliefs, where the content is "this occurred" and the
objective is the past event.

(4) Between content and objective there is sometimes a very wide gulf,
for example in the case of "Caesar crossed the Rubicon." This gulf may,
when it is first perceived, give us a feeling that we cannot really
"know" anything about the outer world. All we can "know," it may be
said, is what is now in our thoughts. If Caesar and the Rubicon cannot
be bodily in our thoughts, it might seem as though we must remain cut
off from knowledge of them. I shall not now deal at length with this
feeling, since it is necessary first to define "knowing," which cannot
be done yet. But I will say, as a preliminary answer, that the feeling
assumes an ideal of knowing which I believe to be quite mistaken. It
assumes, if it is thought out, something like the mystic unity of knower
and known. These two are often said to be combined into a unity by the
fact of cognition; hence when this unity is plainly absent, it may
seem as if there were no genuine cognition. For my part, I think such
theories and feelings wholly mistaken: I believe knowing to be a very
external and complicated relation, incapable of exact definition,
dependent upon causal laws, and involving no more unity than there is
between a signpost and the town to which it points. I shall return to
this question on a later occasion; for the moment these provisional
remarks must suffice.

(5) The objective reference of a belief is connected with the fact that
all or some of the constituents of its content have meaning. If I say
"Caesar conquered Gaul," a person who knows the meaning of the three
words composing my statement knows as much as can be known about the
nature of the objective which would make my statement true. It is clear
that the objective reference of a belief is, in general, in some way
derivative from the meanings of the words or images that occur in its
content. There are, however, certain complications which must be borne
in mind. In the first place, it might be contended that a memory-image
acquires meaning only through the memory-belief, which would seem, at
least in the case of memory, to make belief more primitive than the
meaning of images. In the second place, it is a very singular thing that
meaning, which is single, should generate objective reference, which is
dual, namely true and false. This is one of the facts which any theory
of belief must explain if it is to be satisfactory.

It is now time to leave these preliminary requisites, and attempt the
analysis of the contents of beliefs.

The first thing to notice about what is believed, i.e. about the content
of a belief, is that it is always complex: We believe that a certain
thing has a certain property, or a certain relation to something else,
or that it occurred or will occur (in the sense discussed at the end of
Lecture IX); or we may believe that all the members of a certain class
have a certain property, or that a certain property sometimes occurs
among the members of a class; or we may believe that if one thing
happens, another will happen (for example, "if it rains I shall bring my
umbrella"), or we may believe that something does not happen, or did not
or will not happen (for example, "it won't rain"); or that one of two
things must happen (for example, "either you withdraw your accusation,
or I shall bring a libel action"). The catalogue of the sorts of things
we may believe is infinite, but all of them are complex.

Language sometimes conceals the complexity of a belief. We say that a
person believes in God, and it might seem as if God formed the whole
content of the belief. But what is really believed is that God exists,
which is very far from being simple. Similarly, when a person has a
memory-image with a memory-belief, the belief is "this occurred," in
the sense explained in Lecture IX; and "this occurred" is not simple.
In like manner all cases where the content of a belief seems simple at
first sight will be found, on examination, to confirm the view that the
content is always complex.

The content of a belief involves not merely a plurality of constituents,
but definite relations between them; it is not determinate when its
constituents alone are given. For example, "Plato preceded Aristotle"
and "Aristotle preceded Plato" are both contents which may be believed,
but, although they consist of exactly the same constituents, they are
different, and even incompatible.

The content of a belief may consist of words only, or of images only, or
of a mixture of the two, or of either or both together with one or more
sensations. It must contain at least one constituent which is a word
or an image, and it may or may not contain one or more sensations as
constituents. Some examples will make these various possibilities clear.

We may take first recognition, in either of the forms "this is of
such-and-such a kind" or "this has occurred before." In either case,
present sensation is a constituent. For example, you hear a noise, and
you say to yourself "tram." Here the noise and the word "tram" are both
constituents of your belief; there is also a relation between them,
expressed by "is" in the proposition "that is a tram." As soon as your
act of recognition is completed by the occurrence of the word "tram,"
your actions are affected: you hurry if you want the tram, or cease to
hurry if you want a bus. In this case the content of your belief is a
sensation (the noise) and a word ("tram") related in a way which may be
called predication.

The same noise may bring into your mind the visual image of a tram,
instead of the word "tram." In this case your belief consists of a
sensation and an image suitable related. Beliefs of this class are what
are called "judgments of perception." As we saw in Lecture VIII, the
images associated with a sensation often come with such spontaneity
and force that the unsophisticated do not distinguish them from the
sensation; it is only the psychologist or the skilled observer who is
aware of the large mnemic element that is added to sensation to make
perception. It may be objected that what is added consists merely of
images without belief. This is no doubt sometimes the case, but
is certainly sometimes not the case. That belief always occurs in
perception as opposed to sensation it is not necessary for us to
maintain; it is enough for our purposes to note that it sometimes
occurs, and that when it does, the content of our belief consists of a
sensation and an image suitably related.

In a PURE memory-belief only images occur. But a mixture of words
and images is very common in memory. You have an image of the past
occurrence, and you say to yourself: "Yes, that's how it was." Here the
image and the words together make up the content of the belief. And
when the remembering of an incident has become a habit, it may be purely
verbal, and the memory-belief may consist of words alone.

The more complicated forms of belief tend to consist only of words.
Often images of various kinds accompany them, but they are apt to
be irrelevant, and to form no part of what is actually believed. For
example, in thinking of the Solar System, you are likely to have vague
images of pictures you have seen of the earth surrounded by clouds,
Saturn and his rings, the sun during an eclipse, and so on; but none of
these form part of your belief that the planets revolve round the sun
in elliptical orbits. The only images that form an actual part of such
beliefs are, as a rule, images of words. And images of words, for the
reasons considered in Lecture VIII, cannot be distinguished with any
certainty from sensations, when, as is often, if not usually, the case,
they are kinaesthetic images of pronouncing the words.

It is impossible for a belief to consist of sensations alone, except
when, as in the case of words, the sensations have associations which
make them signs possessed of meaning. The reason is that objective
reference is of the essence of belief, and objective reference is
derived from meaning. When I speak of a belief consisting partly of
sensations and partly of words, I do not mean to deny that the words,
when they are not mere images, are sensational, but that they occur as
signs, not (so to speak) in their own right. To revert to the noise of
the tram, when you hear it and say "tram," the noise and the word are
both sensations (if you actually pronounce the word), but the noise is
part of the fact which makes your belief true, whereas the word is not
part of this fact. It is the MEANING of the word "tram," not the actual
word, that forms part of the fact which is the objective of your
belief. Thus the word occurs in the belief as a symbol, in virtue of
its meaning, whereas the noise enters into both the belief and its
objective. It is this that distinguishes the occurrence of words as
symbols from the occurrence of sensations in their own right: the
objective contains the sensations that occur in their own right, but
contains only the meanings of the words that occur as symbols.

For the sake of simplicity, we may ignore the cases in which sensations
in their own right form part of the content of a belief, and confine
ourselves to images and words. We may also omit the cases in which
both images and words occur in the content of a belief. Thus we become
confined to two cases: (a) when the content consists wholly of images,
(b) when it consists wholly of words. The case of mixed images and words
has no special importance, and its omission will do no harm.

Let us take in illustration a case of memory. Suppose you are thinking
of some familiar room. You may call up an image of it, and in your image
the window may be to the left of the door. Without any intrusion of
words, you may believe in the correctness of your image. You then have a
belief, consisting wholly of images, which becomes, when put into words,
"the window is to the left of the door." You may yourself use these
words and proceed to believe them. You thus pass from an image-content
to the corresponding word-content. The content is different in the two
cases, but its objective reference is the same. This shows the relation
of image-beliefs to word-beliefs in a very simple case. In more
elaborate cases the relation becomes much less simple.

It may be said that even in this very simple case the objective
reference of the word-content is not quite the same as that of the
image-content, that images have a wealth of concrete features which are
lost when words are substituted, that the window in the image is not a
mere window in the abstract, but a window of a certain shape and size,
not merely to the left of the door, but a certain distance to the left,
and so on. In reply, it may be admitted at once that there is, as a
rule, a certain amount of truth in the objection. But two points may be
urged to minimize its force. First, images do not, as a rule, have that
wealth of concrete detail that would make it IMPOSSIBLE to express
them fully in words. They are vague and fragmentary: a finite number
of words, though perhaps a large number, would exhaust at least their
SIGNIFICANT features. For--and this is our second point--images enter
into the content of a belief through the fact that they are capable of
meaning, and their meaning does not, as a rule, have as much complexity
as they have: some of their characteristics are usually devoid of
meaning. Thus it may well be possible to extract in words all that
has meaning in an image-content; in that case the word-content and the
image-content will have exactly the same objective reference.

The content of a belief, when expressed in words, is the same thing (or
very nearly the same thing) as what in logic is called a "proposition."
A proposition is a series of words (or sometimes a single word)
expressing the kind of thing that can be asserted or denied. "That all
men are mortal," "that Columbus discovered America," "that Charles I
died in his bed," "that all philosophers are wise," are propositions.
Not any series of words is a proposition, but only such series of words
as have "meaning," or, in our phraseology, "objective reference." Given
the meanings of separate words, and the rules of syntax, the meaning of
a proposition is determinate. This is the reason why we can understand
a sentence we never heard before. You probably never heard before the
proposition "that the inhabitants of the Andaman Islands habitually
eat stewed hippopotamus for dinner," but there is no difficulty in
understanding the proposition. The question of the relation between
the meaning of a sentence and the meanings of the separate words is
difficult, and I shall not pursue it now; I brought it up solely as
being illustrative of the nature of propositions.

We may extend the term "proposition" so as to cover the image-contents
of beliefs consisting of images. Thus, in the case of remembering a
room in which the window is to the left of the door, when we believe the
image-content the proposition will consist of the image of the window
on the left together with the image of the door on the right. We will
distinguish propositions of this kind as "image-propositions"
and propositions in words as "word-propositions." We may identify
propositions in general with the contents of actual and possible
beliefs, and we may say that it is propositions that are true or false.
In logic we are concerned with propositions rather than beliefs, since
logic is not interested in what people do in fact believe, but only
in the conditions which determine the truth or falsehood of possible
beliefs. Whenever possible, except when actual beliefs are in question,
it is generally a simplification to deal with propositions.

It would seem that image-propositions are more primitive than
word-propositions, and may well ante-date language. There is no reason
why memory-images, accompanied by that very simple belief-feeling which
we decided to be the essence of memory, should not have occurred before
language arose; indeed, it would be rash to assert positively that
memory of this sort does not occur among the higher animals. Our more
elementary beliefs, notably those that are added to sensation to make
perception, often remain at the level of images. For example, most of
the visual objects in our neighbourhood rouse tactile images: we have a
different feeling in looking at a sofa from what we have in looking at
a block of marble, and the difference consists chiefly in different
stimulation of our tactile imagination. It may be said that the tactile
images are merely present, without any accompanying belief; but I think
this view, though sometimes correct, derives its plausibility as a
general proposition from our thinking of explicit conscious belief only.
Most of our beliefs, like most of our wishes, are "unconscious," in the
sense that we have never told ourselves that we have them. Such beliefs
display themselves when the expectations that they arouse fail in any
way. For example, if someone puts tea (without milk) into a glass, and
you drink it under the impression that it is going to be beer; or if you
walk on what appears to be a tiled floor, and it turns out to be a soft
carpet made to look like tiles. The shock of surprise on an occasion of
this kind makes us aware of the expectations that habitually enter into
our perceptions; and such expectations must be classed as beliefs, in
spite of the fact that we do not normally take note of them or put them
into words. I remember once watching a cock pigeon running over and over
again to the edge of a looking-glass to try to wreak vengeance on the
particularly obnoxious bird whom he expected to find there, judging by
what he saw in the glass. He must have experienced each time the sort of
surprise on finding nothing, which is calculated to lead in time to
the adoption of Berkeley's theory that objects of sense are only in the
mind. His expectation, though not expressed in words, deserved, I think,
to be called a belief.

I come now to the question what constitutes believing, as opposed to the
content believed.

To begin with, there are various different attitudes that may be taken
towards the same content. Let us suppose, for the sake of argument, that
you have a visual image of your breakfast-table. You may expect it while
you are dressing in the morning; remember it as you go to your work;
feel doubt as to its correctness when questioned as to your powers of
visualizing; merely entertain the image, without connecting it with
anything external, when you are going to sleep; desire it if you are
hungry, or feel aversion for it if you are ill. Suppose, for the sake of
definiteness, that the content is "an egg for breakfast." Then you have
the following attitudes "I expect there will be an egg for breakfast";
"I remember there was an egg for breakfast"; "Was there an egg for
breakfast?" "An egg for breakfast: well, what of it?" "I hope there
will be an egg for breakfast"; "I am afraid there will be an egg for
breakfast and it is sure to be bad." I do not suggest that this is a
list of all possible attitudes on the subject; I say only that they
are different attitudes, all concerned with the one content "an egg for
breakfast."

These attitudes are not all equally ultimate. Those that involve desire
and aversion have occupied us in Lecture III. For the present, we are
only concerned with such as are cognitive. In speaking of memory, we
distinguished three kinds of belief directed towards the same
content, namely memory, expectation and bare assent without any
time-determination in the belief-feeling. But before developing this
view, we must examine two other theories which might be held concerning
belief, and which, in some ways, would be more in harmony with a
behaviourist outlook than the theory I wish to advocate.

(1) The first theory to be examined is the view that the differentia of
belief consists in its causal efficacy I do not wish to make any author
responsible for this theory: I wish merely to develop it hypothetically
so that we may judge of its tenability.

We defined the meaning of an image or word by causal efficacy, namely by
associations: an image or word acquires meaning, we said, through having
the same associations as what it means.

We propose hypothetically to define "belief" by a different kind
of causal efficacy, namely efficacy in causing voluntary movements.
(Voluntary movements are defined as those vital movements which are
distinguished from reflex movements as involving the higher nervous
centres. I do not like to distinguish them by means of such notions as
"consciousness" or "will," because I do not think these notions, in any
definable sense, are always applicable. Moreover, the purpose of the
theory we are examining is to be, as far as possible, physiological and
behaviourist, and this purpose is not achieved if we introduce such a
conception as "consciousness" or "will." Nevertheless, it is necessary
for our purpose to find some way of distinguishing between voluntary and
reflex movements, since the results would be too paradoxical, if we were
to say that reflex movements also involve beliefs.) According to this
definition, a content is said to be "believed" when it causes us to
move. The images aroused are the same if you say to me, "Suppose there
were an escaped tiger coming along the street," and if you say to me,
"There is an escaped tiger coming along the street." But my actions will
be very different in the two cases: in the first, I shall remain calm;
in the second, it is possible that I may not. It is suggested, by the
theory we are considering, that this difference of effects constitutes
what is meant by saying that in the second case I believe the
proposition suggested, while in the first case I do not. According
to this view, images or words are "believed" when they cause bodily
movements.

I do not think this theory is adequate, but I think it is suggestive
of truth, and not so easily refutable as it might appear to be at first
sight.

It might be objected to the theory that many things which we certainly
believe do not call for any bodily movements. I believe that Great
Britain is an island, that whales are mammals, that Charles I was
executed, and so on; and at first sight it seems obvious that such
beliefs, as a rule, do not call for any action on my part. But when we
investigate the matter more closely, it becomes more doubtful. To begin
with, we must distinguish belief as a mere DISPOSITION from actual
active belief. We speak as if we always believed that Charles I was
executed, but that only means that we are always ready to believe it
when the subject comes up. The phenomenon we are concerned to analyse
is the active belief, not the permanent disposition. Now, what are
the occasions when, we actively believe that Charles I was executed?
Primarily: examinations, when we perform the bodily movement of writing
it down; conversation, when we assert it to display our historical
erudition; and political discourses, when we are engaged in showing what
Soviet government leads to. In all these cases bodily movements (writing
or speaking) result from our belief.

But there remains the belief which merely occurs in "thinking." One may
set to work to recall some piece of history one has been reading, and
what one recalls is believed, although it probably does not cause any
bodily movement whatever. It is true that what we believe always MAY
influence action. Suppose I am invited to become King of Georgia: I find
the prospect attractive, and go to Cook's to buy a third-class ticket to
my new realm. At the last moment I remember Charles I and all the other
monarchs who have come to a bad end; I change my mind, and walk out
without completing the transaction. But such incidents are rare, and
cannot constitute the whole of my belief that Charles I was executed.
The conclusion seems to be that, although a belief always MAY influence
action if it becomes relevant to a practical issue, it often exists
actively (not as a mere disposition) without producing any voluntary
movement whatever. If this is true, we cannot define belief by the
effect on voluntary movements.

There is another, more theoretical, ground for rejecting the view we
are examining. It is clear that a proposition can be either believed or
merely considered, and that the content is the same in both cases. We
can expect an egg for breakfast, or merely entertain the supposition
that there may be an egg for breakfast. A moment ago I considered the
possibility of being invited to become King of Georgia, but I do not
believe that this will happen. Now, it seems clear that, since believing
and considering have different effects if one produces bodily movements
while the other does not, there must be some intrinsic difference
between believing and considering*; for if they were precisely similar,
their effects also would be precisely similar. We have seen that the
difference between believing a given proposition and merely considering
it does not lie in the content; therefore there must be, in one case
or in both, something additional to the content which distinguishes the
occurrence of a belief from the occurrence of a mere consideration
of the same content. So far as the theoretical argument goes, this
additional element may exist only in belief, or only in consideration,
or there may be one sort of additional element in the case of belief,
and another in the case of consideration. This brings us to the second
view which we have to examine.

     * Cf. Brentano, "Psychologie vom empirischen Standpunkte,"
     p. 268 (criticizing Bain, "The Emotions and the Will").

(1) The theory which we have now to consider regards belief as belonging
to every idea which is entertained, except in so far as some positive
counteracting force interferes. In this view belief is not a positive
phenomenon, though doubt and disbelief are so. What we call belief,
according to this hypothesis, involves only the appropriate content,
which will have the effects characteristic of belief unless something
else operating simultaneously inhibits them. James (Psychology, vol.
ii, p. 288) quotes with approval, though inaccurately, a passage from
Spinoza embodying this view:

"Let us conceive a boy imagining to himself a horse, and taking note of
nothing else. As this imagination involves the existence of the horse,
AND THE BOY HAS NO PERCEPTION WHICH ANNULS ITS EXISTENCE [James's
italics], he will necessarily contemplate the horse as present, nor will
he be able to doubt of its existence, however little certain of it he
may be. I deny that a man in so far as he imagines [percipit] affirms
nothing. For what is it to imagine a winged horse but to affirm that the
horse [that horse, namely] has wings? For if the mind had nothing before
it but the winged horse, it would contemplate the same as present, would
have no cause to doubt of its existence, nor any power of dissenting
from its existence, unless the imagination of the winged horse were
joined to an idea which contradicted [tollit] its existence" ("Ethics,"
vol. ii, p. 49, Scholium).

To this doctrine James entirely assents, adding in italics:

"ANY OBJECT WHICH REMAINS UNCONTRADICTED IS IPSO FACTO BELIEVED AND
POSITED AS ABSOLUTE REALITY."

If this view is correct, it follows (though James does not draw
the inference) that there is no need of any specific feeling called
"belief," and that the mere existence of images yields all that is
required. The state of mind in which we merely consider a proposition,
without believing or disbelieving it, will then appear as a
sophisticated product, the result of some rival force adding to the
image-proposition a positive feeling which may be called suspense or
non-belief--a feeling which may be compared to that of a man about to
run a race waiting for the signal. Such a man, though not moving, is in
a very different condition from that of a man quietly at rest And so the
man who is considering a proposition without believing it will be in
a state of tension, restraining the natural tendency to act upon the
proposition which he would display if nothing interfered. In this view
belief primarily consists merely in the existence of the appropriate
images without any counteracting forces.

There is a great deal to be said in favour of this view, and I have some
hesitation in regarding it as inadequate. It fits admirably with the
phenomena of dreams and hallucinatory images, and it is recommended by
the way in which it accords with mental development. Doubt, suspense
of judgment and disbelief all seem later and more complex than a wholly
unreflecting assent. Belief as a positive phenomenon, if it exists,
may be regarded, in this view, as a product of doubt, a decision after
debate, an acceptance, not merely of THIS, but of THIS-RATHER-THAN-THAT.
It is not difficult to suppose that a dog has images (possible
olfactory) of his absent master, or of the rabbit that he dreams of
hunting. But it is very difficult to suppose that he can entertain mere
imagination-images to which no assent is given.

I think it must be conceded that a mere image, without the addition of
any positive feeling that could be called "belief," is apt to have a
certain dynamic power, and in this sense an uncombated image has the
force of a belief. But although this may be true, it accounts only for
some of the simplest phenomena in the region of belief. It will not, for
example, explain memory. Nor can it explain beliefs which do not issue
in any proximate action, such as those of mathematics. I conclude,
therefore, that there must be belief-feelings of the same order as those
of doubt or disbelief, although phenomena closely analogous to those of
belief can be produced by mere uncontradicted images.

(3) I come now to the view of belief which I wish to advocate. It seems
to me that there are at least three kinds of belief, namely memory,
expectation and bare assent. Each of these I regard as constituted by
a certain feeling or complex of sensations, attached to the content
believed. We may illustrate by an example. Suppose I am believing,
by means of images, not words, that it will rain. We have here two
interrelated elements, namely the content and the expectation. The
content consists of images of (say) the visual appearance of rain, the
feeling of wetness, the patter of drops, interrelated, roughly, as the
sensations would be if it were raining. Thus the content is a complex
fact composed of images. Exactly the same content may enter into the
memory "it was raining" or the assent "rain occurs." The difference of
these cases from each other and from expectation does not lie in the
content. The difference lies in the nature of the belief-feeling.
I, personally, do not profess to be able to analyse the sensations
constituting respectively memory, expectation and assent; but I am
not prepared to say that they cannot be analysed. There may be other
belief-feelings, for example in disjunction and implication; also a
disbelief-feeling.

It is not enough that the content and the belief-feeling should coexist:
it is necessary that there should be a specific relation between them,
of the sort expressed by saying that the content is what is believed.
If this were not obvious, it could be made plain by an argument. If
the mere co-existence of the content and the belief-feeling sufficed,
whenever we were having (say) a memory-feeling we should be remembering
any proposition which came into our minds at the same time. But this is
not the case, since we may simultaneously remember one proposition and
merely consider another.

We may sum up our analysis, in the case of bare assent to a proposition
not expressed in words, as follows: (a) We have a proposition,
consisting of interrelated images, and possibly partly of sensations;
(b) we have the feeling of assent, which is presumably a complex
sensation demanding analysis; (c) we have a relation, actually
subsisting, between the assent and the proposition, such as is expressed
by saying that the proposition in question is what is assented to. For
other forms of belief-feeling or of content, we have only to make the
necessary substitutions in this analysis.

If we are right in our analysis of belief, the use of words in
expressing beliefs is apt to be misleading. There is no way of
distinguishing, in words, between a memory and an assent to a
proposition about the past: "I ate my breakfast" and "Caesar conquered
Gaul" have the same verbal form, though (assuming that I remember my
breakfast) they express occurrences which are psychologically very
different. In the one case, what happens is that I remember the content
"eating my breakfast"; in the other case, I assent to the content
"Caesar's conquest of Gaul occurred." In the latter case, but not in the
former, the pastness is part of the content believed. Exactly similar
remarks apply to the difference between expectation, such as we have
when waiting for the thunder after a flash of lightning, and assent to a
proposition about the future, such as we have in all the usual cases of
inferential knowledge as to what will occur. I think this difficulty in
the verbal expression of the temporal aspects of beliefs is one among
the causes which have hampered philosophy in the consideration of time.

The view of belief which I have been advocating contains little that is
novel except the distinction of kinds of belief-feeling--such as memory
and expectation. Thus James says: "Everyone knows the difference between
imagining a thing and believing in its existence, between supposing a
proposition and acquiescing in its truth...IN ITS INNER NATURE, BELIEF,
OR THE SENSE OF REALITY, IS A SORT OF FEELING MORE ALLIED TO THE
EMOTIONS THAN TO ANYTHING ELSE" ("Psychology," vol. ii, p. 283. James's
italics). He proceeds to point out that drunkenness, and, still more,
nitrous-oxide intoxication, will heighten the sense of belief: in the
latter case, he says, a man's very soul may sweat with conviction, and
he be all the time utterly unable to say what he is convinced of. It
would seem that, in such cases, the feeling of belief exists unattached,
without its usual relation to a content believed, just as the feeling
of familiarity may sometimes occur without being related to any definite
familiar object. The feeling of belief, when it occurs in this separated
heightened form, generally leads us to look for a content to which to
attach it. Much of what passes for revelation or mystic insight probably
comes in this way: the belief-feeling, in abnormal strength, attaches
itself, more or less accidentally, to some content which we happen to
think of at the appropriate moment. But this is only a speculation, upon
which I do not wish to lay too much stress.




LECTURE XIII. TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD

The definition of truth and falsehood, which is our topic to-day, lies
strictly outside our general subject, namely the analysis of mind. From
the psychological standpoint, there may be different kinds of belief,
and different degrees of certainty, but there cannot be any purely
psychological means of distinguishing between true and false beliefs.
A belief is rendered true or false by relation to a fact, which may lie
outside the experience of the person entertaining the belief. Truth and
falsehood, except in the case of beliefs about our own minds, depend
upon the relations of mental occurrences to outside things, and thus
take us beyond the analysis of mental occurrences as they are in
themselves. Nevertheless, we can hardly avoid the consideration of truth
and falsehood. We wish to believe that our beliefs, sometimes at least,
yield KNOWLEDGE, and a belief does not yield knowledge unless it is
true. The question whether our minds are instruments of knowledge, and,
if so, in what sense, is so vital that any suggested analysis of mind
must be examined in relation to this question. To ignore this question
would be like describing a chronometer without regard to its accuracy
as a time-keeper, or a thermometer without mentioning the fact that it
measures temperature.

Many difficult questions arise in connection with knowledge. It is
difficult to define knowledge, difficult to decide whether we have any
knowledge, and difficult, even if it is conceded that we sometimes have
knowledge to discover whether we can ever know that we have knowledge
in this or that particular case. I shall divide the discussion into four
parts:

I. We may regard knowledge, from a behaviourist standpoint, as exhibited
in a certain kind of response to the environment. This response must
have some characteristics which it shares with those of scientific
instruments, but must also have others that are peculiar to knowledge.
We shall find that this point of view is important, but not exhaustive
of the nature of knowledge.

II. We may hold that the beliefs that constitute knowledge are
distinguished from such as are erroneous or uncertain by properties
which are intrinsic either to single beliefs or to systems of beliefs,
being in either case discoverable without reference to outside fact.
Views of this kind have been widely held among philosophers, but we
shall find no reason to accept them.

III. We believe that some beliefs are true, and some false. This raises
the problem of VERIFIABILITY: are there any circumstances which can
justifiably give us an unusual degree of certainty that such and such a
belief is true? It is obvious that there are circumstances which in fact
cause a certainty of this sort, and we wish to learn what we can from
examining these circumstances.

IV. Finally, there is the formal problem of defining truth and
falsehood, and deriving the objective reference of a proposition from
the meanings of its component words.

We will consider these four problems in succession.

I. We may regard a human being as an instrument, which makes various
responses to various stimuli. If we observe these responses from
outside, we shall regard them as showing knowledge when they display
two characteristics, ACCURACY and APPROPRIATENESS. These two are quite
distinct, and even sometimes incompatible. If I am being pursued by
a tiger, accuracy is furthered by turning round to look at him, but
appropriateness by running away without making any search for
further knowledge of the beast. I shall return to the question of
appropriateness later; for the present it is accuracy that I wish to
consider.

When we are viewing a man from the outside, it is not his beliefs,
but his bodily movements, that we can observe. His knowledge must be
inferred from his bodily movements, and especially from what he says
and writes. For the present we may ignore beliefs, and regard a man's
knowledge as actually consisting in what he says and does. That is to
say, we will construct, as far as possible, a purely behaviouristic
account of truth and falsehood.

If you ask a boy "What is twice two?" and the boy says "four," you take
that as prima facie evidence that the boy knows what twice two is. But
if you go on to ask what is twice three, twice four, twice five, and so
on, and the boy always answers "four," you come to the conclusion that
he knows nothing about it. Exactly similar remarks apply to scientific
instruments. I know a certain weather-cock which has the pessimistic
habit of always pointing to the north-east. If you were to see it first
on a cold March day, you would think it an excellent weather-cock; but
with the first warm day of spring your confidence would be shaken. The
boy and the weather-cock have the same defect: they do not vary their
response when the stimulus is varied. A good instrument, or a person
with much knowledge, will give different responses to stimuli which
differ in relevant ways. This is the first point in defining accuracy of
response.

We will now assume another boy, who also, when you first question him,
asserts that twice two is four. But with this boy, instead of asking him
different questions, you make a practice of asking him the same question
every day at breakfast. You find that he says five, or six, or seven, or
any other number at random, and you conclude that he also does not know
what twice two is, though by good luck he answered right the first time.
This boy is like a weather-cock which, instead of being stuck fast, is
always going round and round, changing without any change of wind. This
boy and weather-cock have the opposite defect to that of the previous
pair: they give different responses to stimuli which do not differ in
any relevant way.

In connection with vagueness in memory, we already had occasion to
consider the definition of accuracy. Omitting some of the niceties of
our previous discussion, we may say that an instrument is ACCURATE when
it avoids the defects of the two boys and weather-cocks, that is to say,
when--

(a) It gives different responses to stimuli which differ in relevant
ways;

(b) It gives the same response to stimuli which do not differ in
relevant ways.

What are relevant ways depends upon the nature and purpose of the
instrument. In the case of a weather-cock, the direction of the wind is
relevant, but not its strength; in the case of the boy, the meaning of
the words of your question is relevant, but not the loudness of your
voice, or whether you are his father or his schoolmaster If, however,
you were a boy of his own age, that would be relevant, and the
appropriate response would be different.

It is clear that knowledge is displayed by accuracy of response to
certain kinds of stimuli, e.g. examinations. Can we say, conversely,
that it consists wholly of such accuracy of response? I do not think
we can; but we can go a certain distance in this direction. For this
purpose we must define more carefully the kind of accuracy and the kind
of response that may be expected where there is knowledge.

From our present point of view, it is difficult to exclude perception
from knowledge; at any rate, knowledge is displayed by actions based
upon perception. A bird flying among trees avoids bumping into their
branches; its avoidance is a response to visual sensations. This
response has the characteristic of accuracy, in the main, and leads
us to say that the bird "knows," by sight, what objects are in its
neighbourhood. For a behaviourist, this must certainly count as
knowledge, however it may be viewed by analytic psychology. In this
case, what is known, roughly, is the stimulus; but in more advanced
knowledge the stimulus and what is known become different. For example,
you look in your calendar and find that Easter will be early next year.
Here the stimulus is the calendar, whereas the response concerns the
future. Even this can be paralleled among instruments: the behaviour of
the barometer has a present stimulus but foretells the future, so that
the barometer might be said, in a sense, to know the future. However
that may be, the point I am emphasizing as regards knowledge is that
what is known may be quite different from the stimulus, and no part of
the cause of the knowledge-response. It is only in sense-knowledge that
the stimulus and what is known are, with qualifications, identifiable.
In knowledge of the future, it is obvious that they are totally
distinct, since otherwise the response would precede the stimulus. In
abstract knowledge also they are distinct, since abstract facts have no
date. In knowledge of the past there are complications, which we must
briefly examine.

Every form of memory will be, from our present point of view, in one
sense a delayed response. But this phrase does not quite clearly
express what is meant. If you light a fuse and connect it with a heap of
dynamite, the explosion of the dynamite may be spoken of, in a sense,
as a delayed response to your lighting of the fuse. But that only means
that it is a somewhat late portion of a continuous process of which the
earlier parts have less emotional interest. This is not the case
with habit. A display of habit has two sorts of causes: (a) the past
occurrences which generated the habit, (b) the present occurrence which
brings it into play. When you drop a weight on your toe, and say what
you do say, the habit has been caused by imitation of your undesirable
associates, whereas it is brought into play by the dropping of the
weight. The great bulk of our knowledge is a habit in this sense:
whenever I am asked when I was born, I reply correctly by mere habit. It
would hardly be correct to say that getting born was the stimulus, and
that my reply is a delayed response But in cases of memory this way
of speaking would have an element of truth. In an habitual memory, the
event remembered was clearly an essential part of the stimulus to the
formation of the habit. The present stimulus which brings the habit into
play produces a different response from that which it would produce if
the habit did not exist. Therefore the habit enters into the causation
of the response, and so do, at one remove, the causes of the habit. It
follows that an event remembered is an essential part of the causes of
our remembering.

In spite, however, of the fact that what is known is SOMETIMES an
indispensable part of the cause of the knowledge, this circumstance is,
I think, irrelevant to the general question with which we are concerned,
namely What sort of response to what sort of stimulus can be regarded
as displaying knowledge? There is one characteristic which the response
must have, namely, it must consist of voluntary movements. The need
of this characteristic is connected with the characteristic of
APPROPRIATENESS, which I do not wish to consider as yet. For the present
I wish only to obtain a clearer idea of the sort of ACCURACY that a
knowledge-response must have. It is clear from many instances that
accuracy, in other cases, may be purely mechanical. The most complete
form of accuracy consists in giving correct answers to questions, an
achievement in which calculating machines far surpass human beings. In
asking a question of a calculating machine, you must use its language:
you must not address it in English, any more than you would address
an Englishman in Chinese. But if you address it in the language it
understands, it will tell you what is 34521 times 19987, without a
moment's hesitation or a hint of inaccuracy. We do not say the machine
KNOWS the answer, because it has no purpose of its own in giving the
answer: it does not wish to impress you with its cleverness, or feel
proud of being such a good machine. But as far as mere accuracy goes,
the machine leaves nothing to be desired.

Accuracy of response is a perfectly clear notion in the case of answers
to questions, but in other cases it is much more obscure. We may say
generally that an object whether animate or inanimate, is "sensitive" to
a certain feature of the environment if it behaves differently according
to the presence or absence of that feature. Thus iron is sensitive to
anything magnetic. But sensitiveness does not constitute knowledge, and
knowledge of a fact which is not sensible is not sensitiveness to
that fact, as we have seen in distinguishing the fact known from the
stimulus. As soon as we pass beyond the simple case of question and
answer, the definition of knowledge by means of behaviour demands the
consideration of purpose. A carrier pigeon flies home, and so we say
it "knows" the way. But if it merely flew to some place at random, we
should not say that it "knew" the way to that place, any more than a
stone rolling down hill knows the way to the valley.

On the features which distinguish knowledge from accuracy of response in
general, not much can be said from a behaviourist point of view without
referring to purpose. But the necessity of SOMETHING besides accuracy of
response may be brought out by the following consideration: Suppose
two persons, of whom one believed whatever the other disbelieved,
and disbelieved whatever the other believed. So far as accuracy and
sensitiveness of response alone are concerned, there would be nothing to
choose between these two persons. A thermometer which went down for warm
weather and up for cold might be just as accurate as the usual kind; and
a person who always believes falsely is just as sensitive an instrument
as a person who always believes truly. The observable and practical
difference between them would be that the one who always believed
falsely would quickly come to a bad end. This illustrates once more that
accuracy of response to stimulus does not alone show knowledge, but must
be reinforced by appropriateness, i.e. suitability for realizing one's
purpose. This applies even in the apparently simple case of answering
questions: if the purpose of the answers is to deceive, their falsehood,
not their truth, will be evidence of knowledge. The proportion of
the combination of appropriateness with accuracy in the definition
of knowledge is difficult; it seems that both enter in, but that
appropriateness is only required as regards the general type of
response, not as regards each individual instance.

II. I have so far assumed as unquestionable the view that the truth or
falsehood of a belief consists in a relation to a certain fact,
namely the objective of the belief. This view has, however, been often
questioned. Philosophers have sought some intrinsic criterion by which
true and false beliefs could be distinguished.* I am afraid their chief
reason for this search has been the wish to feel more certainty than
seems otherwise possible as to what is true and what is false. If
we could discover the truth of a belief by examining its intrinsic
characteristics, or those of some collection of beliefs of which it
forms part, the pursuit of truth, it is thought, would be a less arduous
business than it otherwise appears to be. But the attempts which
have been made in this direction are not encouraging. I will take two
criteria which have been suggested, namely, (1) self-evidence, (2)
mutual coherence. If we can show that these are inadequate, we may
feel fairly certain that no intrinsic criterion hitherto suggested will
suffice to distinguish true from false beliefs.

     * The view that such a criterion exists is generally held by
     those whose views are in any degree derived from Hegel. It
     may be illustrated by the following passage from Lossky,
     "The Intuitive Basis of Knowledge" (Macmillan, 1919), p.
     268: "Strictly speaking, a false judgment is not a judgment
     at all. The predicate does not follow from the subject S
     alone, but from the subject plus a certain addition C, WHICH
     IN NO SENSE BELONGS TO THE CONTENT OF THE JUDGMENT. What
     takes place may be a process of association of ideas, of
     imagining, or the like, but is not a process of judging. An
     experienced psychologist will be able by careful observation
     to detect that in this process there is wanting just the
     specific element of the objective dependence of the
     predicate upon the subject which is characteristic of a
     judgment. It must be admitted, however, that an exceptional
     power of observation is needed in order to distinguish, by
     means of introspection, mere combination of ideas from
     judgments."


(1) Self-evidence.--Some of our beliefs seem to be peculiarly
indubitable. One might instance the belief that two and two are four,
that two things cannot be in the same place at the same time, nor one
thing in two places, or that a particular buttercup that we are seeing
is yellow. The suggestion we are to examine is that such: beliefs have
some recognizable quality which secures their truth, and the truth of
whatever is deduced from them according to self-evident principles of
inference. This theory is set forth, for example, by Meinong in his
book, "Ueber die Erfahrungsgrundlagen unseres Wissens."

If this theory is to be logically tenable, self-evidence must not
consist merely in the fact that we believe a proposition. We believe
that our beliefs are sometimes erroneous, and we wish to be able to
select a certain class of beliefs which are never erroneous. If we
are to do this, it must be by some mark which belongs only to certain
beliefs, not to all; and among those to which it belongs there must be
none that are mutually inconsistent. If, for example, two propositions
p and q were self-evident, and it were also self-evident that p and q
could not both be true, that would condemn self-evidence as a guarantee
of truth. Again, self-evidence must not be the same thing as the absence
of doubt or the presence of complete certainty. If we are completely
certain of a proposition, we do not seek a ground to support our belief.
If self-evidence is alleged as a ground of belief, that implies that
doubt has crept in, and that our self-evident proposition has not
wholly resisted the assaults of scepticism. To say that any given person
believes some things so firmly that he cannot be made to doubt them is
no doubt true. Such beliefs he will be willing to use as premisses in
reasoning, and to him personally they will seem to have as much evidence
as any belief can need. But among the propositions which one man finds
indubitable there will be some that another man finds it quite possible
to doubt. It used to seem self-evident that there could not be men at
the Antipodes, because they would fall off, or at best grow giddy from
standing on their heads. But New Zealanders find the falsehood of this
proposition self-evident. Therefore, if self-evidence is a guarantee of
truth, our ancestors must have been mistaken in thinking their beliefs
about the Antipodes self-evident. Meinong meets this difficulty by
saying that some beliefs are falsely thought to be self-evident, but in
the case of others it is self-evident that they are self-evident, and
these are wholly reliable. Even this, however, does not remove the
practical risk of error, since we may mistakenly believe it self-evident
that a certain belief is self-evident. To remove all risk of error, we
shall need an endless series of more and more complicated self-evident
beliefs, which cannot possibly be realized in practice. It would seem,
therefore, that self-evidence is useless as a practical criterion for
insuring truth.

The same result follows from examining instances. If we take the four
instances mentioned at the beginning of this discussion, we shall
find that three of them are logical, while the fourth is a judgment of
perception. The proposition that two and two are four follows by purely
logical deduction from definitions: that means that its truth results,
not from the properties of objects, but from the meanings of symbols.
Now symbols, in mathematics, mean what we choose; thus the feeling of
self-evidence, in this case, seems explicable by the fact that the whole
matter is within our control. I do not wish to assert that this is
the whole truth about mathematical propositions, for the question is
complicated, and I do not know what the whole truth is. But I do wish to
suggest that the feeling of self-evidence in mathematical propositions
has to do with the fact that they are concerned with the meanings of
symbols, not with properties of the world such as external observation
might reveal.

Similar considerations apply to the impossibility of a thing being in
two places at once, or of two things being in one place at the same
time. These impossibilities result logically, if I am not mistaken, from
the definitions of one thing and one place. That is to say, they are not
laws of physics, but only part of the intellectual apparatus which we
have manufactured for manipulating physics. Their self-evidence, if this
is so, lies merely in the fact that they represent our decision as to
the use of words, not a property of physical objects.

Judgments of perception, such as "this buttercup is yellow," are in
a quite different position from judgments of logic, and their
self-evidence must have a different explanation. In order to arrive at
the nucleus of such a judgment, we will eliminate, as far as possible,
the use of words which take us beyond the present fact, such as
"buttercup" and "yellow." The simplest kind of judgment underlying the
perception that a buttercup is yellow would seem to be the perception of
similarity in two colours seen simultaneously. Suppose we are seeing
two buttercups, and we perceive that their colours are similar. This
similarity is a physical fact, not a matter of symbols or words; and it
certainly seems to be indubitable in a way that many judgments are not.

The first thing to observe, in regard to such judgments, is that as they
stand they are vague. The word "similar" is a vague word, since there
are degrees of similarity, and no one can say where similarity ends
and dissimilarity begins. It is unlikely that our two buttercups have
EXACTLY the same colour, and if we judged that they had we should have
passed altogether outside the region of self-evidence. To make our
proposition more precise, let us suppose that we are also seeing a
red rose at the same time. Then we may judge that the colours of the
buttercups are more similar to each other than to the colour of the
rose. This judgment seems more complicated, but has certainly gained
in precision. Even now, however, it falls short of complete precision,
since similarity is not prima facie measurable, and it would require
much discussion to decide what we mean by greater or less similarity. To
this process of the pursuit of precision there is strictly no limit.

The next thing to observe (although I do not personally doubt that most
of our judgments of perception are true) is that it is very difficult to
define any class of such judgments which can be known, by its intrinsic
quality, to be always exempt from error. Most of our judgments of
perception involve correlations, as when we judge that a certain noise
is that of a passing cart. Such judgments are all obviously liable to
error, since there is no correlation of which we have a right to be
certain that it is invariable. Other judgments of perception are derived
from recognition, as when we say "this is a buttercup," or even merely
"this is yellow." All such judgments entail some risk of error,
though sometimes perhaps a very small one; some flowers that look like
buttercups are marigolds, and colours that some would call yellow others
might call orange. Our subjective certainty is usually a result of
habit, and may lead us astray in circumstances which are unusual in ways
of which we are unaware.

For such reasons, no form of self-evidence seems to afford an absolute
criterion of truth. Nevertheless, it is perhaps true that judgments
having a high degree of subjective certainty are more apt to be true
than other judgments. But if this be the case, it is a result to be
demonstrated, not a premiss from which to start in defining truth and
falsehood. As an initial guarantee, therefore, neither self-evidence nor
subjective certainty can be accepted as adequate.

(2) Coherence.--Coherence as the definition of truth is advocated by
idealists, particularly by those who in the main follow Hegel. It is set
forth ably in Mr. Joachim's book, "The Nature of Truth" (Oxford, 1906).
According to this view, any set of propositions other than the whole
of truth can be condemned on purely logical grounds, as internally
inconsistent; a single proposition, if it is what we should ordinarily
call false, contradicts itself irremediably, while if it is what we
should ordinarily call true, it has implications which compel us to
admit other propositions, which in turn lead to others, and so on, until
we find ourselves committed to the whole of truth. One might illustrate
by a very simple example: if I say "so-and-so is a married man," that
is not a self-subsistent proposition. We cannot logically conceive of a
universe in which this proposition constituted the whole of truth. There
must be also someone who is a married woman, and who is married to
the particular man in question. The view we are considering regards
everything that can be said about any one object as relative in the same
sort of way as "so-and-so is a married man." But everything, according
to this view, is relative, not to one or two other things, but to all
other things, so that from one bit of truth the whole can be inferred.

The fundamental objection to this view is logical, and consists in a
criticism of its doctrine as to relations. I shall omit this line of
argument, which I have developed elsewhere.* For the moment I will
content myself with saying that the powers of logic seem to me very
much less than this theory supposes. If it were taken seriously, its
advocates ought to profess that any one truth is logically inferable
from any other, and that, for example, the fact that Caesar conquered
Gaul, if adequately considered, would enable us to discover what the
weather will be to-morrow. No such claim is put forward in practice, and
the necessity of empirical observation is not denied; but according to
the theory it ought to be.

     * In the article on "The Monistic Theory of Truth" in
     "Philosophical Essays" (Longmans, 1910), reprinted from the
     "Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society," 1906-7.

Another objection is that no endeavour is made to show that we cannot
form a consistent whole composed partly or wholly of false propositions,
as in a novel. Leibniz's conception of many possible worlds seems to
accord much better with modern logic and with the practical empiricism
which is now universal. The attempt to deduce the world by pure thought
is attractive, and in former times was largely supposed capable of
success. But nowadays most men admit that beliefs must be tested by
observation, and not merely by the fact that they harmonize with other
beliefs. A consistent fairy-tale is a different thing from truth,
however elaborate it may be. But to pursue this topic would lead us
into difficult technicalities; I shall therefore assume, without further
argument, that coherence is not sufficient as a definition of truth.

III. Many difficult problems arise as regards the verifiability of
beliefs. We believe various things, and while we believe them we think
we know them. But it sometimes turns out that we were mistaken, or at
any rate we come to think we were. We must be mistaken either in our
previous opinion or in our subsequent recantation; therefore our beliefs
are not all correct, and there are cases of belief which are not cases
of knowledge. The question of verifiability is in essence this: can we
discover any set of beliefs which are never mistaken or any test which,
when applicable, will always enable us to discriminate between true
and false beliefs? Put thus broadly and abstractly, the answer must be
negative. There is no way hitherto discovered of wholly eliminating the
risk of error, and no infallible criterion. If we believe we have found
a criterion, this belief itself may be mistaken; we should be begging
the question if we tried to test the criterion by applying the criterion
to itself.

But although the notion of an absolute criterion is chimerical, there
may be relative criteria, which increase the probability of truth.
Common sense and science hold that there are. Let us see what they have
to say.

One of the plainest cases of verification, perhaps ultimately the only
case, consists in the happening of something expected. You go to the
station believing that there will be a train at a certain time; you
find the train, you get into it, and it starts at the expected time This
constitutes verification, and is a perfectly definite experience. It is,
in a sense, the converse of memory instead of having first sensations
and then images accompanied by belief, we have first images accompanied
by belief and then sensations. Apart from differences as to the
time-order and the accompanying feelings, the relation between image and
sensation is closely similar in the two cases of memory and expectation;
it is a relation of similarity, with difference as to causal
efficacy--broadly, the image has the psychological but not the physical
effects that the sensation would have. When an image accompanied by
an expectation-belief is thus succeeded by a sensation which is the
"meaning" of the image, we say that the expectation-belief has been
verified. The experience of verification in this sense is exceedingly
familiar; it happens every time that accustomed activities have results
that are not surprising, in eating and walking and talking and all our
daily pursuits.

But although the experience in question is common, it is not wholly easy
to give a theoretical account of it. How do we know that the sensation
resembles the previous image? Does the image persist in presence of the
sensation, so that we can compare the two? And even if SOME image does
persist, how do we know that it is the previous image unchanged? It does
not seem as if this line of inquiry offered much hope of a successful
issue. It is better, I think, to take a more external and causal view of
the relation of expectation to expected occurrence. If the occurrence,
when it comes, gives us the feeling of expectedness, and if the
expectation, beforehand, enabled us to act in a way which proves
appropriate to the occurrence, that must be held to constitute the
maximum of verification. We have first an expectation, then a sensation
with the feeling of expectedness related to memory of the expectation.
This whole experience, when it occurs, may be defined as verification,
and as constituting the truth of the expectation. Appropriate action,
during the period of expectation, may be regarded as additional
verification, but is not essential. The whole process may be illustrated
by looking up a familiar quotation, finding it in the expected words,
and in the expected part of the book. In this case we can strengthen
the verification by writing down beforehand the words which we expect to
find.

I think all verification is ultimately of the above sort. We verify a
scientific hypothesis indirectly, by deducing consequences as to the
future, which subsequent experience confirms. If somebody were to doubt
whether Caesar had crossed the Rubicon, verification could only be
obtained from the future. We could proceed to display manuscripts to our
historical sceptic, in which it was said that Caesar had behaved in this
way. We could advance arguments, verifiable by future experience, to
prove the antiquity of the manuscript from its texture, colour, etc. We
could find inscriptions agreeing with the historian on other points,
and tending to show his general accuracy. The causal laws which our
arguments would assume could be verified by the future occurrence of
events inferred by means of them. The existence and persistence of
causal laws, it is true, must be regarded as a fortunate accident, and
how long it will continue we cannot tell. Meanwhile verification remains
often practically possible. And since it is sometimes possible, we
can gradually discover what kinds of beliefs tend to be verified by
experience, and what kinds tend to be falsified; to the former kinds
we give an increased degree of assent, to the latter kinds a diminished
degree. The process is not absolute or infallible, but it has been
found capable of sifting beliefs and building up science. It affords
no theoretical refutation of the sceptic, whose position must remain
logically unassailable; but if complete scepticism is rejected, it gives
the practical method by which the system of our beliefs grows gradually
towards the unattainable ideal of impeccable knowledge.

IV. I come now to the purely formal definition of the truth or falsehood
of a belief. For this definition it is necessary first of all to
consider the derivation of the objective reference of a proposition from
the meanings of its component words or images.

Just as a word has meaning, so a proposition has an objective reference.
The objective reference of a proposition is a function (in the
mathematical sense) of the meanings of its component words. But the
objective reference differs from the meaning of a word through the
duality of truth and falsehood. You may believe the proposition "to-day
is Tuesday" both when, in fact, to-day is Tuesday, and when to-day is
not Tuesday. If to-day is not Tuesday, this fact is the objective of
your belief that to-day is Tuesday. But obviously the relation of your
belief to the fact is different in this case from what it is in the case
when to-day is Tuesday. We may say, metaphorically, that when to-day is
Tuesday, your belief that it is Tuesday points TOWARDS the fact, whereas
when to-day is not Tuesday your belief points AWAY FROM the fact. Thus
the objective reference of a belief is not determined by the fact alone,
but by the direction of the belief towards or away from the fact.* If,
on a Tuesday, one man believes that it is Tuesday while another believes
that it is not Tuesday, their beliefs have the same objective, namely
the fact that it is Tuesday but the true belief points towards the fact
while the false one points away from it. Thus, in order to define the
reference of a proposition we have to take account not only of the
objective, but also of the direction of pointing, towards the objective
in the case of a true proposition and away from it in the case of a
false one.

     * I owe this way of looking at the matter to my friend
     Ludwig Wittgenstein.

This mode of stating the nature of the objective reference of a
proposition is necessitated by the circumstance that there are true and
false propositions, but not true and false facts. If to-day is Tuesday,
there is not a false objective "to-day is not Tuesday," which could be
the objective of the false belief "to-day is not Tuesday." This is the
reason why two beliefs which are each other's contradictories have the
same objective. There is, however, a practical inconvenience, namely
that we cannot determine the objective reference of a proposition,
according to this definition, unless we know whether the proposition
is true or false. To avoid this inconvenience, it is better to adopt
a slightly different phraseology, and say: The "meaning" of the
proposition "to-day is Tuesday" consists in pointing to the fact "to-day
is Tuesday" if that is a fact, or away from the fact "to-day is not
Tuesday" if that is a fact. The "meaning" of the proposition "to-day is
not Tuesday" will be exactly the opposite. By this hypothetical form
we are able to speak of the meaning of a proposition without knowing
whether it is true or false. According to this definition, we know the
meaning of a proposition when we know what would make it true and what
would make it false, even if we do not know whether it is in fact true
or false.

The meaning of a proposition is derivative from the meanings of its
constituent words. Propositions occur in pairs, distinguished (in
simple cases) by the absence or presence of the word "not." Two such
propositions have the same objective, but opposite meanings: when one is
true, the other is false, and when one is false, the other is true.

The purely formal definition of truth and falsehood offers little
difficulty. What is required is a formal expression of the fact that a
proposition is true when it points towards its objective, and false when
it points away from it, In very simple cases we can give a very simple
account of this: we can say that true propositions actually resemble
their objectives in a way in which false propositions do not. But for
this purpose it is necessary to revert to image-propositions instead of
word-propositions. Let us take again the illustration of a memory-image
of a familiar room, and let us suppose that in the image the window is
to the left of the door. If in fact the window is to the left of the
door, there is a correspondence between the image and the objective;
there is the same relation between the window and the door as between
the images of them. The image-memory consists of the image of the window
to the left of the image of the door. When this is true, the very same
relation relates the terms of the objective (namely the window and
the door) as relates the images which mean them. In this case the
correspondence which constitutes truth is very simple.

In the case we have just been considering the objective consists of
two parts with a certain relation (that of left-to-right), and the
proposition consists of images of these parts with the very same
relation. The same proposition, if it were false, would have a less
simple formal relation to its objective. If the image-proposition
consists of an image of the window to the left of an image of the door,
while in fact the window is not to the left of the door, the proposition
does not result from the objective by the mere substitution of images
for their prototypes. Thus in this unusually simple case we can say that
a true proposition "corresponds" to its objective in a formal sense in
which a false proposition does not. Perhaps it may be possible to modify
this notion of formal correspondence in such a way as to be more widely
applicable, but if so, the modifications required will be by no means
slight. The reasons for this must now be considered.

To begin with, the simple type of correspondence we have been exhibiting
can hardly occur when words are substituted for images, because, in
word-propositions, relations are usually expressed by words, which are
not themselves relations. Take such a proposition as "Socrates
precedes Plato." Here the word "precedes" is just as solid as the words
"Socrates" and "Plato"; it MEANS a relation, but is not a relation. Thus
the objective which makes our proposition true consists of TWO terms
with a relation between them, whereas our proposition consists of THREE
terms with a relation of order between them. Of course, it would be
perfectly possible, theoretically, to indicate a few chosen relations,
not by words, but by relations between the other words. "Socrates-Plato"
might be used to mean "Socrates precedes Plato"; "Plato-Socrates" might
be used to mean "Plato was born before Socrates and died after him"; and
so on. But the possibilities of such a method would be very limited. For
aught I know, there may be languages that use it, but they are not among
the languages with which I am acquainted. And in any case, in view of
the multiplicity of relations that we wish to express, no language could
advance far without words for relations. But as soon as we have words
for relations, word-propositions have necessarily more terms than the
facts to which they refer, and cannot therefore correspond so simply
with their objectives as some image-propositions can.

The consideration of negative propositions and negative facts introduces
further complications. An image-proposition is necessarily positive:
we can image the window to the left of the door, or to the right of the
door, but we can form no image of the bare negative "the window not to
the left of the door." We can DISBELIEVE the image-proposition expressed
by "the window to the left of the door," and our disbelief will be true
if the window is not to the left of the door. But we can form no image
of the fact that the window is not to the left of the door. Attempts
have often been made to deny such negative facts, but, for reasons which
I have given elsewhere,* I believe these attempts to be mistaken, and I
shall assume that there are negative facts.

     * "Monist," January, 1919, p. 42 ff.

Word-propositions, like image-propositions, are always positive facts.
The fact that Socrates precedes Plato is symbolized in English by the
fact that the word "precedes" occurs between the words "Socrates" and
"Plato." But we cannot symbolize the fact that Plato does not precede
Socrates by not putting the word "precedes" between "Plato" and
"Socrates." A negative fact is not sensible, and language, being
intended for communication, has to be sensible. Therefore we symbolize
the fact that Plato does not precede Socrates by putting the words "does
not precede" between "Plato" and "Socrates." We thus obtain a series of
words which is just as positive a fact as the series "Socrates precedes
Plato." The propositions asserting negative facts are themselves
positive facts; they are merely different positive facts from those
asserting positive facts.

We have thus, as regards the opposition of positive and negative, three
different sorts of duality, according as we are dealing with facts,
image-propositions, or word-propositions. We have, namely:

(1) Positive and negative facts;

(2) Image-propositions, which may be believed or disbelieved, but do
not allow any duality of content corresponding to positive and negative
facts;

(3) Word-propositions, which are always positive facts, but are of two
kinds: one verified by a positive objective, the other by a negative
objective.

Owing to these complications, the simplest type of correspondence is
impossible when either negative facts or negative propositions are
involved.

Even when we confine ourselves to relations between two terms which are
both imaged, it may be impossible to form an image-proposition in which
the relation of the terms is represented by the same relation of the
images. Suppose we say "Caesar was 2,000 years before Foch," we express
a certain temporal relation between Caesar and Foch; but we cannot allow
2,000 years to elapse between our image of Caesar and our image of Foch.
This is perhaps not a fair example, since "2,000 years before" is not a
direct relation. But take a case where the relation is direct, say, "the
sun is brighter than the moon." We can form visual images of sunshine
and moonshine, and it may happen that our image of the sunshine is
the brighter of the two, but this is by no means either necessary or
sufficient. The act of comparison, implied in our judgment, is something
more than the mere coexistence of two images, one of which is in fact
brighter than the other. It would take us too far from our main topic if
we were to go into the question what actually occurs when we make this
judgment. Enough has been said to show that the correspondence between
the belief and its objective is more complicated in this case than in
that of the window to the left of the door, and this was all that had to
be proved.

In spite of these complications, the general nature of the formal
correspondence which makes truth is clear from our instances. In the
case of the simpler kind of propositions, namely those that I call
"atomic" propositions, where there is only one word expressing a
relation, the objective which would verify our proposition, assuming
that the word "not" is absent, is obtained by replacing each word
by what it means, the word meaning a relation being replaced by this
relation among the meanings of the other words. For example, if the
proposition is "Socrates precedes Plato," the objective which verifies
it results from replacing the word "Socrates" by Socrates, the word
"Plato" by Plato, and the word "precedes" by the relation of preceding
between Socrates and Plato. If the result of this process is a fact,
the proposition is true; if not, it is false. When our proposition is
"Socrates does not precede Plato," the conditions of truth and falsehood
are exactly reversed. More complicated propositions can be dealt with on
the same lines. In fact, the purely formal question, which has occupied
us in this last section, offers no very formidable difficulties.

I do not believe that the above formal theory is untrue, but I do
believe that it is inadequate. It does not, for example, throw any
light upon our preference for true beliefs rather than false ones. This
preference is only explicable by taking account of the causal efficacy
of beliefs, and of the greater appropriateness of the responses
resulting from true beliefs. But appropriateness depends upon purpose,
and purpose thus becomes a vital part of theory of knowledge.




LECTURE XIV. EMOTIONS AND WILL

On the two subjects of the present lecture I have nothing original to
say, and I am treating them only in order to complete the discussion of
my main thesis, namely that all psychic phenomena are built up out of
sensations and images alone.

Emotions are traditionally regarded by psychologists as a separate
class of mental occurrences: I am, of course, not concerned to deny
the obvious fact that they have characteristics which make a special
investigation of them necessary. What I am concerned with is the
analysis of emotions. It is clear that an emotion is essentially
complex, and we have to inquire whether it ever contains any
non-physiological material not reducible to sensations and images and
their relations.

Although what specially concerns us is the analysis of emotions, we
shall find that the more important topic is the physiological causation
of emotions. This is a subject upon which much valuable and exceedingly
interesting work has been done, whereas the bare analysis of emotions
has proved somewhat barren. In view of the fact that we have defined
perceptions, sensations, and images by their physiological causation, it
is evident that our problem of the analysis of the emotions is bound up
with the problem of their physiological causation.

Modern views on the causation of emotions begin with what is called
the James-Lange theory. James states this view in the following terms
("Psychology," vol. ii, p. 449):

"Our natural way of thinking about these coarser emotions, grief, fear,
rage, love, is that the mental perception of some fact excites the
mental affection called the emotion, and that this latter state of mind
gives rise to the bodily expression. My theory, on the contrary, is that
THE BODILY CHANGES FOLLOW DIRECTLY THE PERCEPTION OF THE EXCITING FACT,
AND THAT OUR FEELING OF THE SAME CHANGES AS THEY OCCUR _IS_ THE EMOTION
(James's italics). Common sense says: we lose our fortune, are sorry
and weep; we meet a bear, are frightened and run; we are insulted by
a rival, are angry and strike. The hypothesis here to be defended says
that this order of sequence is incorrect, that the one mental state is
not immediately induced by the other, that the bodily manifestations
must first be interposed between, and that the more rational statement
is that we feel sorry because we cry, angry because we strike, afraid
because we tremble, and not that we cry, strike, or tremble, because
we are sorry, angry, or fearful, as the case may be. Without the bodily
states following on the perception, the latter would be purely cognitive
in form, pale, colourless, destitute of emotional warmth."

Round this hypothesis a very voluminous literature has grown up. The
history of its victory over earlier criticism, and its difficulties with
the modern experimental work of Sherrington and Cannon, is well told
by James R. Angell in an article called "A Reconsideration of James's
Theory of Emotion in the Light of Recent Criticisms."* In this article
Angell defends James's theory and to me--though I speak with diffidence
on a question as to which I have little competence--it appears that his
defence is on the whole successful.

     * "Psychological Review," 1916.

Sherrington, by experiments on dogs, showed that many of the usual marks
of emotion were present in their behaviour even when, by severing the
spinal cord in the lower cervical region, the viscera were cut off from
all communication with the brain, except that existing through certain
cranial nerves. He mentions the various signs which "contributed to
indicate the existence of an emotion as lively as the animal had ever
shown us before the spinal operation had been made."* He infers that
the physiological condition of the viscera cannot be the cause of the
emotion displayed under such circumstances, and concludes: "We are
forced back toward the likelihood that the visceral expression of
emotion is SECONDARY to the cerebral action occurring with the psychical
state.... We may with James accept visceral and organic sensations
and the memories and associations of them as contributory to primitive
emotion, but we must regard them as re-enforcing rather than as
initiating the psychosis."*

     * Quoted by Angell, loc. cit.


Angell suggests that the display of emotion in such cases may be due
to past experience, generating habits which would require only the
stimulation of cerebral reflex arcs. Rage and some forms of fear,
however, may, he thinks, gain expression without the brain. Rage and
fear have been especially studied by Cannon, whose work is of the
greatest importance. His results are given in his book, "Bodily Changes
in Pain, Hunger, Fear and Rage" (D. Appleton and Co., 1916).

The most interesting part of Cannon's book consists in the investigation
of the effects produced by secretion of adrenin. Adrenin is a substance
secreted into the blood by the adrenal glands. These are among the
ductless glands, the functions of which, both in physiology and in
connection with the emotions, have only come to be known during recent
years. Cannon found that pain, fear and rage occurred in circumstances
which affected the supply of adrenin, and that an artificial injection
of adrenin could, for example, produce all the symptoms of fear. He
studied the effects of adrenin on various parts of the body; he found
that it causes the pupils to dilate, hairs to stand erect, blood vessels
to be constricted, and so on. These effects were still produced if
the parts in question were removed from the body and kept alive
artificially.*

     * Cannon's work is not unconnected with that of Mosso, who
     maintains, as the result of much experimental work, that
     "the seat of the emotions lies in the sympathetic nervous
     system." An account of the work of both these men will be
     found in Goddard's "Psychology of the Normal and Sub-normal"
     (Kegan Paul, 1919), chap. vii and Appendix.

Cannon's chief argument against James is, if I understand him rightly,
that similar affections of the viscera may accompany dissimilar
emotions, especially fear and rage. Various different emotions make
us cry, and therefore it cannot be true to say, as James does, that we
"feel sorry because we cry," since sometimes we cry when we feel glad.
This argument, however, is by no means conclusive against James, because
it cannot be shown that there are no visceral differences for different
emotions, and indeed it is unlikely that this is the case.

As Angell says (loc. cit.): "Fear and joy may both cause cardiac
palpitation, but in one case we find high tonus of the skeletal muscles,
in the other case relaxation and the general sense of weakness."

Angell's conclusion, after discussing the experiments of Sherrington
and Cannon, is: "I would therefore submit that, so far as concerns
the critical suggestions by these two psychologists, James's essential
contentions are not materially affected." If it were necessary for me to
take sides on this question, I should agree with this conclusion; but I
think my thesis as to the analysis of emotion can be maintained without
coming to a probably premature conclusion upon the doubtful parts of
the physiological problem.

According to our definitions, if James is right, an emotion may be
regarded as involving a confused perception of the viscera concerned
in its causation, while if Cannon and Sherrington are right, an emotion
involves a confused perception of its external stimulus. This follows
from what was said in Lecture VII. We there defined a perception as an
appearance, however irregular, of one or more objects external to the
brain. And in order to be an appearance of one or more objects, it is
only necessary that the occurrence in question should be connected
with them by a continuous chain, and should vary when they are varied
sufficiently. Thus the question whether a mental occurrence can be
called a perception turns upon the question whether anything can be
inferred from it as to its causes outside the brain: if such inference
is possible, the occurrence in question will come within our definition
of a perception. And in that case, according to the definition in
Lecture VIII, its non-mnemic elements will be sensations. Accordingly,
whether emotions are caused by changes in the viscera or by sensible
objects, they contain elements which are sensations according to our
definition.

An emotion in its entirety is, of course, something much more complex
than a perception. An emotion is essentially a process, and it will be
only what one may call a cross-section of the emotion that will be a
perception, of a bodily condition according to James, or (in certain
cases) of an external object according to his opponents. An emotion in
its entirety contains dynamic elements, such as motor impulses, desires,
pleasures and pains. Desires and pleasures and pains, according to the
theory adopted in Lecture III, are characteristics of processes, not
separate ingredients. An emotion--rage, for example--will be a certain
kind of process, consisting of perceptions and (in general) bodily
movements. The desires and pleasures and pains involved are properties
of this process, not separate items in the stuff of which the emotion
is composed. The dynamic elements in an emotion, if we are right in our
analysis, contain, from our point of view, no ingredients beyond those
contained in the processes considered in Lecture III. The ingredients
of an emotion are only sensations and images and bodily movements
succeeding each other according to a certain pattern. With this
conclusion we may leave the emotions and pass to the consideration of
the will.

The first thing to be defined when we are dealing with Will is a
VOLUNTARY MOVEMENT. We have already defined vital movements, and we have
maintained that, from a behaviourist standpoint, it is impossible to
distinguish which among such movements are reflex and which voluntary.
Nevertheless, there certainly is a distinction. When we decide in the
morning that it is time to get up, our consequent movement is voluntary.
The beating of the heart, on the other hand, is involuntary: we can
neither cause it nor prevent it by any decision of our own, except
indirectly, as e.g. by drugs. Breathing is intermediate between the two:
we normally breathe without the help of the will, but we can alter or
stop our breathing if we choose.

James ("Psychology," chap. xxvi) maintains that the only distinctive
characteristic of a voluntary act is that it involves an idea of the
movement to be performed, made up of memory-images of the kinaesthetic
sensations which we had when the same movement occurred on some former
occasion. He points out that, on this view, no movement can be made
voluntarily unless it has previously occurred involuntarily.*

     * "Psychology," Vol. ii, pp. 492-3.

I see no reason to doubt the correctness of this view. We shall say,
then, that movements which are accompanied by kinaesthetic sensations
tend to be caused by the images of those sensations, and when so caused
are called VOLUNTARY.

Volition, in the emphatic sense, involves something more than
voluntary movement. The sort of case I am thinking of is decision after
deliberation. Voluntary movements are a part of this, but not the whole.
There is, in addition to them, a judgment: "This is what I shall
do"; there is also a sensation of tension during doubt, followed by a
different sensation at the moment of deciding. I see no reason whatever
to suppose that there is any specifically new ingredient; sensations and
images, with their relations and causal laws, yield all that seems to
be wanted for the analysis of the will, together with the fact that
kinaesthetic images tend to cause the movements with which they are
connected. Conflict of desires is of course essential in the causation
of the emphatic kind of will: there will be for a time kinaesthetic
images of incompatible movements, followed by the exclusive image of
the movement which is said to be willed. Thus will seems to add no new
irreducible ingredient to the analysis of the mind.




LECTURE XV. CHARACTERISTICS OF MENTAL PHENOMENA

At the end of our journey it is time to return to the question from
which we set out, namely: What is it that characterizes mind as opposed
to matter? Or, to state the same question in other terms: How is
psychology to be distinguished from physics? The answer provisionally
suggested at the outset of our inquiry was that psychology and physics
are distinguished by the nature of their causal laws, not by their
subject matter. At the same time we held that there is a certain subject
matter, namely images, to which only psychological causal laws are
applicable; this subject matter, therefore, we assigned exclusively to
psychology. But we found no way of defining images except through
their causation; in their intrinsic character they appeared to have no
universal mark by which they could be distinguished from sensations.

In this last lecture I propose to pass in review various suggested
methods of distinguishing mind from matter. I shall then briefly sketch
the nature of that fundamental science which I believe to be the true
metaphysic, in which mind and matter alike are seen to be constructed
out of a neutral stuff, whose causal laws have no such duality as that
of psychology, but form the basis upon which both physics and psychology
are built.

In search for the definition of "mental phenomena," let us begin with
"consciousness," which is often thought to be the essence of mind.
In the first lecture I gave various arguments against the view that
consciousness is fundamental, but I did not attempt to say what
consciousness is. We must find a definition of it, if we are to feel
secure in deciding that it is not fundamental. It is for the sake of the
proof that it is not fundamental that we must now endeavour to decide
what it is.

"Consciousness," by those who regard it as fundamental, is taken to be a
character diffused throughout our mental life, distinct from sensations
and images, memories, beliefs and desires, but present in all of
them.* Dr. Henry Head, in an article which I quoted in Lecture III,
distinguishing sensations from purely physiological occurrences, says:
"Sensation, in the strict sense of the term, demands the existence of
consciousness." This statement, at first sight, is one to which we feel
inclined to assent, but I believe we are mistaken if we do so. Sensation
is the sort of thing of which we MAY be conscious, but not a thing
of which we MUST be conscious. We have been led, in the course of our
inquiry, to admit unconscious beliefs and unconscious desires. There is,
so far as I can see, no class of mental or other occurrences of which we
are always conscious whenever they happen.

     * Cf. Lecture VI.

The first thing to notice is that consciousness must be of something. In
view of this, I should define "consciousness" in terms of that relation
of an image of a word to an object which we defined, in Lecture XI, as
"meaning." When a sensation is followed by an image which is a "copy" of
it, I think it may be said that the existence of the image constitutes
consciousness of the sensation, provided it is accompanied by that sort
of belief which, when we reflect upon it, makes us feel that the image
is a "sign" of something other than itself. This is the sort of belief
which, in the case of memory, we expressed in the words "this occurred";
or which, in the case of a judgment of perception, makes us believe
in qualities correlated with present sensations, as e.g., tactile and
visual qualities are correlated. The addition of some element of belief
seems required, since mere imagination does not involve consciousness of
anything, and there can be no consciousness which is not of something.
If images alone constituted consciousness of their prototypes,
such imagination-images as in fact have prototypes would involve
consciousness of them; since this is not the case, an element of belief
must be added to the images in defining consciousness. The belief must
be of that sort that constitutes objective reference, past or
present. An image, together with a belief of this sort concerning it,
constitutes, according to our definition, consciousness of the prototype
of the image.

But when we pass from consciousness of sensations to consciousness of
objects of perception, certain further points arise which demand an
addition to our definition. A judgment of perception, we may say,
consists of a core of sensation, together with associated images, with
belief in the present existence of an object to which sensation and
images are referred in a way which is difficult to analyse. Perhaps we
might say that the belief is not fundamentally in any PRESENT existence,
but is of the nature of an expectation: for example, when we see an
object, we expect certain sensations to result if we proceed to touch
it. Perception, then, will consist of a present sensation together with
expectations of future sensations. (This, of course, is a reflective
analysis, not an account of the way perception appears to unchecked
introspection.) But all such expectations are liable to be erroneous,
since they are based upon correlations which are usual but not
invariable. Any such correlation may mislead us in a particular case,
for example, if we try to touch a reflection in a looking-glass under
the impression that it is "real." Since memory is fallible, a similar
difficulty arises as regards consciousness of past objects. It would
seem odd to say that we can be "conscious" of a thing which does not or
did not exist. The only way to avoid this awkwardness is to add to our
definition the proviso that the beliefs involved in consciousness must
be TRUE.

In the second place, the question arises as to whether we can be
conscious of images. If we apply our definition to this case, it seems
to demand images of images. In order, for example, to be conscious of
an image of a cat, we shall require, according to the letter of the
definition, an image which is a copy of our image of the cat, and has
this image for its prototype. Now, it hardly seems probable, as a matter
of observation, that there are images of images, as opposed to images
of sensations. We may meet this difficulty in two ways, either by boldly
denying consciousness of images, or by finding a sense in which, by
means of a different accompanying belief, an image, instead of meaning
its prototype, can mean another image of the same prototype.

The first alternative, which denies consciousness of images, has already
been discussed when we were dealing with Introspection in Lecture VI. We
then decided that there must be, in some sense, consciousness of images.
We are therefore left with the second suggested way of dealing with
knowledge of images. According to this second hypothesis, there may be
two images of the same prototype, such that one of them means the other,
instead of meaning the prototype. It will be remembered that we defined
meaning by association a word or image means an object, we said, when it
has the same associations as the object. But this definition must not be
interpreted too absolutely: a word or image will not have ALL the
same associations as the object which it means. The word "cat" may
be associated with the word "mat," but it would not happen except by
accident that a cat would be associated with a mat. And in like manner
an image may have certain associations which its prototype will not
have, e.g. an association with the word "image." When these associations
are active, an image means an image, instead of meaning its prototype.
If I have had images of a given prototype many times, I can mean one of
these, as opposed to the rest, by recollecting the time and place or any
other distinctive association of that one occasion. This happens, for
example, when a place recalls to us some thought we previously had in
that place, so that we remember a thought as opposed to the occurrence
to which it referred. Thus we may say that we think of an image A when
we have a similar image B associated with recollections of circumstances
connected with A, but not with its prototype or with other images of the
same prototype. In this way we become aware of images without the
need of any new store of mental contents, merely by the help of new
associations. This theory, so far as I can see, solves the problems of
introspective knowledge, without requiring heroic measures such as those
proposed by Knight Dunlap, whose views we discussed in Lecture VI.

According to what we have been saying, sensation itself is not an
instance of consciousness, though the immediate memory by which it is
apt to be succeeded is so. A sensation which is remembered becomes an
object of consciousness as soon as it begins to be remembered, which
will normally be almost immediately after its occurrence (if at all);
but while it exists it is not an object of consciousness. If, however,
it is part of a perception, say of some familiar person, we may say that
the person perceived is an object of consciousness. For in this case
the sensation is a SIGN of the perceived object in much the same way
in which a memory-image is a sign of a remembered object. The essential
practical function of "consciousness" and "thought" is that they enable
us to act with reference to what is distant in time or space, even
though it is not at present stimulating our senses. This reference
to absent objects is possible through association and habit. Actual
sensations, in themselves, are not cases of consciousness, because they
do not bring in this reference to what is absent. But their connection
with consciousness is very close, both through immediate memory, and
through the correlations which turn sensations into perceptions.

Enough has, I hope, been said to show that consciousness is far too
complex and accidental to be taken as the fundamental characteristic
of mind. We have seen that belief and images both enter into it. Belief
itself, as we saw in an earlier lecture, is complex. Therefore, if any
definition of mind is suggested by our analysis of consciousness, images
are what would naturally suggest themselves. But since we found
that images can only be defined causally, we cannot deal with this
suggestion, except in connection with the difference between physical
and psychological causal laws.

I come next to those characteristics of mental phenomena which arise out
of mnemic causation. The possibility of action with reference to what
is not sensibly present is one of the things that might be held to
characterize mind. Let us take first a very elementary example. Suppose
you are in a familiar room at night, and suddenly the light goes out.
You will be able to find your way to the door without much difficulty
by means of the picture of the room which you have in your mind. In this
case visual images serve, somewhat imperfectly it is true, the purpose
which visual sensations would otherwise serve. The stimulus to the
production of visual images is the desire to get out of the room, which,
according to what we found in Lecture III, consists essentially of
present sensations and motor impulses caused by them. Again, words heard
or read enable you to act with reference to the matters about which they
give information; here, again, a present sensible stimulus, in virtue of
habits formed in the past, enables you to act in a manner appropriate
to an object which is not sensibly present. The whole essence of the
practical efficiency of "thought" consists in sensitiveness to signs:
the sensible presence of A, which is a sign of the present or future
existence of B, enables us to act in a manner appropriate to B. Of
this, words are the supreme example, since their effects as signs are
prodigious, while their intrinsic interest as sensible occurrences on
their own account is usually very slight. The operation of signs may or
may not be accompanied by consciousness. If a sensible stimulus A calls
up an image of B, and we then act with reference to B, we have what may
be called consciousness of B. But habit may enable us to act in a manner
appropriate to B as soon as A appears, without ever having an image of
B. In that case, although A operates as a sign, it operates without the
help of consciousness. Broadly speaking, a very familiar sign tends to
operate directly in this manner, and the intervention of consciousness
marks an imperfectly established habit.

The power of acquiring experience, which characterizes men and animals,
is an example of the general law that, in mnemic causation, the causal
unit is not one event at one time, but two or more events at two or more
times.& A burnt child fears the fire, that is to say, the neighbourhood
of fire has a different effect upon a child which has had the sensations
of burning than upon one which has not. More correctly, the observed
effect, when a child which has been burnt is put near a fire, has for
its cause, not merely the neighbourhood of the fire, but this together
with the previous burning. The general formula, when an animal has
acquired experience through some event A, is that, when B occurs at some
future time, the animal to which A has happened acts differently from
an animal which A has not happened. Thus A and B together, not either
separately, must be regarded as the cause of the animal's behaviour,
unless we take account of the effect which A has had in altering the
animal's nervous tissue, which is a matter not patent to external
observation except under very special circumstances. With this
possibility, we are brought back to causal laws, and to the suggestion
that many things which seem essentially mental are really neural.
Perhaps it is the nerves that acquire experience rather than the mind.
If so, the possibility of acquiring experience cannot be used to define
mind.*

     * Cf. Lecture IV.

Very similar considerations apply to memory, if taken as the essence of
mind. A recollection is aroused by something which is happening now,
but is different from the effect which the present occurrence would
have produced if the recollected event had not occurred. This may be
accounted for by the physical effect of the past event on the brain,
making it a different instrument from that which would have resulted
from a different experience. The causal peculiarities of memory may,
therefore, have a physiological explanation. With every special class of
mental phenomena this possibility meets us afresh. If psychology is
to be a separate science at all, we must seek a wider ground for its
separateness than any that we have been considering hitherto.

We have found that "consciousness" is too narrow to characterize mental
phenomena, and that mnemic causation is too wide. I come now to a
characteristic which, though difficult to define, comes much nearer to
what we require, namely subjectivity.

Subjectivity, as a characteristic of mental phenomena, was considered in
Lecture VII, in connection with the definition of perception. We there
decided that those particulars which constitute the physical world can
be collected into sets in two ways, one of which makes a bundle of all
those particulars that are appearances of a given thing from different
places, while the other makes a bundle of all those particulars which
are appearances of different things from a given place. A bundle of
this latter sort, at a given time, is called a "perspective"; taken
throughout a period of time, it is called a "biography." Subjectivity is
the characteristic of perspectives and biographies, the characteristic
of giving the view of the world from a certain place. We saw in Lecture
VII that this characteristic involves none of the other characteristics
that are commonly associated with mental phenomena, such as
consciousness, experience and memory. We found in fact that it is
exhibited by a photographic plate, and, strictly speaking, by any
particular taken in conjunction with those which have the same "passive"
place in the sense defined in Lecture VII. The particulars forming one
perspective are connected together primarily by simultaneity;
those forming one biography, primarily by the existence of direct
time-relations between them. To these are to be added relations
derivable from the laws of perspective. In all this we are clearly not
in the region of psychology, as commonly understood; yet we are also
hardly in the region of physics. And the definition of perspectives
and biographies, though it does not yet yield anything that would
be commonly called "mental," is presupposed in mental phenomena, for
example in mnemic causation: the causal unit in mnemic causation, which
gives rise to Semon's engram, is the whole of one perspective--not of
any perspective, but of a perspective in a place where there is nervous
tissue, or at any rate living tissue of some sort. Perception also,
as we saw, can only be defined in terms of perspectives. Thus the
conception of subjectivity, i.e. of the "passive" place of a particular,
though not alone sufficient to define mind, is clearly an essential
element in the definition.

I have maintained throughout these lectures that the data of psychology
do not differ in, their intrinsic character from the data of physics.
I have maintained that sensations are data for psychology and
physics equally, while images, which may be in some sense exclusively
psychological data, can only be distinguished from sensations by their
correlations, not by what they are in themselves. It is now necessary,
however, to examine the notion of a "datum," and to obtain, if possible,
a definition of this notion.

The notion of "data" is familiar throughout science, and is usually
treated by men of science as though it were perfectly clear.
Psychologists, on the other hand, find great difficulty in the
conception. "Data" are naturally defined in terms of theory of
knowledge: they are those propositions of which the truth is known
without demonstration, so that they may be used as premisses in proving
other propositions. Further, when a proposition which is a datum asserts
the existence of something, we say that the something is a datum, as
well as the proposition asserting its existence. Thus those objects
of whose existence we become certain through perception are said to be
data.

There is some difficulty in connecting this epistemological definition
of "data" with our psychological analysis of knowledge; but until such
a connection has been effected, we have no right to use the conception
"data."

It is clear, in the first place, that there can be no datum apart from a
belief. A sensation which merely comes and goes is not a datum; it only
becomes a datum when it is remembered. Similarly, in perception, we do
not have a datum unless we have a JUDGMENT of perception. In the sense
in which objects (as opposed to propositions) are data, it would seem
natural to say that those objects of which we are conscious are data.
But consciousness, as we have seen, is a complex notion, involving
beliefs, as well as mnemic phenomena such as are required for perception
and memory. It follows that no datum is theoretically indubitable, since
no belief is infallible; it follows also that every datum has a greater
or less degree of vagueness, since there is always some vagueness in
memory and the meaning of images.

Data are not those things of which our consciousness is earliest in
time. At every period of life, after we have become capable of thought,
some of our beliefs are obtained by inference, while others are not.
A belief may pass from either of these classes into the other, and may
therefore become, or cease to be, a belief giving a datum. When, in what
follows, I speak of data, I do not mean the things of which we feel sure
before scientific study begins, but the things which, when a science
is well advanced, appear as affording grounds for other parts of
the science, without themselves being believed on any ground except
observation. I assume, that is to say, a trained observer, with an
analytic attention, knowing the sort of thing to look for, and the sort
of thing that will be important. What he observes is, at the stage of
science which he has reached, a datum for his science. It is just as
sophisticated and elaborate as the theories which he bases upon it,
since only trained habits and much practice enable a man to make
the kind of observation that will be scientifically illuminating.
Nevertheless, when once it has been observed, belief in it is not based
on inference and reasoning, but merely upon its having been seen. In
this way its logical status differs from that of the theories which are
proved by its means.

In any science other than psychology the datum is primarily a
perception, in which only the sensational core is ultimately and
theoretically a datum, though some such accretions as turn the sensation
into a perception are practically unavoidable. But if we postulate an
ideal observer, he will be able to isolate the sensation, and treat this
alone as datum. There is, therefore, an important sense in which we
may say that, if we analyse as much as we ought, our data, outside
psychology, consist of sensations, which include within themselves
certain spatial and temporal relations.

Applying this remark to physiology, we see that the nerves and brain
as physical objects are not truly data; they are to be replaced, in
the ideal structure of science, by the sensations through which the
physiologist is said to perceive them. The passage from these sensations
to nerves and brain as physical objects belongs really to the initial
stage in the theory of physics, and ought to be placed in the reasoned
part, not in the part supposed to be observed. To say we see the
nerves is like saying we hear the nightingale; both are convenient but
inaccurate expressions. We hear a sound which we believe to be causally
connected with the nightingale, and we see a sight which we believe
to be causally connected with a nerve. But in each case it is only
the sensation that ought, in strictness, to be called a datum. Now,
sensations are certainly among the data of psychology. Therefore all the
data of the physical sciences are also psychological data. It remains
to inquire whether all the data of psychology are also data of physical
science, and especially of physiology.

If we have been right in our analysis of mind, the ultimate data of
psychology are only sensations and images and their relations. Beliefs,
desires, volitions, and so on, appeared to us to be complex phenomena
consisting of sensations and images variously interrelated. Thus (apart
from certain relations) the occurrences which seem most distinctively
mental, and furthest removed from physics, are, like physical objects,
constructed or inferred, not part of the original stock of data in the
perfected science. From both ends, therefore, the difference between
physical and psychological data is diminished. Is there ultimately
no difference, or do images remain as irreducibly and exclusively
psychological? In view of the causal definition of the difference
between images and sensations, this brings us to a new question, namely:
Are the causal laws of psychology different from those of any other
science, or are they really physiological?

Certain ambiguities must be removed before this question can be
adequately discussed.

First, there is the distinction between rough approximate laws and
such as appear to be precise and general. I shall return to the former
presently; it is the latter that I wish to discuss now.

Matter, as defined at the end of Lecture V, is a logical fiction,
invented because it gives a convenient way of stating causal laws.
Except in cases of perfect regularity in appearances (of which we can
have no experience), the actual appearances of a piece of matter are not
members of that ideal system of regular appearances which is defined
as being the matter in question. But the matter is, after all, inferred
from its appearances, which are used to VERIFY physical laws. Thus, in
so far as physics is an empirical and verifiable science, it must assume
or prove that the inference from appearances to matter is, in general,
legitimate, and it must be able to tell us, more or less, what
appearances to expect. It is through this question of verifiability and
empirical applicability to experience that we are led to a theory of
matter such as I advocate. From the consideration of this question it
results that physics, in so far as it is an empirical science, not a
logical phantasy, is concerned with particulars of just the same sort
as those which psychology considers under the name of sensations. The
causal laws of physics, so interpreted, differ from those of psychology
only by the fact that they connect a particular with other appearances
in the same piece of matter, rather than with other appearances in the
same perspective. That is to say, they group together particulars having
the same "active" place, while psychology groups together those having
the same "passive" place. Some particulars, such as images, have no
"active" place, and therefore belong exclusively to psychology.

We can now understand the distinction between physics and psychology.
The nerves and brain are matter: our visual sensations when we look
at them may be, and I think are, members of the system constituting
irregular appearances of this matter, but are not the whole of the
system. Psychology is concerned, inter alia, with our sensations when we
see a piece of matter, as opposed to the matter which we see. Assuming,
as we must, that our sensations have physical causes, their causal laws
are nevertheless radically different from the laws of physics, since
the consideration of a single sensation requires the breaking up of
the group of which it is a member. When a sensation is used to verify
physics, it is used merely as a sign of a certain material phenomenon,
i.e. of a group of particulars of which it is a member. But when it is
studied by psychology, it is taken away from that group and put
into quite a different context, where it causes images or voluntary
movements. It is primarily this different grouping that is
characteristic of psychology as opposed to all the physical sciences,
including physiology; a secondary difference is that images, which
belong to psychology, are not easily to be included among the aspects
which constitute a physical thing or piece of matter.

There remains, however, an important question, namely: Are mental events
causally dependent upon physical events in a sense in which the converse
dependence does not hold? Before we can discuss the answer to this
question, we must first be clear as to what our question means.

When, given A, it is possible to infer B, but given B, it is not
possible to infer A, we say that B is dependent upon A in a sense in
which A is not dependent upon B. Stated in logical terms, this amounts
to saying that, when we know a many-one relation of A to B, B is
dependent upon A in respect of this relation. If the relation is a
causal law, we say that B is causally dependent upon A. The illustration
that chiefly concerns us is the system of appearances of a physical
object. We can, broadly speaking, infer distant appearances from near
ones, but not vice versa. All men look alike when they are a mile away,
hence when we see a man a mile off we cannot tell what he will look like
when he is only a yard away. But when we see him a yard away, we can
tell what he will look like a mile away. Thus the nearer view gives us
more valuable information, and the distant view is causally dependent
upon it in a sense in which it is not causally dependent upon the
distant view.

It is this greater causal potency of the near appearance that leads
physics to state its causal laws in terms of that system of regular
appearances to which the nearest appearances increasingly approximate,
and that makes it value information derived from the microscope or
telescope. It is clear that our sensations, considered as irregular
appearances of physical objects, share the causal dependence belonging
to comparatively distant appearances; therefore in our sensational life
we are in causal dependence upon physical laws.

This, however, is not the most important or interesting part of our
question. It is the causation of images that is the vital problem. We
have seen that they are subject to mnenic causation, and that mnenic
causation may be reducible to ordinary physical causation in nervous
tissue. This is the question upon which our attitude must turn towards
what may be called materialism. One sense of materialism is the view
that all mental phenomena are causally dependent upon physical phenomena
in the above-defined sense of causal dependence. Whether this is the
case or not, I do not profess to know. The question seems to me the
same as the question whether mnemic causation is ultimate, which we
considered without deciding in Lecture IV. But I think the bulk of the
evidence points to the materialistic answer as the more probable.

In considering the causal laws of psychology, the distinction between
rough generalizations and exact laws is important. There are many rough
generalizations in psychology, not only of the sort by which we
govern our ordinary behaviour to each other, but also of a more nearly
scientific kind. Habit and association belong among such laws. I will
give an illustration of the kind of law that can be obtained. Suppose a
person has frequently experienced A and B in close temporal contiguity,
an association will be established, so that A, or an image of A, tends
to cause an image of B. The question arises: will the association work
in either direction, or only from the one which has occurred earlier
to the one which has occurred later? In an article by Mr. Wohlgemuth,
called "The Direction of Associations" ("British Journal of Psychology,"
vol. v, part iv, March, 1913), it is claimed to be proved by experiment
that, in so far as motor memory (i.e. memory of movements) is concerned,
association works only from earlier to later, while in visual and
auditory memory this is not the case, but the later of two neighbouring
experiences may recall the earlier as well as the earlier the later.
It is suggested that motor memory is physiological, while visual and
auditory memory are more truly psychological. But that is not the point
which concerns us in the illustration. The point which concerns us
is that a law of association, established by purely psychological
observation, is a purely psychological law, and may serve as a sample
of what is possible in the way of discovering such laws. It is, however,
still no more than a rough generalization, a statistical average. It
cannot tell us what will result from a given cause on a given occasion.
It is a law of tendency, not a precise and invariable law such as those
of physics aim at being.

If we wish to pass from the law of habit, stated as a tendency or
average, to something more precise and invariable, we seem driven to the
nervous system. We can more or less guess how an occurrence produces a
change in the brain, and how its repetition gradually produces something
analogous to the channel of a river, along which currents flow more
easily than in neighbouring paths. We can perceive that in this way, if
we had more knowledge, the tendency to habit through repetition might
be replaced by a precise account of the effect of each occurrence
in bringing about a modification of the sort from which habit would
ultimately result. It is such considerations that make students of
psychophysiology materialistic in their methods, whatever they may be in
their metaphysics. There are, of course, exceptions, such as Professor
J. S. Haldane,* who maintains that it is theoretically impossible to
obtain physiological explanations of psychical phenomena, or physical
explanations of physiological phenomena. But I think the bulk of expert
opinion, in practice, is on the other side.

     *See his book, "The New Physiology and Other Addresses"
     (Charles Griffin & Co., 1919).

The question whether it is possible to obtain precise causal laws in
which the causes are psychological, not material, is one of detailed
investigation. I have done what I could to make clear the nature of the
question, but I do not believe that it is possible as yet to answer it
with any confidence. It seems to be by no means an insoluble question,
and we may hope that science will be able to produce sufficient grounds
for regarding one answer as much more probable than the other. But for
the moment I do not see how we can come to a decision.

I think, however, on grounds of the theory of matter explained in
Lectures V and VII, that an ultimate scientific account of what goes on
in the world, if it were ascertainable, would resemble psychology rather
than physics in what we found to be the decisive difference between
them. I think, that is to say, that such an account would not be content
to speak, even formally, as though matter, which is a logical fiction,
were the ultimate reality. I think that, if our scientific knowledge
were adequate to the task, which it neither is nor is likely to become,
it would exhibit the laws of correlation of the particulars constituting
a momentary condition of a material unit, and would state the causal
laws* of the world in terms of these particulars, not in terms of
matter. Causal laws so stated would, I believe, be applicable to
psychology and physics equally; the science in which they were stated
would succeed in achieving what metaphysics has vainly attempted, namely
a unified account of what really happens, wholly true even if not the
whole of truth, and free from all convenient fictions or unwarrantable
assumptions of metaphysical entities. A causal law applicable to
particulars would count as a law of physics if it could be stated in
terms of those fictitious systems of regular appearances which are
matter; if this were not the case, it would count as a law of psychology
if one of the particulars were a sensation or an image, i.e. were
subject to mnemic causation. I believe that the realization of the
complexity of a material unit, and its analysis into constituents
analogous to sensations, is of the utmost importance to philosophy, and
vital for any understanding of the relations between mind and matter,
between our perceptions and the world which they perceive. It is in this
direction, I am convinced, that we must look for the solution of many
ancient perplexities.

     * In a perfected science, causal laws will take the form of
     differential equations--or of finite-difference equations,
     if the theory of quanta should prove correct.

It is probable that the whole science of mental occurrences, especially
where its initial definitions are concerned, could be simplified by the
development of the fundamental unifying science in which the causal laws
of particulars are sought, rather than the causal laws of those systems
of particulars that constitute the material units of physics. This
fundamental science would cause physics to become derivative, in the
sort of way in which theories of the constitution of the atom make
chemistry derivative from physics; it would also cause psychology to
appear less singular and isolated among sciences. If we are right in
this, it is a wrong philosophy of matter which has caused many of the
difficulties in the philosophy of mind--difficulties which a right
philosophy of matter would cause to disappear.

The conclusions at which we have arrived may be summed up as follows:

I. Physics and psychology are not distinguished by their material. Mind
and matter alike are logical constructions; the particulars out of which
they are constructed, or from which they are inferred, have various
relations, some of which are studied by physics, others by psychology.
Broadly speaking, physics group particulars by their active places,
psychology by their passive places.

II. The two most essential characteristics of the causal laws which
would naturally be called psychological are SUBJECTIVITY and MNEMIC
CAUSATION; these are not unconnected, since the causal unit in mnemic
causation is the group of particulars having a given passive place at
a given time, and it is by this manner of grouping that subjectivity is
defined.

III. Habit, memory and thought are all developments of mnemic causation.
It is probable, though not certain, that mnemic causation is derivative
from ordinary physical causation in nervous (and other) tissue.

IV. Consciousness is a complex and far from universal characteristic of
mental phenomena.

V. Mind is a matter of degree, chiefly exemplified in number and
complexity of habits.

VI. All our data, both in physics and psychology, are subject to
psychological causal laws; but physical causal laws, at least in
traditional physics, can only be stated in terms of matter, which is
both inferred and constructed, never a datum. In this respect psychology
is nearer to what actually exists.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Analysis of Mind, by Bertrand Russell



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ANALYSIS OF MIND ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given awayyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

     You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.
    
     You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
        works.
    
     You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
     You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenbergs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundations EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your states laws.

The Foundations business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundations website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



The Project Gutenberg eBook of Our Knowledge of the External World as a Field for Scientific Method in Philosophy
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Our Knowledge of the External World as a Field for Scientific Method in Philosophy

Author: Bertrand Russell

Release date: August 15, 2011 [eBook #37090]
                Most recently updated: January 8, 2021

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Jana Srna and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OUR KNOWLEDGE OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD AS A FIELD FOR SCIENTIFIC METHOD IN PHILOSOPHY ***




Produced by Jana Srna and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net






  [ Transcriber's Notes:

    Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully
    as possible, including inconsistencies in spelling and hyphenation.
    Some corrections of spelling and punctuation have been made. They
    are listed at the end of the text.

    Italic text has been marked with _underscores_.
  ]




  OUR KNOWLEDGE OF THE
  EXTERNAL WORLD

  AS A FIELD FOR SCIENTIFIC METHOD
  IN PHILOSOPHY




BY THE SAME AUTHOR


  INTRODUCTION TO MATHEMATICAL PHILOSOPHY
  Second Edition.
  Demy 8vo, 12s. 6d. net.

  THE ANALYSIS OF MIND
  Demy 8vo, 16s. net.

  PRINCIPLES OF SOCIAL RECONSTRUCTION
  Seventh Impression.
  Cr. 8vo, 5s. net; Limp, 3s. 6d. net.

  ROADS TO FREEDOM: SOCIALISM, ANARCHISM AND SYNDICALISM
  Fourth Impression.
  Cr. 8vo, 5s. net; Limp, 3s. 6d. net.

  THE PRACTICE AND THEORY OF BOLSHEVISM
  Second Impression.
  Cr. 8vo, 6s. net.




  OUR KNOWLEDGE OF
  THE EXTERNAL WORLD
  AS A FIELD FOR SCIENTIFIC METHOD
  IN PHILOSOPHY

  BY
  BERTRAND RUSSELL, F.R.S

  LONDON: GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD
  RUSKIN HOUSE, 40 MUSEUM STREET, W.C. 1


  First published in 1914 by
  The Open Court Publishing Company

  Reissued by George Allen & Unwin Ltd.
  1922




PREFACE


The following lectures[1] are an attempt to show, by means of examples,
the nature, capacity, and limitations of the logical-analytic method in
philosophy. This method, of which the first complete example is to be
found in the writings of Frege, has gradually, in the course of actual
research, increasingly forced itself upon me as something perfectly
definite, capable of embodiment in maxims, and adequate, in all branches
of philosophy, to yield whatever objective scientific knowledge it is
possible to obtain. Most of the methods hitherto practised have
professed to lead to more ambitious results than any that logical
analysis can claim to reach, but unfortunately these results have always
been such as many competent philosophers considered inadmissible.
Regarded merely as hypotheses and as aids to imagination, the great
systems of the past serve a very useful purpose, and are abundantly
worthy of study. But something different is required if philosophy is to
become a science, and to aim at results independent of the tastes and
temperament of the philosopher who advocates them. In what follows, I
have endeavoured to show, however imperfectly, the way by which I
believe that this _desideratum_ is to be found.

  [1] Delivered as Lowell Lectures in Boston, in March and April 1914.

The central problem by which I have sought to illustrate method is the
problem of the relation between the crude data of sense and the space,
time, and matter of mathematical physics. I have been made aware of the
importance of this problem by my friend and collaborator Dr Whitehead,
to whom are due almost all the differences between the views advocated
here and those suggested in _The Problems of Philosophy_.[2] I owe to
him the definition of points, the suggestion for the treatment of
instants and "things," and the whole conception of the world of physics
as a _construction_ rather than an _inference_. What is said on these
topics here is, in fact, a rough preliminary account of the more precise
results which he is giving in the fourth volume of our _Principia
Mathematica_.[3] It will be seen that if his way of dealing with these
topics is capable of being successfully carried through, a wholly new
light is thrown on the time-honoured controversies of realists and
idealists, and a method is obtained of solving all that is soluble in
their problem.

  [2] London and New York, 1912 ("Home University Library").

  [3] The first volume was published at Cambridge in 1910, the second in
  1912, and the third in 1913.

The speculations of the past as to the reality or unreality of the world
of physics were baffled, at the outset, by the absence of any
satisfactory theory of the mathematical infinite. This difficulty has
been removed by the work of Georg Cantor. But the positive and detailed
solution of the problem by means of mathematical constructions based
upon sensible objects as data has only been rendered possible by the
growth of mathematical logic, without which it is practically impossible
to manipulate ideas of the requisite abstractness and complexity. This
aspect, which is somewhat obscured in a merely popular outline such as
is contained in the following lectures, will become plain as soon as Dr
Whitehead's work is published. In pure logic, which, however, will be
very briefly discussed in these lectures, I have had the benefit of
vitally important discoveries, not yet published, by my friend Mr Ludwig
Wittgenstein.

Since my purpose was to illustrate method, I have included much that is
tentative and incomplete, for it is not by the study of finished
structures alone that the manner of construction can be learnt. Except
in regard to such matters as Cantor's theory of infinity, no finality is
claimed for the theories suggested; but I believe that where they are
found to require modification, this will be discovered by substantially
the same method as that which at present makes them appear probable, and
it is on this ground that I ask the reader to be tolerant of their
incompleteness.

  Cambridge,
    June 1914.




CONTENTS


  LECTURE                                                     PAGE

       I. Current Tendencies                                     3

      II. Logic as the Essence of Philosophy                    33

     III. On our Knowledge of the External World                63

      IV. The World of Physics and the World of Sense          101

       V. The Theory of Continuity                             129

      VI. The Problem of Infinity considered Historically      155

     VII. The Positive Theory of Infinity                      185

    VIII. On the Notion of Cause, with Applications to
             the Free-will Problem                             211

          Index                                                243




LECTURE I

CURRENT TENDENCIES


Philosophy, from the earliest times, has made greater claims, and
achieved fewer results, than any other branch of learning. Ever since
Thales said that all is water, philosophers have been ready with glib
assertions about the sum-total of things; and equally glib denials have
come from other philosophers ever since Thales was contradicted by
Anaximander. I believe that the time has now arrived when this
unsatisfactory state of things can be brought to an end. In the
following course of lectures I shall try, chiefly by taking certain
special problems as examples, to indicate wherein the claims of
philosophers have been excessive, and why their achievements have not
been greater. The problems and the method of philosophy have, I believe,
been misconceived by all schools, many of its traditional problems being
insoluble with our means of knowledge, while other more neglected but
not less important problems can, by a more patient and more adequate
method, be solved with all the precision and certainty to which the most
advanced sciences have attained.

Among present-day philosophies, we may distinguish three principal
types, often combined in varying proportions by a single philosopher,
but in essence and tendency distinct. The first of these, which I shall
call the classical tradition, descends in the main from Kant and Hegel;
it represents the attempt to adapt to present needs the methods and
results of the great constructive philosophers from Plato downwards. The
second type, which may be called evolutionism, derived its predominance
from Darwin, and must be reckoned as having had Herbert Spencer for its
first philosophical representative; but in recent times it has become,
chiefly through William James and M. Bergson, far bolder and far more
searching in its innovations than it was in the hands of Herbert
Spencer. The third type, which may be called "logical atomism" for want
of a better name, has gradually crept into philosophy through the
critical scrutiny of mathematics. This type of philosophy, which is the
one that I wish to advocate, has not as yet many whole-hearted
adherents, but the "new realism" which owes its inception to Harvard is
very largely impregnated with its spirit. It represents, I believe, the
same kind of advance as was introduced into physics by Galileo: the
substitution of piecemeal, detailed, and verifiable results for large
untested generalities recommended only by a certain appeal to
imagination. But before we can understand the changes advocated by this
new philosophy, we must briefly examine and criticise the other two
types with which it has to contend.


A. The Classical Tradition

Twenty years ago, the classical tradition, having vanquished the
opposing tradition of the English empiricists, held almost unquestioned
sway in all Anglo-Saxon universities. At the present day, though it is
losing ground, many of the most prominent teachers still adhere to it.
In academic France, in spite of M. Bergson, it is far stronger than all
its opponents combined; and in Germany it has many vigorous advocates.
Nevertheless, it represents on the whole a decaying force, and it has
failed to adapt itself to the temper of the age. Its advocates are, in
the main, those whose extra-philosophical knowledge is literary, rather
than those who have felt the inspiration of science. There are, apart
from reasoned arguments, certain general intellectual forces against
it--the same general forces which are breaking down the other great
syntheses of the past, and making our age one of bewildered groping
where our ancestors walked in the clear daylight of unquestioning
certainty.

The original impulse out of which the classical tradition developed was
the nave faith of the Greek philosophers in the omnipotence of
reasoning. The discovery of geometry had intoxicated them, and its _a
priori_ deductive method appeared capable of universal application. They
would prove, for instance, that all reality is one, that there is no
such thing as change, that the world of sense is a world of mere
illusion; and the strangeness of their results gave them no qualms
because they believed in the correctness of their reasoning. Thus it
came to be thought that by mere thinking the most surprising and
important truths concerning the whole of reality could be established
with a certainty which no contrary observations could shake. As the
vital impulse of the early philosophers died away, its place was taken
by authority and tradition, reinforced, in the Middle Ages and almost to
our own day, by systematic theology. Modern philosophy, from Descartes
onwards, though not bound by authority like that of the Middle Ages,
still accepted more or less uncritically the Aristotelian logic.
Moreover, it still believed, except in Great Britain, that _a priori_
reasoning could reveal otherwise undiscoverable secrets about the
universe, and could prove reality to be quite different from what, to
direct observation, it appears to be. It is this belief, rather than any
particular tenets resulting from it, that I regard as the distinguishing
characteristic of the classical tradition, and as hitherto the main
obstacle to a scientific attitude in philosophy.

The nature of the philosophy embodied in the classical tradition may be
made clearer by taking a particular exponent as an illustration. For
this purpose, let us consider for a moment the doctrines of Mr Bradley,
who is probably the most distinguished living representative of this
school. Mr Bradley's _Appearance and Reality_ is a book consisting of
two parts, the first called _Appearance_, the second _Reality_. The
first part examines and condemns almost all that makes up our everyday
world: things and qualities, relations, space and time, change,
causation, activity, the self. All these, though in some sense facts
which qualify reality, are not real as they appear. What is real is one
single, indivisible, timeless whole, called the Absolute, which is in
some sense spiritual, but does not consist of souls, or of thought and
will as we know them. And all this is established by abstract logical
reasoning professing to find self-contradictions in the categories
condemned as mere appearance, and to leave no tenable alternative to the
kind of Absolute which is finally affirmed to be real.

One brief example may suffice to illustrate Mr Bradley's method. The
world appears to be full of many things with various relations to each
other--right and left, before and after, father and son, and so on. But
relations, according to Mr Bradley, are found on examination to be
self-contradictory and therefore impossible. He first argues that, if
there are relations, there must be qualities between which they hold.
This part of his argument need not detain us. He then proceeds:

"But how the relation can stand to the qualities is, on the other side,
unintelligible. If it is nothing to the qualities, then they are not
related at all; and, if so, as we saw, they have ceased to be qualities,
and their relation is a nonentity. But if it is to be something to them,
then clearly we shall require a _new_ connecting relation. For the
relation hardly can be the mere adjective of one or both of its terms;
or, at least, as such it seems indefensible. And, being something
itself, if it does not itself bear a relation to the terms, in what
intelligible way will it succeed in being anything to them? But here
again we are hurried off into the eddy of a hopeless process, since we
are forced to go on finding new relations without end. The links are
united by a link, and this bond of union is a link which also has two
ends; and these require each a fresh link to connect them with the old.
The problem is to find how the relation can stand to its qualities, and
this problem is insoluble."[4]

  [4] _Appearance and Reality_, pp. 32-33.

I do not propose to examine this argument in detail, or to show the
exact points where, in my opinion, it is fallacious. I have quoted it
only as an example of method. Most people will admit, I think, that it
is calculated to produce bewilderment rather than conviction, because
there is more likelihood of error in a very subtle, abstract, and
difficult argument than in so patent a fact as the interrelatedness of
the things in the world. To the early Greeks, to whom geometry was
practically the only known science, it was possible to follow reasoning
with assent even when it led to the strangest conclusions. But to us,
with our methods of experiment and observation, our knowledge of the
long history of _a priori_ errors refuted by empirical science, it has
become natural to suspect a fallacy in any deduction of which the
conclusion appears to contradict patent facts. It is easy to carry such
suspicion too far, and it is very desirable, if possible, actually to
discover the exact nature of the error when it exists. But there is no
doubt that what we may call the empirical outlook has become part of
most educated people's habit of mind; and it is this, rather than any
definite argument, that has diminished the hold of the classical
tradition upon students of philosophy and the instructed public
generally.

The function of logic in philosophy, as I shall try to show at a later
stage, is all-important; but I do not think its function is that which
it has in the classical tradition. In that tradition, logic becomes
constructive through negation. Where a number of alternatives seem, at
first sight, to be equally possible, logic is made to condemn all of
them except one, and that one is then pronounced to be realised in the
actual world. Thus the world is constructed by means of logic, with
little or no appeal to concrete experience. The true function of logic
is, in my opinion, exactly the opposite of this. As applied to matters
of experience, it is analytic rather than constructive; taken _a
priori_, it shows the possibility of hitherto unsuspected alternatives
more often than the impossibility of alternatives which seemed _prim
facie_ possible. Thus, while it liberates imagination as to what the
world _may_ be, it refuses to legislate as to what the world _is_. This
change, which has been brought about by an internal revolution in logic,
has swept away the ambitious constructions of traditional metaphysics,
even for those whose faith in logic is greatest; while to the many who
regard logic as a chimera the paradoxical systems to which it has given
rise do not seem worthy even of refutation. Thus on all sides these
systems have ceased to attract, and even the philosophical world tends
more and more to pass them by.

One or two of the favourite doctrines of the school we are considering
may be mentioned to illustrate the nature of its claims. The universe,
it tells us, is an "organic unity," like an animal or a perfect work of
art. By this it means, roughly speaking, that all the different parts
fit together and co-operate, and are what they are because of their
place in the whole. This belief is sometimes advanced dogmatically,
while at other times it is defended by certain logical arguments. If it
is true, every part of the universe is a microcosm, a miniature
reflection of the whole. If we knew ourselves thoroughly, according to
this doctrine, we should know everything. Common sense would naturally
object that there are people--say in China--with whom our relations are
so indirect and trivial that we cannot infer anything important as to
them from any fact about ourselves. If there are living beings in Mars
or in more distant parts of the universe, the same argument becomes even
stronger. But further, perhaps the whole contents of the space and time
in which we live form only one of many universes, each seeming to itself
complete. And thus the conception of the necessary unity of all that is
resolves itself into the poverty of imagination, and a freer logic
emancipates us from the strait-waistcoated benevolent institution which
idealism palms off as the totality of being.

Another very important doctrine held by most, though not all, of the
school we are examining is the doctrine that all reality is what is
called "mental" or "spiritual," or that, at any rate, all reality is
dependent for its existence upon what is mental. This view is often
particularised into the form which states that the relation of knower
and known is fundamental, and that nothing can exist unless it either
knows or is known. Here again the same legislative function is ascribed
to _a priori_ argumentation: it is thought that there are contradictions
in an unknown reality. Again, if I am not mistaken, the argument is
fallacious, and a better logic will show that no limits can be set to
the extent and nature of the unknown. And when I speak of the unknown, I
do not mean merely what we personally do not know, but what is not known
to any mind. Here as elsewhere, while the older logic shut out
possibilities and imprisoned imagination within the walls of the
familiar, the newer logic shows rather what may happen, and refuses to
decide as to what _must_ happen.

The classical tradition in philosophy is the last surviving child of two
very diverse parents: the Greek belief in reason, and the medival
belief in the tidiness of the universe. To the schoolmen, who lived amid
wars, massacres, and pestilences, nothing appeared so delightful as
safety and order. In their idealising dreams, it was safety and order
that they sought: the universe of Thomas Aquinas or Dante is as small
and neat as a Dutch interior. To us, to whom safety has become monotony,
to whom the primeval savageries of nature are so remote as to become a
mere pleasing condiment to our ordered routine, the world of dreams is
very different from what it was amid the wars of Guelf and Ghibelline.
Hence William James's protest against what he calls the "block universe"
of the classical tradition; hence Nietzsche's worship of force; hence
the verbal bloodthirstiness of many quiet literary men. The barbaric
substratum of human nature, unsatisfied in action, finds an outlet in
imagination. In philosophy, as elsewhere, this tendency is visible; and
it is this, rather than formal argument, that has thrust aside the
classical tradition for a philosophy which fancies itself more virile
and more vital.


B. Evolutionism

Evolutionism, in one form or another, is the prevailing creed of our
time. It dominates our politics, our literature, and not least our
philosophy. Nietzsche, pragmatism, Bergson, are phases in its
philosophic development, and their popularity far beyond the circles of
professional philosophers shows its consonance with the spirit of the
age. It believes itself firmly based on science, a liberator of hopes,
an inspirer of an invigorating faith in human power, a sure antidote to
the ratiocinative authority of the Greeks and the dogmatic authority of
medival systems. Against so fashionable and so agreeable a creed it may
seem useless to raise a protest; and with much of its spirit every
modern man must be in sympathy. But I think that, in the intoxication of
a quick success, much that is important and vital to a true
understanding of the universe has been forgotten. Something of Hellenism
must be combined with the new spirit before it can emerge from the
ardour of youth into the wisdom of manhood. And it is time to remember
that biology is neither the only science, nor yet the model to which all
other sciences must adapt themselves. Evolutionism, as I shall try to
show, is not a truly scientific philosophy, either in its method or in
the problems which it considers. The true scientific philosophy is
something more arduous and more aloof, appealing to less mundane hopes,
and requiring a severer discipline for its successful practice.

Darwin's _Origin of Species_ persuaded the world that the difference
between different species of animals and plants is not the fixed,
immutable difference that it appears to be. The doctrine of natural
kinds, which had rendered classification easy and definite, which was
enshrined in the Aristotelian tradition, and protected by its supposed
necessity for orthodox dogma, was suddenly swept away for ever out of
the biological world. The difference between man and the lower animals,
which to our human conceit appears enormous, was shown to be a gradual
achievement, involving intermediate beings who could not with certainty
be placed either within or without the human family. The sun and planets
had already been shown by Laplace to be very probably derived from a
primitive more or less undifferentiated nebula. Thus the old fixed
landmarks became wavering and indistinct, and all sharp outlines were
blurred. Things and species lost their boundaries, and none could say
where they began or where they ended.

But if human conceit was staggered for a moment by its kinship with the
ape, it soon found a way to reassert itself, and that way is the
"philosophy" of evolution. A process which led from the amoeba to man
appeared to the philosophers to be obviously a progress--though whether
the amoeba would agree with this opinion is not known. Hence the cycle
of changes which science had shown to be the probable history of the
past was welcomed as revealing a law of development towards good in the
universe--an evolution or unfolding of an ideal slowly embodying itself
in the actual. But such a view, though it might satisfy Spencer and
those whom we may call Hegelian evolutionists, could not be accepted as
adequate by the more whole-hearted votaries of change. An ideal to which
the world continuously approaches is, to these minds, too dead and
static to be inspiring. Not only the aspirations, but the ideal too,
must change and develop with the course of evolution; there must be no
fixed goal, but a continual fashioning of fresh needs by the impulse
which is life and which alone gives unity to the process.

Ever since the seventeenth century, those whom William James described
as the "tender-minded" have been engaged in a desperate struggle with
the mechanical view of the course of nature which physical science seems
to impose. A great part of the attractiveness of the classical tradition
was due to the partial escape from mechanism which it provided. But now,
with the influence of biology, the "tender-minded" believe that a more
radical escape is possible, sweeping aside not merely the laws of
physics, but the whole apparently immutable apparatus of logic, with its
fixed concepts, its general principles, and its reasonings which seem
able to compel even the most unwilling assent. The older kind of
teleology, therefore, which regarded the End as a fixed goal, already
partially visible, towards which we were gradually approaching, is
rejected by M. Bergson as not allowing enough for the absolute dominion
of change. After explaining why he does not accept mechanism, he
proceeds:[5]

"But radical finalism is quite as unacceptable, and for the same reason.
The doctrine of teleology, in its extreme form, as we find it in Leibniz
for example, implies that things and beings merely realise a programme
previously arranged. But if there is nothing unforeseen, no invention or
creation in the universe, time is useless again. As in the mechanistic
hypothesis, here again it is supposed that _all is given_. Finalism thus
understood is only inverted mechanism. It springs from the same
postulate, with this sole difference, that in the movement of our finite
intellects along successive things, whose successiveness is reduced to a
mere appearance, it holds in front of us the light with which it claims
to guide us, instead of putting it behind. It substitutes the attraction
of the future for the impulsion of the past. But succession remains none
the less a mere appearance, as indeed does movement itself. In the
doctrine of Leibniz, time is reduced to a confused perception, relative
to the human standpoint, a perception which would vanish, like a rising
mist, for a mind seated at the centre of things.

"Yet finalism is not, like mechanism, a doctrine with fixed rigid
outlines. It admits of as many inflections as we like. The mechanistic
philosophy is to be taken or left: it must be left if the least grain of
dust, by straying from the path foreseen by mechanics, should show the
slightest trace of spontaneity. The doctrine of final causes, on the
contrary, will never be definitively refuted. If one form of it be put
aside, it will take another. Its principle, which is essentially
psychological, is very flexible. It is so extensible, and thereby so
comprehensive, that one accepts something of it as soon as one rejects
pure mechanism. The theory we shall put forward in this book will
therefore necessarily partake of finalism to a certain extent."

  [5] _Creative Evolution_, English translation, p. 41.

M. Bergson's form of finalism depends upon his conception of life. Life,
in his philosophy, is a continuous stream, in which all divisions are
artificial and unreal. Separate things, beginnings and endings, are mere
convenient fictions: there is only smooth, unbroken transition. The
beliefs of to-day may count as true to-day, if they carry us along the
stream; but to-morrow they will be false, and must be replaced by new
beliefs to meet the new situation. All our thinking consists of
convenient fictions, imaginary congealings of the stream: reality flows
on in spite of all our fictions, and though it can be lived, it cannot
be conceived in thought. Somehow, without explicit statement, the
assurance is slipped in that the future, though we cannot foresee it,
will be better than the past or the present: the reader is like the
child who expects a sweet because it has been told to open its mouth and
shut its eyes. Logic, mathematics, physics disappear in this philosophy,
because they are too "static"; what is real is an impulse and movement
towards a goal which, like the rainbow, recedes as we advance, and makes
every place different when we reach it from what it appeared to be at a
distance.

Now I do not propose at present to enter upon a technical examination of
this philosophy. At present I wish to make only two criticisms of
it--first, that its truth does not follow from what science has rendered
probable concerning the facts of evolution, and secondly, that the
motives and interests which inspire it are so exclusively practical, and
the problems with which it deals are so special, that it can hardly be
regarded as really touching any of the questions that to my mind
constitute genuine philosophy.

(1) What biology has rendered probable is that the diverse species arose
by adaptation from a less differentiated ancestry. This fact is in
itself exceedingly interesting, but it is not the kind of fact from
which philosophical consequences follow. Philosophy is general, and
takes an impartial interest in all that exists. The changes suffered by
minute portions of matter on the earth's surface are very important to
us as active sentient beings; but to us as philosophers they have no
greater interest than other changes in portions of matter elsewhere. And
if the changes on the earth's surface during the last few millions of
years appear to our present ethical notions to be in the nature of a
progress, that gives no ground for believing that progress is a general
law of the universe. Except under the influence of desire, no one would
admit for a moment so crude a generalisation from such a tiny selection
of facts. What does result, not specially from biology, but from all the
sciences which deal with what exists, is that we cannot understand the
world unless we can understand change and continuity. This is even more
evident in physics than it is in biology. But the analysis of change and
continuity is not a problem upon which either physics or biology throws
any light: it is a problem of a new kind, belonging to a different kind
of study. The question whether evolutionism offers a true or a false
answer to this problem is not, therefore, a question to be solved by
appeals to particular facts, such as biology and physics reveal. In
assuming dogmatically a certain answer to this question, evolutionism
ceases to be scientific, yet it is only in touching on this question
that evolutionism reaches the subject-matter of philosophy. Evolutionism
thus consists of two parts: one not philosophical, but only a hasty
generalisation of the kind which the special sciences might hereafter
confirm or confute; the other not scientific, but a mere unsupported
dogma, belonging to philosophy by its subject-matter, but in no way
deducible from the facts upon which evolution relies.

(2) The predominant interest of evolutionism is in the question of human
destiny, or at least of the destiny of Life. It is more interested in
morality and happiness than in knowledge for its own sake. It must be
admitted that the same may be said of many other philosophies, and that
a desire for the kind of knowledge which philosophy really can give is
very rare. But if philosophy is to become scientific--and it is our
object to discover how this can be achieved--it is necessary first and
foremost that philosophers should acquire the disinterested intellectual
curiosity which characterises the genuine man of science. Knowledge
concerning the future--which is the kind of knowledge that must be
sought if we are to know about human destiny--is possible within certain
narrow limits. It is impossible to say how much the limits may be
enlarged with the progress of science. But what is evident is that any
proposition about the future belongs by its subject-matter to some
particular science, and is to be ascertained, if at all, by the methods
of that science. Philosophy is not a short cut to the same kind of
results as those of the other sciences: if it is to be a genuine study,
it must have a province of its own, and aim at results which the other
sciences can neither prove nor disprove.

The consideration that philosophy, if there is such a study, must
consist of propositions which could not occur in the other sciences, is
one which has very far-reaching consequences. All the questions which
have what is called a human interest--such, for example, as the question
of a future life--belong, at least in theory, to special sciences, and
are capable, at least in theory, of being decided by empirical evidence.
Philosophers have too often, in the past, permitted themselves to
pronounce on empirical questions, and found themselves, as a result, in
disastrous conflict with well-attested facts. We must, therefore,
renounce the hope that philosophy can promise satisfaction to our
mundane desires. What it can do, when it is purified from all practical
taint, is to help us to understand the general aspects of the world and
the logical analysis of familiar but complex things. Through this
achievement, by the suggestion of fruitful hypotheses, it may be
indirectly useful in other sciences, notably mathematics, physics, and
psychology. But a genuinely scientific philosophy cannot hope to appeal
to any except those who have the wish to understand, to escape from
intellectual bewilderment. It offers, in its own domain, the kind of
satisfaction which the other sciences offer. But it does not offer, or
attempt to offer, a solution of the problem of human destiny, or of the
destiny of the universe.

Evolutionism, if what has been said is true, is to be regarded as a
hasty generalisation from certain rather special facts, accompanied by a
dogmatic rejection of all attempts at analysis, and inspired by
interests which are practical rather than theoretical. In spite,
therefore, of its appeal to detailed results in various sciences, it
cannot be regarded as any more genuinely scientific than the classical
tradition which it has replaced. How philosophy is to be rendered
scientific, and what is the true subject-matter of philosophy, I shall
try to show first by examples of certain achieved results, and then more
generally. We will begin with the problem of the physical conceptions of
space and time and matter, which, as we have seen, are challenged by the
contentions of the evolutionists. That these conceptions stand in need
of reconstruction will be admitted, and is indeed increasingly urged by
physicists themselves. It will also be admitted that the reconstruction
must take more account of change and the universal flux than is done in
the older mechanics with its fundamental conception of an indestructible
matter. But I do not think the reconstruction required is on Bergsonian
lines, nor do I think that his rejection of logic can be anything but
harmful. I shall not, however, adopt the method of explicit controversy,
but rather the method of independent inquiry, starting from what, in a
pre-philosophic stage, appear to be facts, and keeping always as close
to these initial data as the requirements of consistency will permit.

Although explicit controversy is almost always fruitless in philosophy,
owing to the fact that no two philosophers ever understand one another,
yet it seems necessary to say something at the outset in justification
of the scientific as against the mystical attitude. Metaphysics, from
the first, has been developed by the union or the conflict of these two
attitudes. Among the earliest Greek philosophers, the Ionians were more
scientific and the Sicilians more mystical.[6] But among the latter,
Pythagoras, for example, was in himself a curious mixture of the two
tendencies: the scientific attitude led him to his proposition on
right-angled triangles, while his mystic insight showed him that it is
wicked to eat beans. Naturally enough, his followers divided into two
sects, the lovers of right-angled triangles and the abhorrers of beans;
but the former sect died out, leaving, however, a haunting flavour of
mysticism over much Greek mathematical speculation, and in particular
over Plato's views on mathematics. Plato, of course, embodies both the
scientific and the mystical attitudes in a higher form than his
predecessors, but the mystical attitude is distinctly the stronger of
the two, and secures ultimate victory whenever the conflict is sharp.
Plato, moreover, adopted from the Eleatics the device of using logic to
defeat common sense, and thus to leave the field clear for mysticism--a
device still employed in our own day by the adherents of the classical
tradition.

  [6] _Cf._ Burnet, _Early Greek Philosophy_, pp. 85 ff.

The logic used in defence of mysticism seems to me faulty as logic, and
in a later lecture I shall criticise it on this ground. But the more
thorough-going mystics do not employ logic, which they despise: they
appeal instead directly to the immediate deliverance of their insight.
Now, although fully developed mysticism is rare in the West, some
tincture of it colours the thoughts of many people, particularly as
regards matters on which they have strong convictions not based on
evidence. In all who seek passionately for the fugitive and difficult
goods, the conviction is almost irresistible that there is in the world
something deeper, more significant, than the multiplicity of little
facts chronicled and classified by science. Behind the veil of these
mundane things, they feel, something quite different obscurely shimmers,
shining forth clearly in the great moments of illumination, which alone
give anything worthy to be called real knowledge of truth. To seek such
moments, therefore, is to them the way of wisdom, rather than, like the
man of science, to observe coolly, to analyse without emotion, and to
accept without question the equal reality of the trivial and the
important.

Of the reality or unreality of the mystic's world I know nothing. I have
no wish to deny it, nor even to declare that the insight which reveals
it is not a genuine insight. What I do wish to maintain--and it is here
that the scientific attitude becomes imperative--is that insight,
untested and unsupported, is an insufficient guarantee of truth, in
spite of the fact that much of the most important truth is first
suggested by its means. It is common to speak of an opposition between
instinct and reason; in the eighteenth century, the opposition was drawn
in favour of reason, but under the influence of Rousseau and the
romantic movement instinct was given the preference, first by those who
rebelled against artificial forms of government and thought, and then,
as the purely rationalistic defence of traditional theology became
increasingly difficult, by all who felt in science a menace to creeds
which they associated with a spiritual outlook on life and the world.
Bergson, under the name of "intuition," has raised instinct to the
position of sole arbiter of metaphysical truth. But in fact the
opposition of instinct and reason is mainly illusory. Instinct,
intuition, or insight is what first leads to the beliefs which
subsequent reason confirms or confutes; but the confirmation, where it
is possible, consists, in the last analysis, of agreement with other
beliefs no less instinctive. Reason is a harmonising, controlling force
rather than a creative one. Even in the most purely logical realms, it
is insight that first arrives at what is new.

Where instinct and reason do sometimes conflict is in regard to single
beliefs, held instinctively, and held with such determination that no
degree of inconsistency with other beliefs leads to their abandonment.
Instinct, like all human faculties, is liable to error. Those in whom
reason is weak are often unwilling to admit this as regards themselves,
though all admit it in regard to others. Where instinct is least liable
to error is in practical matters as to which right judgment is a help to
survival; friendship and hostility in others, for instance, are often
felt with extraordinary discrimination through very careful disguises.
But even in such matters a wrong impression may be given by reserve or
flattery; and in matters less directly practical, such as philosophy
deals with, very strong instinctive beliefs may be wholly mistaken, as
we may come to know through their perceived inconsistency with other
equally strong beliefs. It is such considerations that necessitate the
harmonising mediation of reason, which tests our beliefs by their mutual
compatibility, and examines, in doubtful cases, the possible sources of
error on the one side and on the other. In this there is no opposition
to instinct as a whole, but only to blind reliance upon some one
interesting aspect of instinct to the exclusion of other more
commonplace but not less trustworthy aspects. It is such onesidedness,
not instinct itself, that reason aims at correcting.

These more or less trite maxims may be illustrated by application to
Bergson's advocacy of "intuition" as against "intellect." There are, he
says, "two profoundly different ways of knowing a thing. The first
implies that we move round the object; the second that we enter into it.
The first depends on the point of view at which we are placed and on the
symbols by which we express ourselves. The second neither depends on a
point of view nor relies on any symbol. The first kind of knowledge may
be said to stop at the _relative_; the second, in those cases where it
is possible, to attain the _absolute_."[7] The second of these, which is
intuition, is, he says, "the kind of intellectual _sympathy_ by which
one places oneself within an object in order to coincide with what is
unique in it and therefore inexpressible" (p. 6). In illustration, he
mentions self-knowledge: "there is one reality, at least, which we all
seize from within, by intuition and not by simple analysis. It is our
own personality in its flowing through time--our self which endures"
(p. 8). The rest of Bergson's philosophy consists in reporting, through
the imperfect medium of words, the knowledge gained by intuition, and
the consequent complete condemnation of all the pretended knowledge
derived from science and common sense.

  [7] _Introduction to Metaphysics_, p. 1.

This procedure, since it takes sides in a conflict of instinctive
beliefs, stands in need of justification by proving the greater
trustworthiness of the beliefs on one side than of those on the other.
Bergson attempts this justification in two ways--first, by explaining
that intellect is a purely practical faculty designed to secure
biological success; secondly, by mentioning remarkable feats of instinct
in animals, and by pointing out characteristics of the world which,
though intuition can apprehend them, are baffling to intellect as he
interprets it.

Of Bergson's theory that intellect is a purely practical faculty
developed in the struggle for survival, and not a source of true
beliefs, we may say, first, that it is only through intellect that we
know of the struggle for survival and of the biological ancestry of man:
if the intellect is misleading, the whole of this merely inferred
history is presumably untrue. If, on the other hand, we agree with M.
Bergson in thinking that evolution took place as Darwin believed, then
it is not only intellect, but all our faculties, that have been
developed under the stress of practical utility. Intuition is seen at
its best where it is directly useful--for example, in regard to other
people's characters and dispositions. Bergson apparently holds that
capacity for this kind of knowledge is less explicable by the struggle
for existence than, for example, capacity for pure mathematics. Yet the
savage deceived by false friendship is likely to pay for his mistake
with his life; whereas even in the most civilised societies men are not
put to death for mathematical incompetence. All the most striking of his
instances of intuition in animals have a very direct survival value. The
fact is, of course, that both intuition and intellect have been
developed because they are useful, and that, speaking broadly, they are
useful when they give truth and become harmful when they give falsehood.
Intellect, in civilised man, like artistic capacity, has occasionally
been developed beyond the point where it is useful to the individual;
intuition, on the other hand, seems on the whole to diminish as
civilisation increases. Speaking broadly, it is greater in children than
in adults, in the uneducated than in the educated. Probably in dogs it
exceeds anything to be found in human beings. But those who find in
these facts a recommendation of intuition ought to return to running
wild in the woods, dyeing themselves with woad and living on hips and
haws.

Let us next examine whether intuition possesses any such infallibility
as Bergson claims for it. The best instance of it, according to him, is
our acquaintance with ourselves; yet self-knowledge is proverbially rare
and difficult. Most men, for example, have in their nature meannesses,
vanities, and envies of which they are quite unconscious, though even
their best friends can perceive them without any difficulty. It is true
that intuition has a convincingness which is lacking to intellect: while
it is present, it is almost impossible to doubt its truth. But if it
should appear, on examination, to be at least as fallible as intellect,
its greater subjective certainty becomes a demerit, making it only the
more irresistibly deceptive. Apart from self-knowledge, one of the most
notable examples of intuition is the knowledge people believe themselves
to possess of those with whom they are in love: the wall between
different personalities seems to become transparent, and people think
they see into another soul as into their own. Yet deception in such
cases is constantly practised with success; and even where there is no
intentional deception, experience gradually proves, as a rule, that the
supposed insight was illusory, and that the slower, more groping methods
of the intellect are in the long run more reliable.

Bergson maintains that intellect can only deal with things in so far as
they resemble what has been experienced in the past, while intuition has
the power of apprehending the uniqueness and novelty that always belong
to each fresh moment. That there is something unique and new at every
moment, is certainly true; it is also true that this cannot be fully
expressed by means of intellectual concepts. Only direct acquaintance
can give knowledge of what is unique and new. But direct acquaintance of
this kind is given fully in sensation, and does not require, so far as I
can see, any special faculty of intuition for its apprehension. It is
neither intellect nor intuition, but sensation, that supplies new data;
but when the data are new in any remarkable manner, intellect is much
more capable of dealing with them than intuition would be. The hen with
a brood of ducklings no doubt has intuitions which seem to place her
inside them, and not merely to know them analytically; but when the
ducklings take to the water, the whole apparent intuition is seen to be
illusory, and the hen is left helpless on the shore. Intuition, in fact,
is an aspect and development of instinct, and, like all instinct, is
admirable in those customary surroundings which have moulded the habits
of the animal in question, but totally incompetent as soon as the
surroundings are changed in a way which demands some non-habitual mode
of action.

The theoretical understanding of the world, which is the aim of
philosophy, is not a matter of great practical importance to animals, or
to savages, or even to most civilised men. It is hardly to be supposed,
therefore, that the rapid, rough and ready methods of instinct or
intuition will find in this field a favourable ground for their
application. It is the older kinds of activity, which bring out our
kinship with remote generations of animal and semi-human ancestors, that
show intuition at its best. In such matters as self-preservation and
love, intuition will act sometimes (though not always) with a swiftness
and precision which are astonishing to the critical intellect. But
philosophy is not one of the pursuits which illustrate our affinity with
the past: it is a highly refined, highly civilised pursuit, demanding,
for its success, a certain liberation from the life of instinct, and
even, at times, a certain aloofness from all mundane hopes and fears. It
is not in philosophy, therefore, that we can hope to see intuition at
its best. On the contrary, since the true objects of philosophy, and the
habits of thought demanded for their apprehension, are strange, unusual,
and remote, it is here, more almost than anywhere else, that intellect
proves superior to intuition, and that quick unanalysed convictions are
least deserving of uncritical acceptance.

Before embarking upon the somewhat difficult and abstract discussions
which lie before us, it will be well to take a survey of the hopes we
may retain and the hopes we must abandon. The hope of satisfaction to
our more human desires--the hope of demonstrating that the world has
this or that desirable ethical characteristic--is not one which, so far
as I can see, philosophy can do anything whatever to satisfy. The
difference between a good world and a bad one is a difference in the
particular characteristics of the particular things that exist in these
worlds: it is not a sufficiently abstract difference to come within the
province of philosophy. Love and hate, for example, are ethical
opposites, but to philosophy they are closely analogous attitudes
towards objects. The general form and structure of those attitudes
towards objects which constitute mental phenomena is a problem for
philosophy; but the difference between love and hate is not a difference
of form or structure, and therefore belongs rather to the special
science of psychology than to philosophy. Thus the ethical interests
which have often inspired philosophers must remain in the background:
some kind of ethical interest may inspire the whole study, but none must
obtrude in the detail or be expected in the special results which are
sought.

If this view seems at first sight disappointing, we may remind ourselves
that a similar change has been found necessary in all the other
sciences. The physicist or chemist is not now required to prove the
ethical importance of his ions or atoms; the biologist is not expected
to prove the utility of the plants or animals which he dissects. In
pre-scientific ages this was not the case. Astronomy, for example, was
studied because men believed in astrology: it was thought that the
movements of the planets had the most direct and important bearing upon
the lives of human beings. Presumably, when this belief decayed and the
disinterested study of astronomy began, many who had found astrology
absorbingly interesting decided that astronomy had too little human
interest to be worthy of study. Physics, as it appears in Plato's
_Timus_ for example, is full of ethical notions: it is an essential
part of its purpose to show that the earth is worthy of admiration. The
modern physicist, on the contrary, though he has no wish to deny that
the earth is admirable, is not concerned, as physicist, with its ethical
attributes: he is merely concerned to find out facts, not to consider
whether they are good or bad. In psychology, the scientific attitude is
even more recent and more difficult than in the physical sciences: it is
natural to consider that human nature is either good or bad, and to
suppose that the difference between good and bad, so all-important in
practice, must be important in theory also. It is only during the last
century that an ethically neutral science of psychology has grown up;
and here too ethical neutrality has been essential to scientific
success.

In philosophy, hitherto, ethical neutrality has been seldom sought and
hardly ever achieved. Men have remembered their wishes, and have judged
philosophies in relation to their wishes. Driven from the particular
sciences, the belief that the notions of good and evil must afford a key
to the understanding of the world has sought a refuge in philosophy. But
even from this last refuge, if philosophy is not to remain a set of
pleasing dreams, this belief must be driven forth. It is a commonplace
that happiness is not best achieved by those who seek it directly; and
it would seem that the same is true of the good. In thought, at any
rate, those who forget good and evil and seek only to know the facts are
more likely to achieve good than those who view the world through the
distorting medium of their own desires.

The immense extension of our knowledge of facts in recent times has had,
as it had in the Renaissance, two effects upon the general intellectual
outlook. On the one hand, it has made men distrustful of the truth of
wide, ambitious systems: theories come and go swiftly, each serving, for
a moment, to classify known facts and promote the search for new ones,
but each in turn proving inadequate to deal with the new facts when they
have been found. Even those who invent the theories do not, in science,
regard them as anything but a temporary makeshift. The ideal of an
all-embracing synthesis, such as the Middle Ages believed themselves to
have attained, recedes further and further beyond the limits of what
seems feasible. In such a world, as in the world of Montaigne, nothing
seems worth while except the discovery of more and more facts, each in
turn the deathblow to some cherished theory; the ordering intellect
grows weary, and becomes slovenly through despair.

On the other hand, the new facts have brought new powers; man's physical
control over natural forces has been increasing with unexampled
rapidity, and promises to increase in the future beyond all easily
assignable limits. Thus alongside of despair as regards ultimate theory
there is an immense optimism as regards practice: what man can _do_
seems almost boundless. The old fixed limits of human power, such as
death, or the dependence of the race on an equilibrium of cosmic forces,
are forgotten, and no hard facts are allowed to break in upon the dream
of omnipotence. No philosophy is tolerated which sets bounds to man's
capacity of gratifying his wishes; and thus the very despair of theory
is invoked to silence every whisper of doubt as regards the
possibilities of practical achievement.

In the welcoming of new fact, and in the suspicion of dogmatism as
regards the universe at large, the modern spirit should, I think, be
accepted as wholly an advance. But both in its practical pretensions and
in its theoretical despair it seems to me to go too far. Most of what is
greatest in man is called forth in response to the thwarting of his
hopes by immutable natural obstacles; by the pretence of omnipotence, he
becomes trivial and a little absurd. And on the theoretical side,
ultimate metaphysical truth, though less all-embracing and harder of
attainment than it appeared to some philosophers in the past, can, I
believe, be discovered by those who are willing to combine the
hopefulness, patience, and open-mindedness of science with something of
the Greek feeling for beauty in the abstract world of logic and for the
ultimate intrinsic value in the contemplation of truth.

The philosophy, therefore, which is to be genuinely inspired by the
scientific spirit, must deal with somewhat dry and abstract matters, and
must not hope to find an answer to the practical problems of life. To
those who wish to understand much of what has in the past been most
difficult and obscure in the constitution of the universe, it has great
rewards to offer--triumphs as noteworthy as those of Newton and Darwin,
and as important in the long run, for the moulding of our mental habits.
And it brings with it--as a new and powerful method of investigation
always does--a sense of power and a hope of progress more reliable and
better grounded than any that rests on hasty and fallacious
generalisation as to the nature of the universe at large. Many hopes
which inspired philosophers in the past it cannot claim to fulfil; but
other hopes, more purely intellectual, it can satisfy more fully than
former ages could have deemed possible for human minds.




LECTURE II

LOGIC AS THE ESSENCE OF PHILOSOPHY


The topics we discussed in our first lecture, and the topics we shall
discuss later, all reduce themselves, in so far as they are genuinely
philosophical, to problems of logic. This is not due to any accident,
but to the fact that every philosophical problem, when it is subjected
to the necessary analysis and purification, is found either to be not
really philosophical at all, or else to be, in the sense in which we are
using the word, logical. But as the word "logic" is never used in the
same sense by two different philosophers, some explanation of what I
mean by the word is indispensable at the outset.

Logic, in the Middle Ages, and down to the present day in teaching,
meant no more than a scholastic collection of technical terms and rules
of syllogistic inference. Aristotle had spoken, and it was the part of
humbler men merely to repeat the lesson after him. The trivial nonsense
embodied in this tradition is still set in examinations, and defended by
eminent authorities as an excellent "propdeutic," _i.e._ a training in
those habits of solemn humbug which are so great a help in later life.
But it is not this that I mean to praise in saying that all philosophy
is logic. Ever since the beginning of the seventeenth century, all
vigorous minds that have concerned themselves with inference have
abandoned the medival tradition, and in one way or other have widened
the scope of logic.

The first extension was the introduction of the inductive method by
Bacon and Galileo--by the former in a theoretical and largely mistaken
form, by the latter in actual use in establishing the foundations of
modern physics and astronomy. This is probably the only extension of the
old logic which has become familiar to the general educated public. But
induction, important as it is when regarded as a method of
investigation, does not seem to remain when its work is done: in the
final form of a perfected science, it would seem that everything ought
to be deductive. If induction remains at all, which is a difficult
question, it will remain merely as one of the principles according to
which deductions are effected. Thus the ultimate result of the
introduction of the inductive method seems not the creation of a new
kind of non-deductive reasoning, but rather the widening of the scope of
deduction by pointing out a way of deducing which is certainly not
syllogistic, and does not fit into the medival scheme.

The question of the scope and validity of induction is of great
difficulty, and of great importance to our knowledge. Take such a
question as, "Will the sun rise to-morrow?" Our first instinctive
feeling is that we have abundant reason for saying that it will, because
it has risen on so many previous mornings. Now, I do not myself know
whether this does afford a ground or not, but I am willing to suppose
that it does. The question which then arises is: What is the principle
of inference by which we pass from past sunrises to future ones? The
answer given by Mill is that the inference depends upon the law of
causation. Let us suppose this to be true; then what is the reason for
believing in the law of causation? There are broadly three possible
answers: (1) that it is itself known _a priori_; (2) that it is a
postulate; (3) that it is an empirical generalisation from past
instances in which it has been found to hold. The theory that causation
is known _a priori_ cannot be definitely refuted, but it can be rendered
very unplausible by the mere process of formulating the law exactly, and
thereby showing that it is immensely more complicated and less obvious
than is generally supposed. The theory that causation is a postulate,
_i.e._ that it is something which we choose to assert although we know
that it is very likely false, is also incapable of refutation; but it is
plainly also incapable of justifying any use of the law in inference. We
are thus brought to the theory that the law is an empirical
generalisation, which is the view held by Mill.

But if so, how are empirical generalisations to be justified? The
evidence in their favour cannot be empirical, since we wish to argue
from what has been observed to what has not been observed, which can
only be done by means of some known relation of the observed and the
unobserved; but the unobserved, by definition, is not known empirically,
and therefore its relation to the observed, if known at all, must be
known independently of empirical evidence. Let us see what Mill says on
this subject.

According to Mill, the law of causation is proved by an admittedly
fallible process called "induction by simple enumeration." This process,
he says, "consists in ascribing the nature of general truths to all
propositions which are true in every instance that we happen to know
of."[8] As regards its fallibility, he asserts that "the precariousness
of the method of simple enumeration is in an inverse ratio to the
largeness of the generalisation. The process is delusive and
insufficient, exactly in proportion as the subject-matter of the
observation is special and limited in extent. As the sphere widens, this
unscientific method becomes less and less liable to mislead; and the
most universal class of truths, the law of causation for instance, and
the principles of number and of geometry, are duly and satisfactorily
proved by that method alone, nor are they susceptible of any other
proof."[9]

  [8] _Logic_, book iii., chapter iii.,  2.

  [9] Book iii., chapter xxi.,  3.

In the above statement, there are two obvious lacun: (1) How is the
method of simple enumeration itself justified? (2) What logical
principle, if any, covers the same ground as this method, without being
liable to its failures? Let us take the second question first.

A method of proof which, when used as directed, gives sometimes truth
and sometimes falsehood--as the method of simple enumeration does--is
obviously not a valid method, for validity demands invariable truth.
Thus, if simple enumeration is to be rendered valid, it must not be
stated as Mill states it. We shall have to say, at most, that the data
render the result _probable_. Causation holds, we shall say, in every
instance we have been able to test; therefore it _probably_ holds in
untested instances. There are terrible difficulties in the notion of
probability, but we may ignore them at present. We thus have what at
least _may_ be a logical principle, since it is without exception. If a
proposition is true in every instance that we happen to know of, and if
the instances are very numerous, then, we shall say, it becomes very
probable, on the data, that it will be true in any further instance.
This is not refuted by the fact that what we declare to be probable does
not always happen, for an event may be probable on the data and yet not
occur. It is, however, obviously capable of further analysis, and of
more exact statement. We shall have to say something like this: that
every instance of a proposition[10] being true increases the probability
of its being true in a fresh instance, and that a sufficient number of
favourable instances will, in the absence of instances to the contrary,
make the probability of the truth of a fresh instance approach
indefinitely near to certainty. Some such principle as this is required
if the method of simple enumeration is to be valid.

  [10] Or rather a propositional function.

But this brings us to our other question, namely, how is our principle
known to be true? Obviously, since it is required to justify induction,
it cannot be proved by induction; since it goes beyond the empirical
data, it cannot be proved by them alone; since it is required to justify
all inferences from empirical data to what goes beyond them, it cannot
itself be even rendered in any degree probable by such data. Hence, _if_
it is known, it is not known by experience, but independently of
experience. I do not say that any such principle is known: I only say
that it is required to justify the inferences from experience which
empiricists allow, and that it cannot itself be justified
empirically.[11]

  [11] The subject of causality and induction will be discussed again in
  Lecture VIII.

A similar conclusion can be proved by similar arguments concerning any
other logical principle. Thus logical knowledge is not derivable from
experience alone, and the empiricist's philosophy can therefore not be
accepted in its entirety, in spite of its excellence in many matters
which lie outside logic.

Hegel and his followers widened the scope of logic in quite a different
way--a way which I believe to be fallacious, but which requires
discussion if only to show how their conception of logic differs from
the conception which I wish to advocate. In their writings, logic is
practically identical with metaphysics. In broad outline, the way this
came about is as follows. Hegel believed that, by means of _a priori_
reasoning, it could be shown that the world _must_ have various
important and interesting characteristics, since any world without these
characteristics would be impossible and self-contradictory. Thus what he
calls "logic" is an investigation of the nature of the universe, in so
far as this can be inferred merely from the principle that the universe
must be logically self-consistent. I do not myself believe that from
this principle alone anything of importance can be inferred as regards
the existing universe. But, however that may be, I should not regard
Hegel's reasoning, even if it were valid, as properly belonging to
logic: it would rather be an application of logic to the actual world.
Logic itself would be concerned rather with such questions as what
self-consistency is, which Hegel, so far as I know, does not discuss.
And though he criticises the traditional logic, and professes to replace
it by an improved logic of his own, there is some sense in which the
traditional logic, with all its faults, is uncritically and
unconsciously assumed throughout his reasoning. It is not in the
direction advocated by him, it seems to me, that the reform of logic is
to be sought, but by a more fundamental, more patient, and less
ambitious investigation into the presuppositions which his system shares
with those of most other philosophers.

The way in which, as it seems to me, Hegel's system assumes the ordinary
logic which it subsequently criticises, is exemplified by the general
conception of "categories" with which he operates throughout. This
conception is, I think, essentially a product of logical confusion, but
it seems in some way to stand for the conception of "qualities of
Reality as a whole." Mr Bradley has worked out a theory according to
which, in all judgment, we are ascribing a predicate to Reality as a
whole; and this theory is derived from Hegel. Now the traditional logic
holds that every proposition ascribes a predicate to a subject, and from
this it easily follows that there can be only one subject, the Absolute,
for if there were two, the proposition that there were two would not
ascribe a predicate to either. Thus Hegel's doctrine, that philosophical
propositions must be of the form, "the Absolute is such-and-such,"
depends upon the traditional belief in the universality of the
subject-predicate form. This belief, being traditional, scarcely
self-conscious, and not supposed to be important, operates underground,
and is assumed in arguments which, like the refutation of relations,
appear at first sight such as to establish its truth. This is the most
important respect in which Hegel uncritically assumes the traditional
logic. Other less important respects--though important enough to be the
source of such essentially Hegelian conceptions as the "concrete
universal" and the "union of identity in difference"--will be found
where he explicitly deals with formal logic.[12]

  [12] See the translation by H. S. Macran, _Hegel's Doctrine of Formal
  Logic_, Oxford, 1912. Hegel's argument in this portion of his "Logic"
  depends throughout upon confusing the "is" of predication, as in
  "Socrates is mortal," with the "is" of identity, as in "Socrates is
  the philosopher who drank the hemlock." Owing to this confusion, he
  thinks that "Socrates" and "mortal" must be identical. Seeing that
  they are different, he does not infer, as others would, that there is
  a mistake somewhere, but that they exhibit "identity in difference."
  Again, Socrates is particular, "mortal" is universal. Therefore, he
  says, since Socrates is mortal, it follows that the particular is the
  universal--taking the "is" to be throughout expressive of identity.
  But to say "the particular is the universal" is self-contradictory.
  Again Hegel does not suspect a mistake but proceeds to synthesise
  particular and universal in the individual, or concrete universal.
  This is an example of how, for want of care at the start, vast and
  imposing systems of philosophy are built upon stupid and trivial
  confusions, which, but for the almost incredible fact that they are
  unintentional, one would be tempted to characterise as puns.

There is quite another direction in which a large technical development
of logic has taken place: I mean the direction of what is called
logistic or mathematical logic. This kind of logic is mathematical in
two different senses: it is itself a branch of mathematics, and it is
the logic which is specially applicable to other more traditional
branches of mathematics. Historically, it began as _merely_ a branch of
mathematics: its special applicability to other branches is a more
recent development. In both respects, it is the fulfilment of a hope
which Leibniz cherished throughout his life, and pursued with all the
ardour of his amazing intellectual energy. Much of his work on this
subject has been published recently, since his discoveries have been
remade by others; but none was published by him, because his results
persisted in contradicting certain points in the traditional doctrine of
the syllogism. We now know that on these points the traditional doctrine
is wrong, but respect for Aristotle prevented Leibniz from realising
that this was possible.[13]

  [13] _Cf._ Couturat, _La Logique de Leibniz_, pp. 361, 386.

The modern development of mathematical logic dates from Boole's _Laws of
Thought_ (1854). But in him and his successors, before Peano and Frege,
the only thing really achieved, apart from certain details, was the
invention of a mathematical symbolism for deducing consequences from the
premisses which the newer methods shared with those of Aristotle. This
subject has considerable interest as an independent branch of
mathematics, but it has very little to do with real logic. The first
serious advance in real logic since the time of the Greeks was made
independently by Peano and Frege--both mathematicians. They both arrived
at their logical results by an analysis of mathematics. Traditional
logic regarded the two propositions, "Socrates is mortal" and "All men
are mortal," as being of the same form;[14] Peano and Frege showed that
they are utterly different in form. The philosophical importance of
logic may be illustrated by the fact that this confusion--which is still
committed by most writers--obscured not only the whole study of the
forms of judgment and inference, but also the relations of things to
their qualities, of concrete existence to abstract concepts, and of the
world of sense to the world of Platonic ideas. Peano and Frege, who
pointed out the error, did so for technical reasons, and applied their
logic mainly to technical developments; but the philosophical importance
of the advance which they made is impossible to exaggerate.

  [14] It was often recognised that there was _some_ difference between
  them, but it was not recognised that the difference is fundamental,
  and of very great importance.

Mathematical logic, even in its most modern form, is not _directly_ of
philosophical importance except in its beginnings. After the beginnings,
it belongs rather to mathematics than to philosophy. Of its beginnings,
which are the only part of it that can properly be called
_philosophical_ logic, I shall speak shortly. But even the later
developments, though not directly philosophical, will be found of great
indirect use in philosophising. They enable us to deal easily with more
abstract conceptions than merely verbal reasoning can enumerate; they
suggest fruitful hypotheses which otherwise could hardly be thought of;
and they enable us to see quickly what is the smallest store of
materials with which a given logical or scientific edifice can be
constructed. Not only Frege's theory of number, which we shall deal with
in Lecture VII., but the whole theory of physical concepts which will be
outlined in our next two lectures, is inspired by mathematical logic,
and could never have been imagined without it.

In both these cases, and in many others, we shall appeal to a certain
principle called "the principle of abstraction." This principle, which
might equally well be called "the principle which dispenses with
abstraction," and is one which clears away incredible accumulations of
metaphysical lumber, was directly suggested by mathematical logic, and
could hardly have been proved or practically used without its help. The
principle will be explained in our fourth lecture, but its use may be
briefly indicated in advance. When a group of objects have that kind of
similarity which we are inclined to attribute to possession of a common
quality, the principle in question shows that membership of the group
will serve all the purposes of the supposed common quality, and that
therefore, unless some common quality is actually known, the group or
class of similar objects may be used to replace the common quality,
which need not be assumed to exist. In this and other ways, the indirect
uses of even the later parts of mathematical logic are very great; but
it is now time to turn our attention to its philosophical foundations.

In every proposition and in every inference there is, besides the
particular subject-matter concerned, a certain _form_, a way in which
the constituents of the proposition or inference are put together. If I
say, "Socrates is mortal," "Jones is angry," "The sun is hot," there is
something in common in these three cases, something indicated by the
word "is." What is in common is the _form_ of the proposition, not an
actual constituent. If I say a number of things about Socrates--that he
was an Athenian, that he married Xantippe, that he drank the
hemlock--there is a common constituent, namely Socrates, in all the
propositions I enunciate, but they have diverse forms. If, on the other
hand, I take any one of these propositions and replace its constituents,
one at a time, by other constituents, the form remains constant, but no
constituent remains. Take (say) the series of propositions, "Socrates
drank the hemlock," "Coleridge drank the hemlock," "Coleridge drank
opium," "Coleridge ate opium." The form remains unchanged throughout
this series, but all the constituents are altered. Thus form is not
another constituent, but is the way the constituents are put together.
It is forms, in this sense, that are the proper object of philosophical
logic.

It is obvious that the knowledge of logical forms is something quite
different from knowledge of existing things. The form of "Socrates drank
the hemlock" is not an existing thing like Socrates or the hemlock, nor
does it even have that close relation to existing things that drinking
has. It is something altogether more abstract and remote. We might
understand all the separate words of a sentence without understanding
the sentence: if a sentence is long and complicated, this is apt to
happen. In such a case we have knowledge of the constituents, but not of
the form. We may also have knowledge of the form without having
knowledge of the constituents. If I say, "Rorarius drank the hemlock,"
those among you who have never heard of Rorarius (supposing there are
any) will understand the form, without having knowledge of all the
constituents. In order to understand a sentence, it is necessary to have
knowledge both of the constituents and of the particular instance of the
form. It is in this way that a sentence conveys information, since it
tells us that certain known objects are related according to a certain
known form. Thus some kind of knowledge of logical forms, though with
most people it is not explicit, is involved in all understanding of
discourse. It is the business of philosophical logic to extract this
knowledge from its concrete integuments, and to render it explicit and
pure.

In all inference, form alone is essential: the particular subject-matter
is irrelevant except as securing the truth of the premisses. This is one
reason for the great importance of logical form. When I say, "Socrates
was a man, all men are mortal, therefore Socrates was mortal," the
connection of premisses and conclusion does not in any way depend upon
its being Socrates and man and mortality that I am mentioning. The
general form of the inference may be expressed in some such words as,
"If a thing has a certain property, and whatever has this property has a
certain other property, then the thing in question also has that other
property." Here no particular things or properties are mentioned: the
proposition is absolutely general. All inferences, when stated fully,
are instances of propositions having this kind of generality. If they
seem to depend upon the subject-matter otherwise than as regards the
truth of the premisses, that is because the premisses have not been all
explicitly stated. In logic, it is a waste of time to deal with
inferences concerning particular cases: we deal throughout with
completely general and purely formal implications, leaving it to other
sciences to discover when the hypotheses are verified and when they are
not.

But the forms of propositions giving rise to inferences are not the
simplest forms: they are always hypothetical, stating that if one
proposition is true, then so is another. Before considering inference,
therefore, logic must consider those simpler forms which inference
presupposes. Here the traditional logic failed completely: it believed
that there was only one form of simple proposition (_i.e._ of
proposition not stating a relation between two or more other
propositions), namely, the form which ascribes a predicate to a subject.
This is the appropriate form in assigning the qualities of a given
thing--we may say "this thing is round, and red, and so on." Grammar
favours this form, but philosophically it is so far from universal that
it is not even very common. If we say "this thing is bigger than that,"
we are not assigning a mere quality of "this," but a relation of "this"
and "that." We might express the same fact by saying "that thing is
smaller than this," where grammatically the subject is changed. Thus
propositions stating that two things have a certain relation have a
different form from subject-predicate propositions, and the failure to
perceive this difference or to allow for it has been the source of many
errors in traditional metaphysics.

The belief or unconscious conviction that all propositions are of the
subject-predicate form--in other words, that every fact consists in some
thing having some quality--has rendered most philosophers incapable of
giving any account of the world of science and daily life. If they had
been honestly anxious to give such an account, they would probably have
discovered their error very quickly; but most of them were less anxious
to understand the world of science and daily life, than to convict it of
unreality in the interests of a super-sensible "real" world. Belief in
the unreality of the world of sense arises with irresistible force in
certain moods--moods which, I imagine, have some simple physiological
basis, but are none the less powerfully persuasive. The conviction born
of these moods is the source of most mysticism and of most metaphysics.
When the emotional intensity of such a mood subsides, a man who is in
the habit of reasoning will search for logical reasons in favour of the
belief which he finds in himself. But since the belief already exists,
he will be very hospitable to any reason that suggests itself. The
paradoxes apparently proved by his logic are really the paradoxes of
mysticism, and are the goal which he feels his logic must reach if it is
to be in accordance with insight. It is in this way that logic has been
pursued by those of the great philosophers who were mystics--notably
Plato, Spinoza, and Hegel. But since they usually took for granted the
supposed insight of the mystic emotion, their logical doctrines were
presented with a certain dryness, and were believed by their disciples
to be quite independent of the sudden illumination from which they
sprang. Nevertheless their origin clung to them, and they remained--to
borrow a useful word from Mr Santayana--"malicious" in regard to the
world of science and common sense. It is only so that we can account for
the complacency with which philosophers have accepted the inconsistency
of their doctrines with all the common and scientific facts which seem
best established and most worthy of belief.

The logic of mysticism shows, as is natural, the defects which are
inherent in anything malicious. While the mystic mood is dominant, the
need of logic is not felt; as the mood fades, the impulse to logic
reasserts itself, but with a desire to retain the vanishing insight, or
at least to prove that it _was_ insight, and that what seems to
contradict it is illusion. The logic which thus arises is not quite
disinterested or candid, and is inspired by a certain hatred of the
daily world to which it is to be applied. Such an attitude naturally
does not tend to the best results. Everyone knows that to read an author
simply in order to refute him is not the way to understand him; and to
read the book of Nature with a conviction that it is all illusion is
just as unlikely to lead to understanding. If our logic is to find the
common world intelligible, it must not be hostile, but must be inspired
by a genuine acceptance such as is not usually to be found among
metaphysicians.

Traditional logic, since it holds that all propositions have the
subject-predicate form, is unable to admit the reality of relations: all
relations, it maintains, must be reduced to properties of the apparently
related terms. There are many ways of refuting this opinion; one of the
easiest is derived from the consideration of what are called
"asymmetrical" relations. In order to explain this, I will first explain
two independent ways of classifying relations.

Some relations, when they hold between A and B, also hold between B and
A. Such, for example, is the relation "brother or sister." If A is a
brother or sister of B, then B is a brother or sister of A. Such again
is any kind of similarity, say similarity of colour. Any kind of
dissimilarity is also of this kind: if the colour of A is unlike the
colour of B, then the colour of B is unlike the colour of A. Relations
of this sort are called _symmetrical_. Thus a relation is symmetrical
if, whenever it holds between A and B, it also holds between B and A.

All relations that are not symmetrical are called _non-symmetrical_.
Thus "brother" is non-symmetrical, because, if A is a brother of B, it
may happen that B is a _sister_ of A.

A relation is called _asymmetrical_ when, if it holds between A and B,
it _never_ holds between B and A. Thus husband, father, grandfather,
etc., are asymmetrical relations. So are _before_, _after_, _greater_,
_above_, _to the right of_, etc. All the relations that give rise to
series are of this kind.

Classification into symmetrical, asymmetrical, and merely
non-symmetrical relations is the first of the two classifications we had
to consider. The second is into transitive, intransitive, and merely
non-transitive relations, which are defined as follows.

A relation is said to be _transitive_, if, whenever it holds between A
and B and also between B and C, it holds between A and C. Thus _before_,
_after_, _greater_, _above_ are transitive. All relations giving rise to
series are transitive, but so are many others. The transitive relations
just mentioned were asymmetrical, but many transitive relations are
symmetrical--for instance, equality in any respect, exact identity of
colour, being equally numerous (as applied to collections), and so on.

A relation is said to be _non-transitive_ whenever it is not transitive.
Thus "brother" is non-transitive, because a brother of one's brother may
be oneself. All kinds of dissimilarity are non-transitive.

A relation is said to be _intransitive_ when, if A has the relation to
B, and B to C, A never has it to C. Thus "father" is intransitive. So is
such a relation as "one inch taller" or "one year later."

Let us now, in the light of this classification, return to the question
whether all relations can be reduced to predications.

In the case of symmetrical relations--_i.e._ relations which, if they
hold between A and B, also hold between B and A--some kind of
plausibility can be given to this doctrine. A symmetrical relation which
is transitive, such as equality, can be regarded as expressing
possession of some common property, while one which is not transitive,
such as inequality, can be regarded as expressing possession of
different properties. But when we come to asymmetrical relations, such
as before and after, greater and less, etc., the attempt to reduce them
to properties becomes obviously impossible. When, for example, two
things are merely known to be unequal, without our knowing which is
greater, we may say that the inequality results from their having
different magnitudes, because inequality is a symmetrical relation; but
to say that when one thing is _greater_ than another, and not merely
unequal to it, that means that they have different magnitudes, is
formally incapable of explaining the facts. For if the other thing had
been greater than the one, the magnitudes would also have been
different, though the fact to be explained would not have been the same.
Thus mere _difference_ of magnitude is not _all_ that is involved,
since, if it were, there would be no difference between one thing being
greater than another, and the other being greater than the one. We shall
have to say that the one magnitude is _greater_ than the other, and thus
we shall have failed to get rid of the relation "greater." In short,
both possession of the same property and possession of different
properties are _symmetrical_ relations, and therefore cannot account for
the existence of _asymmetrical_ relations.

Asymmetrical relations are involved in all series--in space and time,
greater and less, whole and part, and many others of the most important
characteristics of the actual world. All these aspects, therefore, the
logic which reduces everything to subjects and predicates is compelled
to condemn as error and mere appearance. To those whose logic is not
malicious, such a wholesale condemnation appears impossible. And in fact
there is no reason except prejudice, so far as I can discover, for
denying the reality of relations. When once their reality is admitted,
all _logical_ grounds for supposing the world of sense to be illusory
disappear. If this is to be supposed, it must be frankly and simply on
the ground of mystic insight unsupported by argument. It is impossible
to argue against what professes to be insight, so long as it does not
argue in its own favour. As logicians, therefore, we may admit the
possibility of the mystic's world, while yet, so long as we do not have
his insight, we must continue to study the everyday world with which we
are familiar. But when he contends that our world is impossible, then
our logic is ready to repel his attack. And the first step in creating
the logic which is to perform this service is the recognition of the
reality of relations.

Relations which have two terms are only one kind of relations. A
relation may have three terms, or four, or any number. Relations of two
terms, being the simplest, have received more attention than the others,
and have generally been alone considered by philosophers, both those who
accepted and those who denied the reality of relations. But other
relations have their importance, and are indispensable in the solution
of certain problems. Jealousy, for example, is a relation between three
people. Professor Royce mentions the relation "giving": when A gives B
to C, that is a relation of three terms.[15] When a man says to his
wife: "My dear, I wish you could induce Angelina to accept Edwin," his
wish constitutes a relation between four people, himself, his wife,
Angelina, and Edwin. Thus such relations are by no means recondite or
rare. But in order to explain exactly how they differ from relations of
two terms, we must embark upon a classification of the logical forms of
facts, which is the first business of logic, and the business in which
the traditional logic has been most deficient.

  [15] _Encyclopdia of the Philosophical Sciences_, vol. i. p. 97.

The existing world consists of many things with many qualities and
relations. A complete description of the existing world would require
not only a catalogue of the things, but also a mention of all their
qualities and relations. We should have to know not only this, that, and
the other thing, but also which was red, which yellow, which was earlier
than which, which was between which two others, and so on. When I speak
of a "fact," I do not mean one of the simple things in the world; I mean
that a certain thing has a certain quality, or that certain things have
a certain relation. Thus, for example, I should not call Napoleon a
fact, but I should call it a fact that he was ambitious, or that he
married Josephine. Now a fact, in this sense, is never simple, but
always has two or more constituents. When it simply assigns a quality to
a thing, it has only two constituents, the thing and the quality. When
it consists of a relation between two things, it has three constituents,
the things and the relation. When it consists of a relation between
three things, it has four constituents, and so on. The constituents of
facts, in the sense in which we are using the word "fact," are not other
facts, but are things and qualities or relations. When we say that there
are relations of more than two terms, we mean that there are single
facts consisting of a single relation and more than two things. I do not
mean that one relation of two terms may hold between A and B, and also
between A and C, as, for example, a man is the son of his father and
also the son of his mother. This constitutes two distinct facts: if we
choose to treat it as one fact, it is a fact which has facts for its
constituents. But the facts I am speaking of have no facts among their
constituents, but only things and relations. For example, when A is
jealous of B on account of C, there is only one fact, involving three
people; there are not two instances of jealousy, but only one. It is in
such cases that I speak of a relation of three terms, where the simplest
possible fact in which the relation occurs is one involving three things
in addition to the relation. And the same applies to relations of four
terms or five or any other number. All such relations must be admitted
in our inventory of the logical forms of facts: two facts involving the
same number of things have the same form, and two which involve
different numbers of things have different forms.

Given any fact, there is an assertion which expresses the fact. The fact
itself is objective, and independent of our thought or opinion about it;
but the assertion is something which involves thought, and may be either
true or false. An assertion may be positive or negative: we may assert
that Charles I. was executed, or that he did _not_ die in his bed. A
negative assertion may be said to be a _denial_. Given a form of words
which must be either true or false, such as "Charles I. died in his
bed," we may either assert or deny this form of words: in the one case
we have a positive assertion, in the other a negative one. A form of
words which must be either true or false I shall call a _proposition_.
Thus a proposition is the same as what may be significantly asserted or
denied. A proposition which expresses what we have called a fact, _i.e._
which, when asserted, asserts that a certain thing has a certain
quality, or that certain things have a certain relation, will be called
an atomic proposition, because, as we shall see immediately, there are
other propositions into which atomic propositions enter in a way
analogous to that in which atoms enter into molecules. Atomic
propositions, although, like facts, they may have any one of an infinite
number of forms, are only one kind of propositions. All other kinds are
more complicated. In order to preserve the parallelism in language as
regards facts and propositions, we shall give the name "atomic facts" to
the facts we have hitherto been considering. Thus atomic facts are what
determine whether atomic propositions are to be asserted or denied.

Whether an atomic proposition, such as "this is red," or "this is before
that," is to be asserted or denied can only be known empirically.
Perhaps one atomic fact may sometimes be capable of being inferred from
another, though this seems very doubtful; but in any case it cannot be
inferred from premisses no one of which is an atomic fact. It follows
that, if atomic facts are to be known at all, some at least must be
known without inference. The atomic facts which we come to know in this
way are the facts of sense-perception; at any rate, the facts of
sense-perception are those which we most obviously and certainly come to
know in this way. If we knew all atomic facts, and also knew that there
were none except those we knew, we should, theoretically, be able to
infer all truths of whatever form.[16] Thus logic would then supply us
with the whole of the apparatus required. But in the first acquisition
of knowledge concerning atomic facts, logic is useless. In pure logic,
no atomic fact is ever mentioned: we confine ourselves wholly to forms,
without asking ourselves what objects can fill the forms. Thus pure
logic is independent of atomic facts; but conversely, they are, in a
sense, independent of logic. Pure logic and atomic facts are the two
poles, the wholly _a priori_ and the wholly empirical. But between the
two lies a vast intermediate region, which we must now briefly explore.

  [16] This perhaps requires modification in order to include such facts
  as beliefs and wishes, since such facts apparently contain
  propositions as components. Such facts, though not strictly atomic,
  must be supposed included if the statement in the text is to be true.

"Molecular" propositions are such as contain conjunctions--_if_, _or_,
_and_, _unless_, etc.--and such words are the marks of a molecular
proposition. Consider such an assertion as, "If it rains, I shall bring
my umbrella." This assertion is just as capable of truth or falsehood as
the assertion of an atomic proposition, but it is obvious that either
the corresponding fact, or the nature of the correspondence with fact,
must be quite different from what it is in the case of an atomic
proposition. Whether it rains, and whether I bring my umbrella, are each
severally matters of atomic fact, ascertainable by observation. But the
connection of the two involved in saying that _if_ the one happens,
_then_ the other will happen, is something radically different from
either of the two separately. It does not require for its truth that it
should actually rain, or that I should actually bring my umbrella; even
if the weather is cloudless, it may still be true that I should have
brought my umbrella if the weather had been different. Thus we have here
a connection of two propositions, which does not depend upon whether
they are to be asserted or denied, but only upon the second being
inferable from the first. Such propositions, therefore, have a form
which is different from that of any atomic proposition.

Such propositions are important to logic, because all inference depends
upon them. If I have told you that if it rains I shall bring my
umbrella, and if you see that there is a steady downpour, you can infer
that I shall bring my umbrella. There can be no inference except where
propositions are connected in some such way, so that from the truth or
falsehood of the one something follows as to the truth or falsehood of
the other. It seems to be the case that we can sometimes know molecular
propositions, as in the above instance of the umbrella, when we do not
know whether the component atomic propositions are true or false. The
_practical_ utility of inference rests upon this fact.

The next kind of propositions we have to consider are _general_
propositions, such as "all men are mortal," "all equilateral triangles
are equiangular." And with these belong propositions in which the word
"some" occurs, such as "some men are philosophers" or "some philosophers
are not wise." These are the denials of general propositions, namely (in
the above instances), of "all men are non-philosophers" and "all
philosophers are wise." We will call propositions containing the word
"some" _negative_ general propositions, and those containing the word
"all" _positive_ general propositions. These propositions, it will be
seen, begin to have the appearance of the propositions in logical
text-books. But their peculiarity and complexity are not known to the
text-books, and the problems which they raise are only discussed in the
most superficial manner.

When we were discussing atomic facts, we saw that we should be able,
theoretically, to infer all other truths by logic if we knew all atomic
facts and also knew that there were no other atomic facts besides those
we knew. The knowledge that there are no other atomic facts is positive
general knowledge; it is the knowledge that "all atomic facts are known
to me," or at least "all atomic facts are in this collection"--however
the collection may be given. It is easy to see that general
propositions, such as "all men are mortal," cannot be known by inference
from atomic facts alone. If we could know each individual man, and know
that he was mortal, that would not enable us to know that all men are
mortal, unless we _knew_ that those were all the men there are, which is
a general proposition. If we knew every other existing thing throughout
the universe, and knew that each separate thing was not an immortal man,
that would not give us our result unless we _knew_ that we had explored
the whole universe, _i.e._ unless we knew "all things belong to this
collection of things I have examined." Thus general truths cannot be
inferred from particular truths alone, but must, if they are to be
known, be either self-evident, or inferred from premisses of which at
least one is a general truth. But all _empirical_ evidence is of
_particular_ truths. Hence, if there is any knowledge of general truths
at all, there must be _some_ knowledge of general truths which is
independent of empirical evidence, _i.e._ does not depend upon the data
of sense.

The above conclusion, of which we had an instance in the case of the
inductive principle, is important, since it affords a refutation of the
older empiricists. They believed that all our knowledge is derived from
the senses and dependent upon them. We see that, if this view is to be
maintained, we must refuse to admit that we know any general
propositions. It is perfectly possible logically that this should be the
case, but it does not appear to be so in fact, and indeed no one would
dream of maintaining such a view except a theorist at the last
extremity. We must therefore admit that there is general knowledge not
derived from sense, and that some of this knowledge is not obtained by
inference but is primitive.

Such general knowledge is to be found in logic. Whether there is any
such knowledge not derived from logic, I do not know; but in logic, at
any rate, we have such knowledge. It will be remembered that we excluded
from pure logic such propositions as, "Socrates is a man, all men are
mortal, therefore Socrates is mortal," because Socrates and _man_ and
_mortal_ are empirical terms, only to be understood through particular
experience. The corresponding proposition in pure logic is: "If anything
has a certain property, and whatever has this property has a certain
other property, then the thing in question has the other property." This
proposition is absolutely general: it applies to all things and all
properties. And it is quite self-evident. Thus in such propositions of
pure logic we have the self-evident general propositions of which we
were in search.

A proposition such as, "If Socrates is a man, and all men are mortal,
then Socrates is mortal," is true in virtue of its _form_ alone. Its
truth, in this hypothetical form, does not depend upon whether Socrates
actually is a man, nor upon whether in fact all men are mortal; thus it
is equally true when we substitute other terms for Socrates and _man_
and _mortal_. The general truth of which it is an instance is purely
formal, and belongs to logic. Since it does not mention any particular
thing, or even any particular quality or relation, it is wholly
independent of the accidental facts of the existent world, and can be
known, theoretically, without any experience of particular things or
their qualities and relations.

Logic, we may say, consists of two parts. The first part investigates
what propositions are and what forms they may have; this part enumerates
the different kinds of atomic propositions, of molecular propositions,
of general propositions, and so on. The second part consists of certain
supremely general propositions, which assert the truth of all
propositions of certain forms. This second part merges into pure
mathematics, whose propositions all turn out, on analysis, to be such
general formal truths. The first part, which merely enumerates forms, is
the more difficult, and philosophically the more important; and it is
the recent progress in this first part, more than anything else, that
has rendered a truly scientific discussion of many philosophical
problems possible.

The problem of the nature of judgment or belief may be taken as an
example of a problem whose solution depends upon an adequate inventory
of logical forms. We have already seen how the supposed universality of
the subject-predicate form made it impossible to give a right analysis
of serial order, and therefore made space and time unintelligible. But
in this case it was only necessary to admit relations of two terms. The
case of judgment demands the admission of more complicated forms. If all
judgments were true, we might suppose that a judgment consisted in
apprehension of a _fact_, and that the apprehension was a relation of a
mind to the fact. From poverty in the logical inventory, this view has
often been held. But it leads to absolutely insoluble difficulties in
the case of error. Suppose I believe that Charles I. died in his bed.
There is no objective fact "Charles I.'s death in his bed" to which I
can have a relation of apprehension. Charles I. and death and his bed
are objective, but they are not, except in my thought, put together as
my false belief supposes. It is therefore necessary, in analysing a
belief, to look for some other logical form than a two-term relation.
Failure to realise this necessity has, in my opinion, vitiated almost
everything that has hitherto been written on the theory of knowledge,
making the problem of error insoluble and the difference between belief
and perception inexplicable.

Modern logic, as I hope is now evident, has the effect of enlarging our
abstract imagination, and providing an infinite number of possible
hypotheses to be applied in the analysis of any complex fact. In this
respect it is the exact opposite of the logic practised by the classical
tradition. In that logic, hypotheses which seem _prim facie_ possible
are professedly proved impossible, and it is decreed in advance that
reality must have a certain special character. In modern logic, on the
contrary, while the _prim facie_ hypotheses as a rule remain
admissible, others, which only logic would have suggested, are added to
our stock, and are very often found to be indispensable if a right
analysis of the facts is to be obtained. The old logic put thought in
fetters, while the new logic gives it wings. It has, in my opinion,
introduced the same kind of advance into philosophy as Galileo
introduced into physics, making it possible at last to see what kinds of
problems may be capable of solution, and what kinds must be abandoned as
beyond human powers. And where a solution appears possible, the new
logic provides a method which enables us to obtain results that do not
merely embody personal idiosyncrasies, but must command the assent of
all who are competent to form an opinion.




LECTURE III

ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD


Philosophy may be approached by many roads, but one of the oldest and
most travelled is the road which leads through doubt as to the reality
of the world of sense. In Indian mysticism, in Greek and modern monistic
philosophy from Parmenides onward, in Berkeley, in modern physics, we
find sensible appearance criticised and condemned for a bewildering
variety of motives. The mystic condemns it on the ground of immediate
knowledge of a more real and significant world behind the veil;
Parmenides and Plato condemn it because its continual flux is thought
inconsistent with the unchanging nature of the abstract entities
revealed by logical analysis; Berkeley brings several weapons, but his
chief is the subjectivity of sense-data, their dependence upon the
organisation and point of view of the spectator; while modern physics,
on the basis of sensible evidence itself, maintains a mad dance of
electrons which has, superficially at least, very little resemblance to
the immediate objects of sight or touch.

Every one of these lines of attack raises vital and interesting
problems.

The mystic, so long as he merely reports a positive revelation, cannot
be refuted; but when he _denies_ reality to objects of sense, he may be
questioned as to what he means by "reality," and may be asked how their
unreality follows from the supposed reality of his super-sensible world.
In answering these questions, he is led to a logic which merges into
that of Parmenides and Plato and the idealist tradition.

The logic of the idealist tradition has gradually grown very complex and
very abstruse, as may be seen from the Bradleian sample considered in
our first lecture. If we attempted to deal fully with this logic, we
should not have time to reach any other aspect of our subject; we will
therefore, while acknowledging that it deserves a long discussion, pass
by its central doctrines with only such occasional criticism as may
serve to exemplify other topics, and concentrate our attention on such
matters as its objections to the continuity of motion and the infinity
of space and time--objections which have been fully answered by modern
mathematicians in a manner constituting an abiding triumph for the
method of logical analysis in philosophy. These objections and the
modern answers to them will occupy our fifth, sixth, and seventh
lectures.

Berkeley's attack, as reinforced by the physiology of the sense-organs
and nerves and brain, is very powerful. I think it must be admitted as
probable that the immediate objects of sense depend for their existence
upon physiological conditions in ourselves, and that, for example, the
coloured surfaces which we see cease to exist when we shut our eyes. But
it would be a mistake to infer that they are dependent upon mind, not
real while we see them, or not the sole basis for our knowledge of the
external world. This line of argument will be developed in the present
lecture.

The discrepancy between the world of physics and the world of sense,
which we shall consider in our fourth lecture, will be found to be more
apparent than real, and it will be shown that whatever there is reason
to believe in physics can probably be interpreted in terms of sense.

The instrument of discovery throughout is modern logic, a very different
science from the logic of the text-books and also from the logic of
idealism. Our second lecture has given a short account of modern logic
and of its points of divergence from the various traditional kinds of
logic.

In our last lecture, after a discussion of causality and free will, we
shall try to reach a general account of the logical-analytic method of
scientific philosophy, and a tentative estimate of the hopes of
philosophical progress which it allows us to entertain.

In this lecture, I wish to apply the logical-analytic method to one of
the oldest problems of philosophy, namely, the problem of our knowledge
of the external world. What I have to say on this problem does not
amount to an answer of a definite and dogmatic kind; it amounts only to
an analysis and statement of the questions involved, with an indication
of the directions in which evidence may be sought. But although not yet
a definite solution, what can be said at present seems to me to throw a
completely new light on the problem, and to be indispensable, not only
in seeking the answer, but also in the preliminary question as to what
parts of our problem may possibly have an ascertainable answer.

In every philosophical problem, our investigation starts from what may
be called "data," by which I mean matters of common knowledge, vague,
complex, inexact, as common knowledge always is, but yet somehow
commanding our assent as on the whole and in some interpretation pretty
certainly true. In the case of our present problem, the common knowledge
involved is of various kinds. There is first our acquaintance with
particular objects of daily life--furniture, houses, towns, other
people, and so on. Then there is the extension of such particular
knowledge to particular things outside our personal experience, through
history and geography, newspapers, etc. And lastly, there is the
systematisation of all this knowledge of particulars by means of
physical science, which derives immense persuasive force from its
astonishing power of foretelling the future. We are quite willing to
admit that there may be errors of detail in this knowledge, but we
believe them to be discoverable and corrigible by the methods which have
given rise to our beliefs, and we do not, as practical men, entertain
for a moment the hypothesis that the whole edifice may be built on
insecure foundations. In the main, therefore, and without absolute
dogmatism as to this or that special portion, we may accept this mass of
common knowledge as affording data for our philosophical analysis.

It may be said--and this is an objection which must be met at the
outset--that it is the duty of the philosopher to call in question the
admittedly fallible beliefs of daily life, and to replace them by
something more solid and irrefragable. In a sense this is true, and in a
sense it is effected in the course of analysis. But in another sense,
and a very important one, it is quite impossible. While admitting that
doubt is possible with regard to all our common knowledge, we must
nevertheless accept that knowledge in the main if philosophy is to be
possible at all. There is not any superfine brand of knowledge,
obtainable by the philosopher, which can give us a standpoint from which
to criticise the whole of the knowledge of daily life. The most that can
be done is to examine and purify our common knowledge by an internal
scrutiny, assuming the canons by which it has been obtained, and
applying them with more care and with more precision. Philosophy cannot
boast of having achieved such a degree of certainty that it can have
authority to condemn the facts of experience and the laws of science.
The philosophic scrutiny, therefore, though sceptical in regard to every
detail, is not sceptical as regards the whole. That is to say, its
criticism of details will only be based upon their relation to other
details, not upon some external criterion which can be applied to all
the details equally. The reason for this abstention from a universal
criticism is not any dogmatic confidence, but its exact opposite; it is
not that common knowledge _must_ be true, but that we possess no
radically different kind of knowledge derived from some other source.
Universal scepticism, though logically irrefutable, is practically
barren; it can only, therefore, give a certain flavour of hesitancy to
our beliefs, and cannot be used to substitute other beliefs for them.

Although data can only be criticised by other data, not by an outside
standard, yet we may distinguish different grades of certainty in the
different kinds of common knowledge which we enumerated just now. What
does not go beyond our own personal sensible acquaintance must be for us
the most certain: the "evidence of the senses" is proverbially the least
open to question. What depends on testimony, like the facts of history
and geography which are learnt from books, has varying degrees of
certainty according to the nature and extent of the testimony. Doubts as
to the existence of Napoleon can only be maintained for a joke, whereas
the historicity of Agamemnon is a legitimate subject of debate. In
science, again, we find all grades of certainty short of the highest.
The law of gravitation, at least as an approximate truth, has acquired
by this time the same kind of certainty as the existence of Napoleon,
whereas the latest speculations concerning the constitution of matter
would be universally acknowledged to have as yet only a rather slight
probability in their favour. These varying degrees of certainty
attaching to different data may be regarded as themselves forming part
of our data; they, along with the other data, lie within the vague,
complex, inexact body of knowledge which it is the business of the
philosopher to analyse.

The first thing that appears when we begin to analyse our common
knowledge is that some of it is derivative, while some is primitive;
that is to say, there is some that we only believe because of something
else from which it has been inferred in some sense, though not
necessarily in a strict logical sense, while other parts are believed on
their own account, without the support of any outside evidence. It is
obvious that the senses give knowledge of the latter kind: the immediate
facts perceived by sight or touch or hearing do not need to be proved by
argument, but are completely self-evident. Psychologists, however, have
made us aware that what is actually given in sense is much less than
most people would naturally suppose, and that much of what at first
sight seems to be given is really inferred. This applies especially in
regard to our space-perceptions. For instance, we instinctively infer
the "real" size and shape of a visible object from its apparent size and
shape, according to its distance and our point of view. When we hear a
person speaking, our actual sensations usually miss a great deal of what
he says, and we supply its place by unconscious inference; in a foreign
language, where this process is more difficult, we find ourselves
apparently grown deaf, requiring, for example, to be much nearer the
stage at a theatre than would be necessary in our own country. Thus the
first step in the analysis of data, namely, the discovery of what is
really given in sense, is full of difficulty. We will, however, not
linger on this point; so long as its existence is realised, the exact
outcome does not make any very great difference in our main problem.

The next step in our analysis must be the consideration of how the
derivative parts of our common knowledge arise. Here we become involved
in a somewhat puzzling entanglement of logic and psychology.
Psychologically, a belief may be called derivative whenever it is caused
by one or more other beliefs, or by some fact of sense which is not
simply what the belief asserts. Derivative beliefs in this sense
constantly arise without any process of logical inference, merely by
association of ideas or some equally extra-logical process. From the
expression of a man's face we judge as to what he is feeling: we say we
_see_ that he is angry, when in fact we only see a frown. We do not
judge as to his state of mind by any logical process: the judgment grows
up, often without our being able to say what physical mark of emotion we
actually saw. In such a case, the knowledge is derivative
psychologically; but logically it is in a sense primitive, since it is
not the result of any logical deduction. There may or may not be a
possible deduction leading to the same result, but whether there is or
not, we certainly do not employ it. If we call a belief "logically
primitive" when it is not actually arrived at by a logical inference,
then innumerable beliefs are logically primitive which psychologically
are derivative. The separation of these two kinds of primitiveness is
vitally important to our present discussion.

When we reflect upon the beliefs which are logically but not
psychologically primitive, we find that, unless they can on reflection
be deduced by a logical process from beliefs which are also
psychologically primitive, our confidence in their truth tends to
diminish the more we think about them. We naturally believe, for
example, that tables and chairs, trees and mountains, are still there
when we turn our backs upon them. I do not wish for a moment to maintain
that this is certainly not the case, but I do maintain that the question
whether it is the case is not to be settled off-hand on any supposed
ground of obviousness. The belief that they persist is, in all men
except a few philosophers, logically primitive, but it is not
psychologically primitive; psychologically, it arises only through our
having seen those tables and chairs, trees and mountains. As soon as the
question is seriously raised whether, because we have seen them, we have
a right to suppose that they are there still, we feel that some kind of
argument must be produced, and that if none is forthcoming, our belief
can be no more than a pious opinion. We do not feel this as regards the
immediate objects of sense: there they are, and as far as their
momentary existence is concerned, no further argument is required. There
is accordingly more need of justifying our psychologically derivative
beliefs than of justifying those that are primitive.

We are thus led to a somewhat vague distinction between what we may call
"hard" data and "soft" data. This distinction is a matter of degree, and
must not be pressed; but if not taken too seriously it may help to make
the situation clear. I mean by "hard" data those which resist the
solvent influence of critical reflection, and by "soft" data those
which, under the operation of this process, become to our minds more or
less doubtful. The hardest of hard data are of two sorts: the particular
facts of sense, and the general truths of logic. The more we reflect
upon these, the more we realise exactly what they are, and exactly what
a doubt concerning them really means, the more luminously certain do
they become. _Verbal_ doubt concerning even these is possible, but
verbal doubt may occur when what is nominally being doubted is not
really in our thoughts, and only words are actually present to our
minds. Real doubt, in these two cases, would, I think, be pathological.
At any rate, to me they seem quite certain, and I shall assume that you
agree with me in this. Without this assumption, we are in danger of
falling into that universal scepticism which, as we saw, is as barren as
it is irrefutable. If we are to continue philosophising, we must make
our bow to the sceptical hypothesis, and, while admitting the elegant
terseness of its philosophy, proceed to the consideration of other
hypotheses which, though perhaps not certain, have at least as good a
right to our respect as the hypothesis of the sceptic.

Applying our distinction of "hard" and "soft" data to psychologically
derivative but logically primitive beliefs, we shall find that most, if
not all, are to be classed as soft data. They may be found, on
reflection, to be capable of logical proof, and they then again become
believed, but no longer as data. As data, though entitled to a certain
limited respect, they cannot be placed on a level with the facts of
sense or the laws of logic. The kind of respect which they deserve seems
to me such as to warrant us in hoping, though not too confidently, that
the hard data may prove them to be at least probable. Also, if the hard
data are found to throw no light whatever upon their truth or falsehood,
we are justified, I think, in giving rather more weight to the
hypothesis of their truth than to the hypothesis of their falsehood. For
the present, however, let us confine ourselves to the hard data, with a
view to discovering what sort of world can be constructed by their means
alone.

Our data now are primarily the facts of sense (_i.e._ of _our own_
sense-data) and the laws of logic. But even the severest scrutiny will
allow some additions to this slender stock. Some facts of
memory--especially of recent memory--seem to have the highest degree of
certainty. Some introspective facts are as certain as any facts of
sense. And facts of sense themselves must, for our present purposes, be
interpreted with a certain latitude. Spatial and temporal relations must
sometimes be included, for example in the case of a swift motion falling
wholly within the specious present. And some facts of comparison, such
as the likeness or unlikeness of two shades of colour, are certainly to
be included among hard data. Also we must remember that the distinction
of hard and soft data is psychological and subjective, so that, if there
are other minds than our own--which at our present stage must be held
doubtful--the catalogue of hard data may be different for them from what
it is for us.

Certain common beliefs are undoubtedly excluded from hard data. Such is
the belief which led us to introduce the distinction, namely, that
sensible objects in general persist when we are not perceiving them.
Such also is the belief in other people's minds: this belief is
obviously derivative from our perception of their bodies, and is felt to
demand logical justification as soon as we become aware of its
derivativeness. Belief in what is reported by the testimony of others,
including all that we learn from books, is of course involved in the
doubt as to whether other people have minds at all. Thus the world from
which our reconstruction is to begin is very fragmentary. The best we
can say for it is that it is slightly more extensive than the world at
which Descartes arrived by a similar process, since that world contained
nothing except himself and his thoughts.

We are now in a position to understand and state the problem of our
knowledge of the external world, and to remove various misunderstandings
which have obscured the meaning of the problem. The problem really is:
Can the existence of anything other than our own hard data be inferred
from the existence of those data? But before considering this problem,
let us briefly consider what the problem is _not_.

When we speak of the "external" world in this discussion, we must not
mean "spatially external," unless "space" is interpreted in a peculiar
and recondite manner. The immediate objects of sight, the coloured
surfaces which make up the visible world, are spatially external in the
natural meaning of this phrase. We feel them to be "there" as opposed to
"here"; without making any assumption of an existence other than hard
data, we can more or less estimate the distance of a coloured surface.
It seems probable that distances, provided they are not too great, are
actually given more or less roughly in sight; but whether this is the
case or not, ordinary distances can certainly be estimated approximately
by means of the data of sense alone. The immediately given world is
spatial, and is further not wholly contained within our own bodies. Thus
our knowledge of what is external in this sense is not open to doubt.

Another form in which the question is often put is: "Can we know of the
existence of any reality which is independent of ourselves?" This form
of the question suffers from the ambiguity of the two words
"independent" and "self." To take the Self first: the question as to
what is to be reckoned part of the Self and what is not, is a very
difficult one. Among many other things which we may mean by the Self,
two may be selected as specially important, namely, (1) the bare subject
which thinks and is aware of objects, (2) the whole assemblage of things
that would necessarily cease to exist if our lives came to an end. The
bare subject, if it exists at all, is an inference, and is not part of
the data; therefore this meaning of Self may be ignored in our present
inquiry. The second meaning is difficult to make precise, since we
hardly know what things depend upon our lives for their existence. And
in this form, the definition of Self introduces the word "depend," which
raises the same questions as are raised by the word "independent." Let
us therefore take up the word "independent," and return to the Self
later.

When we say that one thing is "independent" of another, we may mean
either that it is logically possible for the one to exist without the
other, or that there is no causal relation between the two such that the
one only occurs as the effect of the other. The only way, so far as I
know, in which one thing can be _logically_ dependent upon another is
when the other is _part_ of the one. The existence of a book, for
example, is logically dependent upon that of its pages: without the
pages there would be no book. Thus in this sense the question, "Can we
know of the existence of any reality which is independent of ourselves?"
reduces to the question, "Can we know of the existence of any reality of
which our Self is not part?" In this form, the question brings us back
to the problem of defining the Self; but I think, however the Self may
be defined, even when it is taken as the bare subject, it cannot be
supposed to be part of the immediate object of sense; thus in this form
of the question we must admit that we can know of the existence of
realities independent of ourselves.

The question of causal dependence is much more difficult. To know that
one kind of thing is causally independent of another, we must know that
it actually occurs without the other. Now it is fairly obvious that,
whatever legitimate meaning we give to the Self, our thoughts and
feelings are causally dependent upon ourselves, _i.e._ do not occur when
there is no Self for them to belong to. But in the case of objects of
sense this is not obvious; indeed, as we saw, the common-sense view is
that such objects persist in the absence of any percipient. If this is
the case, then they are causally independent of ourselves; if not, not.
Thus in this form the question reduces to the question whether we can
know that objects of sense, or any other objects not our own thoughts
and feelings, exist at times when we are not perceiving them. This form,
in which the difficult word "independent" no longer occurs, is the form
in which we stated the problem a minute ago.

Our question in the above form raises two distinct problems, which it is
important to keep separate. First, can we know that objects of sense, or
very similar objects, exist at times when we are not perceiving them?
Secondly, if this cannot be known, can we know that other objects,
inferable from objects of sense but not necessarily resembling them,
exist either when we are perceiving the objects of sense or at any other
time? This latter problem arises in philosophy as the problem of the
"thing in itself," and in science as the problem of matter as assumed in
physics. We will consider this latter problem first.

Owing to the fact that we feel passive in sensation, we naturally
suppose that our sensations have outside causes. Now it is necessary
here first of all to distinguish between (1) our sensation, which is a
mental event consisting in our being aware of a sensible object, and (2)
the sensible object of which we are aware in sensation. When I speak of
the sensible object, it must be understood that I do not mean such a
thing as a table, which is both visible and tangible, can be seen by
many people at once, and is more or less permanent. What I mean is just
that patch of colour which is momentarily seen when we look at the
table, or just that particular hardness which is felt when we press it,
or just that particular sound which is heard when we rap it. Each of
these I call a sensible object, and our awareness of it I call a
sensation. Now our sense of passivity, if it really afforded any
argument, would only tend to show that the _sensation_ has an outside
cause; this cause we should naturally seek in the sensible object. Thus
there is no good reason, so far, for supposing that sensible objects
must have outside causes. But both the thing-in-itself of philosophy and
the matter of physics present themselves as outside causes of the
sensible object as much as of the sensation. What are the grounds for
this common opinion?

In each case, I think, the opinion has resulted from the combination of
a belief that _something_ which can persist independently of our
consciousness makes itself known in sensation, with the fact that our
sensations often change in ways which seem to depend upon us rather than
upon anything which would be supposed to persist independently of us. At
first, we believe unreflectingly that everything is as it seems to be,
and that, if we shut our eyes, the objects we had been seeing remain as
they were though we no longer see them. But there are arguments against
this view, which have generally been thought conclusive. It is
extraordinarily difficult to see just what the arguments prove; but if
we are to make any progress with the problem of the external world, we
must try to make up our minds as to these arguments.

A table viewed from one place presents a different appearance from that
which it presents from another place. This is the language of common
sense, but this language already assumes that there is a real table of
which we see the appearances. Let us try to state what is known in terms
of sensible objects alone, without any element of hypothesis. We find
that as we walk round the table, we perceive a series of gradually
changing visible objects. But in speaking of "walking round the table,"
we have still retained the hypothesis that there is a single table
connected with all the appearances. What we ought to say is that, while
we have those muscular and other sensations which make us say we are
walking, our visual sensations change in a continuous way, so that, for
example, a striking patch of colour is not suddenly replaced by
something wholly different, but is replaced by an insensible gradation
of slightly different colours with slightly different shapes. This is
what we really know by experience, when we have freed our minds from the
assumption of permanent "things" with changing appearances. What is
really known is a correlation of muscular and other bodily sensations
with changes in visual sensations.

But walking round the table is not the only way of altering its
appearance. We can shut one eye, or put on blue spectacles, or look
through a microscope. All these operations, in various ways, alter the
visual appearance which we call that of the table. More distant objects
will also alter their appearance if (as we say) the state of the
atmosphere changes--if there is fog or rain or sunshine. Physiological
changes also alter the appearances of things. If we assume the world of
common sense, all these changes, including those attributed to
physiological causes, are changes in the intervening medium. It is not
quite so easy as in the former case to reduce this set of facts to a
form in which nothing is assumed beyond sensible objects. Anything
intervening between ourselves and what we see must be invisible: our
view in every direction is bounded by the nearest visible object. It
might be objected that a dirty pane of glass, for example, is visible
although we can see things through it. But in this case we really see a
spotted patchwork: the dirtier specks in the glass are visible, while
the cleaner parts are invisible and allow us to see what is beyond. Thus
the discovery that the intervening medium affects the appearances of
things cannot be made by means of the sense of sight alone.

Let us take the case of the blue spectacles, which is the simplest, but
may serve as a type for the others. The frame of the spectacles is of
course visible, but the blue glass, if it is clean, is not visible. The
blueness, which we say is in the glass, appears as being in the objects
seen through the glass. The glass itself is known by means of the sense
of touch. In order to know that it is between us and the objects seen
through it, we must know how to correlate the space of touch with the
space of sight. This correlation itself, when stated in terms of the
data of sense alone, is by no means a simple matter. But it presents no
difficulties of principle, and may therefore be supposed accomplished.
When it has been accomplished, it becomes possible to attach a meaning
to the statement that the blue glass, which we can touch, is between us
and the object seen, as we say, "through" it.

But we have still not reduced our statement completely to what is
actually given in sense. We have fallen into the assumption that the
object of which we are conscious when we touch the blue spectacles still
exists after we have ceased to touch them. So long as we are touching
them, nothing except our finger can be seen through the part touched,
which is the only part where we immediately know that there is
something. If we are to account for the blue appearance of objects other
than the spectacles, when seen through them, it might seem as if we must
assume that the spectacles still exist when we are not touching them;
and if this assumption really is necessary, our main problem is
answered: we have means of knowing of the present existence of objects
not given in sense, though of the same kind as objects formerly given in
sense.

It may be questioned, however, whether this assumption is actually
unavoidable, though it is unquestionably the most natural one to make.
We may say that the object of which we become aware when we touch the
spectacles continues to have effects afterwards, though perhaps it no
longer exists. In this view, the supposed continued existence of
sensible objects after they have ceased to be sensible will be a
fallacious inference from the fact that they still have effects. It is
often supposed that nothing which has ceased to exist can continue to
have effects, but this is a mere prejudice, due to a wrong conception of
causality. We cannot, therefore, dismiss our present hypothesis on the
ground of _a priori_ impossibility, but must examine further whether it
can really account for the facts.

It may be said that our hypothesis is useless in the case when the blue
glass is never touched at all. How, in that case, are we to account for
the blue appearance of objects? And more generally, what are we to make
of the hypothetical sensations of touch which we associate with
untouched visible objects, which we know would be verified if we chose,
though in fact we do not verify them? Must not these be attributed to
permanent possession, by the objects, of the properties which touch
would reveal?

Let us consider the more general question first. Experience has taught
us that where we see certain kinds of coloured surfaces we can, by
touch, obtain certain expected sensations of hardness or softness,
tactile shape, and so on. This leads us to believe that what is seen is
usually tangible, and that it has, whether we touch it or not, the
hardness or softness which we should expect to feel if we touched it.
But the mere fact that we are able to infer what our tactile sensations
would be shows that it is not logically necessary to assume tactile
qualities before they are felt. All that is really known is that the
visual appearance in question, together with touch, will lead to certain
sensations, which can necessarily be determined in terms of the visual
appearance, since otherwise they could not be inferred from it.

We can now give a statement of the experienced facts concerning the blue
spectacles, which will supply an interpretation of common-sense beliefs
without assuming anything beyond the existence of sensible objects at
the times when they are sensible. By experience of the correlation of
touch and sight sensations, we become able to associate a certain place
in touch-space with a certain corresponding place in sight-space.
Sometimes, namely in the case of transparent things, we find that there
is a tangible object in a touch-place without there being any visible
object in the corresponding sight-place. But in such a case as that of
the blue spectacles, we find that whatever object is visible beyond the
empty sight-place in the same line of sight has a different colour from
what it has when there is no tangible object in the intervening
touch-place; and as we move the tangible object in touch-space, the blue
patch moves in sight-space. If now we find a blue patch moving in this
way in sight-space, when we have no sensible experience of an
intervening tangible object, we nevertheless infer that, if we put our
hand at a certain place in touch-space, we should experience a certain
touch-sensation. If we are to avoid non-sensible objects, this must be
taken as the whole of our meaning when we say that the blue spectacles
are in a certain place, though we have not touched them, and have only
seen other things rendered blue by their interposition.

I think it may be laid down quite generally that, _in so far_ as physics
or common sense is verifiable, it must be capable of interpretation in
terms of actual sense-data alone. The reason for this is simple.
Verification consists always in the occurrence of an expected
sense-datum. Astronomers tell us there will be an eclipse of the moon:
we look at the moon, and find the earth's shadow biting into it, that is
to say, we see an appearance quite different from that of the usual full
moon. Now if an expected sense-datum constitutes a verification, what
was asserted must have been about sense-data; or, at any rate, if part
of what was asserted was not about sense-data, then only the other part
has been verified. There is in fact a certain regularity or conformity
to law about the occurrence of sense-data, but the sense-data that occur
at one time are often causally connected with those that occur at quite
other times, and not, or at least not very closely, with those that
occur at neighbouring times. If I look at the moon and immediately
afterwards hear a train coming, there is no very close causal connection
between my two sense-data; but if I look at the moon on two nights a
week apart, there is a very close causal connection between the two
sense-data. The simplest, or at least the easiest, statement of the
connection is obtained by imagining a "real" moon which goes on whether
I look at it or not, providing a series of _possible_ sense-data of
which only those are actual which belong to moments when I choose to
look at the moon.

But the degree of verification obtainable in this way is very small. It
must be remembered that, at our present level of doubt, we are not at
liberty to accept testimony. When we hear certain noises, which are
those we should utter if we wished to express a certain thought, we
assume that that thought, or one very like it, has been in another mind,
and has given rise to the expression which we hear. If at the same time
we see a body resembling our own, moving its lips as we move ours when
we speak, we cannot resist the belief that it is alive, and that the
feelings inside it continue when we are not looking at it. When we see
our friend drop a weight upon his toe, and hear him say--what we should
say in similar circumstances, the phenomena _can_ no doubt be explained
without assuming that he is anything but a series of shapes and noises
seen and heard by us, but practically no man is so infected with
philosophy as not to be quite certain that his friend has felt the same
kind of pain as he himself would feel. We will consider the legitimacy
of this belief presently; for the moment, I only wish to point out that
it needs the same kind of justification as our belief that the moon
exists when we do not see it, and that, without it, testimony heard or
read is reduced to noises and shapes, and cannot be regarded as evidence
of the facts which it reports. The verification of physics which is
possible at our present level is, therefore, only that degree of
verification which is possible by one man's unaided observations, which
will not carry us very far towards the establishment of a whole science.

Before proceeding further, let us summarise the argument so far as it
has gone. The problem is: "Can the existence of anything other than our
own hard data be inferred from these data?" It is a mistake to state the
problem in the form: "Can we know of the existence of anything other
than ourselves and our states?" or: "Can we know of the existence of
anything independent of ourselves?" because of the extreme difficulty of
defining "self" and "independent" precisely. The felt passivity of
sensation is irrelevant, since, even if it proved anything, it could
only prove that sensations are caused by sensible objects. The natural
_nave_ belief is that things seen persist, when unseen, exactly or
approximately as they appeared when seen; but this belief tends to be
dispelled by the fact that what common sense regards as the appearance
of one object changes with what common sense regards as changes in the
point of view and in the intervening medium, including in the latter our
own sense-organs and nerves and brain. This fact, as just stated,
assumes, however, the common-sense world of stable objects which it
professes to call in question; hence, before we can discover its precise
bearing on our problem, we must find a way of stating it which does not
involve any of the assumptions which it is designed to render doubtful.
What we then find, as the bare outcome of experience, is that gradual
changes in certain sense-data are correlated with gradual changes in
certain others, or (in the case of bodily motions) with the other
sense-data themselves.

The assumption that sensible objects persist after they have ceased to
be sensible--for example, that the hardness of a visible body, which has
been discovered by touch, continues when the body is no longer
touched--may be replaced by the statement that the _effects_ of sensible
objects persist, _i.e._ that what happens now can only be accounted for,
in many cases, by taking account of what happened at an earlier time.
Everything that one man, by his own personal experience, can verify in
the account of the world given by common sense and physics, will be
explicable by some such means, since verification consists merely in the
occurrence of an expected sense-datum. But what depends upon testimony,
whether heard or read, cannot be explained in this way, since testimony
depends upon the existence of minds other than our own, and thus
requires a knowledge of something not given in sense. But before
examining the question of our knowledge of other minds, let us return to
the question of the thing-in-itself, namely, to the theory that what
exists at times when we are not perceiving a given sensible object is
something quite unlike that object, something which, together with us
and our sense-organs, causes our sensations, but is never itself given
in sensation.

The thing-in-itself, when we start from common-sense assumptions, is a
fairly natural outcome of the difficulties due to the changing
appearances of what is supposed to be one object. It is supposed that
the table (for example) causes our sense-data of sight and touch, but
must, since these are altered by the point of view and the intervening
medium, be quite different from the sense-data to which it gives rise.
There is, in this theory, a tendency to a confusion from which it
derives some of its plausibility, namely, the confusion between a
sensation as a psychical occurrence and its object. A patch of colour,
even if it only exists when it is seen, is still something quite
different from the seeing of it: the seeing of it is mental, but the
patch of colour is not. This confusion, however, can be avoided without
our necessarily abandoning the theory we are examining. The objection to
it, I think, lies in its failure to realise the radical nature of the
reconstruction demanded by the difficulties to which it points. We
cannot speak legitimately of changes in the point of view and the
intervening medium until we have already constructed some world more
stable than that of momentary sensation. Our discussion of the blue
spectacles and the walk round the table has, I hope, made this clear.
But what remains far from clear is the nature of the reconstruction
required.

Although we cannot rest content with the above theory, in the terms in
which it is stated, we must nevertheless treat it with a certain
respect, for it is in outline the theory upon which physical science and
physiology are built, and it must, therefore, be susceptible of a true
interpretation. Let us see how this is to be done.

The first thing to realise is that there are no such things as
"illusions of sense." Objects of sense, even when they occur in dreams,
are the most indubitably real objects known to us. What, then, makes us
call them unreal in dreams? Merely the unusual nature of their
connection with other objects of sense. I dream that I am in America,
but I wake up and find myself in England without those intervening days
on the Atlantic which, alas! are inseparably connected with a "real"
visit to America. Objects of sense are called "real" when they have the
kind of connection with other objects of sense which experience has led
us to regard as normal; when they fail in this, they are called
"illusions." But what is illusory is only the inferences to which they
give rise; in themselves, they are every bit as real as the objects of
waking life. And conversely, the sensible objects of waking life must
not be expected to have any more intrinsic reality than those of dreams.
Dreams and waking life, in our first efforts at construction, must be
treated with equal respect; it is only by some reality not _merely_
sensible that dreams can be condemned.

Accepting the indubitable momentary reality of objects of sense, the
next thing to notice is the confusion underlying objections derived from
their changeableness. As we walk round the table, its aspect changes;
but it is thought impossible to maintain either that the table changes,
or that its various aspects can all "really" exist in the same place. If
we press one eyeball, we shall see two tables; but it is thought
preposterous to maintain that there are "really" two tables. Such
arguments, however, seem to involve the assumption that there can be
something more real than objects of sense. If we see two tables, then
there _are_ two visual tables. It is perfectly true that, at the same
moment, we may discover by touch that there is only one tactile table.
This makes us declare the two visual tables an illusion, because usually
one visual object corresponds to one tactile object. But all that we are
warranted in saying is that, in this case, the manner of correlation of
touch and sight is unusual. Again, when the aspect of the table changes
as we walk round it, and we are told there cannot be so many different
aspects in the same place, the answer is simple: what does the critic of
the table mean by "the same place"? The use of such a phrase presupposes
that all our difficulties have been solved; as yet, we have no right to
speak of a "place" except with reference to one given set of momentary
sense-data. When all are changed by a bodily movement, no place remains
the same as it was. Thus the difficulty, if it exists, has at least not
been rightly stated.

We will now make a new start, adopting a different method. Instead of
inquiring what is the minimum of assumption by which we can explain the
world of sense, we will, in order to have a model hypothesis as a help
for the imagination, construct one possible (not necessary) explanation
of the facts. It may perhaps then be possible to pare away what is
superfluous in our hypothesis, leaving a residue which may be regarded
as the abstract answer to our problem.

Let us imagine that each mind looks out upon the world, as in Leibniz's
monadology, from a point of view peculiar to itself; and for the sake of
simplicity let us confine ourselves to the sense of sight, ignoring
minds which are devoid of this sense. Each mind sees at each moment an
immensely complex three-dimensional world; but there is absolutely
nothing which is seen by two minds simultaneously. When we say that two
people see the same thing, we always find that, owing to difference of
point of view, there are differences, however slight, between their
immediate sensible objects. (I am here assuming the validity of
testimony, but as we are only constructing a _possible_ theory, that is
a legitimate assumption.) The three-dimensional world seen by one mind
therefore contains no place in common with that seen by another, for
places can only be constituted by the things in or around them. Hence we
may suppose, in spite of the differences between the different worlds,
that each exists entire exactly as it is perceived, and might be exactly
as it is even if it were not perceived. We may further suppose that
there are an infinite number of such worlds which are in fact
unperceived. If two men are sitting in a room, two somewhat similar
worlds are perceived by them; if a third man enters and sits between
them, a third world, intermediate between the two previous worlds,
begins to be perceived. It is true that we cannot reasonably suppose
just this world to have existed before, because it is conditioned by the
sense-organs, nerves, and brain of the newly arrived man; but we can
reasonably suppose that _some_ aspect of the universe existed from that
point of view, though no one was perceiving it. The system consisting of
all views of the universe perceived and unperceived, I shall call the
system of "perspectives"; I shall confine the expression "private
worlds" to such views of the universe as are actually perceived. Thus a
"private world" is a perceived "perspective"; but there may be any
number of unperceived perspectives.

Two men are sometimes found to perceive very similar perspectives, so
similar that they can use the same words to describe them. They say they
see the same table, because the differences between the two tables they
see are slight and not practically important. Thus it is possible,
sometimes, to establish a correlation by similarity between a great many
of the things of one perspective, and a great many of the things of
another. In case the similarity is very great, we say the points of view
of the two perspectives are near together in space; but this space in
which they are near together is totally different from the spaces inside
the two perspectives. It is a relation between the perspectives, and is
not in either of them; no one can perceive it, and if it is to be known
it can be only by inference. Between two perceived perspectives which
are similar, we can imagine a whole series of other perspectives, some
at least unperceived, and such that between any two, however similar,
there are others still more similar. In this way the space which
consists of relations between perspectives can be rendered continuous,
and (if we choose) three-dimensional.

We can now define the momentary common-sense "thing," as opposed to its
momentary appearances. By the similarity of neighbouring perspectives,
many objects in the one can be correlated with objects in the other,
namely, with the similar objects. Given an object in one perspective,
form the system of all the objects correlated with it in all the
perspectives; that system may be identified with the momentary
common-sense "thing." Thus an aspect of a "thing" is a member of the
system of aspects which _is_ the "thing" at that moment. (The
correlation of the times of different perspectives raises certain
complications, of the kind considered in the theory of relativity; but
we may ignore these at present.) All the aspects of a thing are real,
whereas the thing is a mere logical construction. It has, however, the
merit of being neutral as between different points of view, and of being
visible to more than one person, in the only sense in which it can ever
be visible, namely, in the sense that each sees one of its aspects.

It will be observed that, while each perspective contains its own space,
there is only one space in which the perspectives themselves are the
elements. There are as many private spaces as there are perspectives;
there are therefore at least as many as there are percipients, and there
may be any number of others which have a merely material existence and
are not seen by anyone. But there is only one perspective-space, whose
elements are single perspectives, each with its own private space. We
have now to explain how the private space of a single perspective is
correlated with part of the one all-embracing perspective space.

Perspective space is the system of "points of view" of private spaces
(perspectives), or, since "points of view" have not been defined, we may
say it is the system of the private spaces themselves. These private
spaces will each count as one point, or at any rate as one element, in
perspective space. They are ordered by means of their similarities.
Suppose, for example, that we start from one which contains the
appearance of a circular disc, such as would be called a penny, and
suppose this appearance, in the perspective in question, is circular,
not elliptic. We can then form a whole series of perspectives containing
a graduated series of circular aspects of varying sizes: for this
purpose we only have to move (as we say) towards the penny or away from
it. The perspectives in which the penny looks circular will be said to
lie on a straight line in perspective space, and their order on this
line will be that of the sizes of the circular aspects. Moreover--though
this statement must be noticed and subsequently examined--the
perspectives in which the penny looks big will be said to be nearer to
the penny than those in which it looks small. It is to be remarked also
that any other "thing" than our penny might have been chosen to define
the relations of our perspectives in perspective space, and that
experience shows that the same spatial order of perspectives would have
resulted.

In order to explain the correlation of private spaces with perspective
space, we have first to explain what is meant by "the place (in
perspective space) where a thing is." For this purpose, let us again
consider the penny which appears in many perspectives. We formed a
straight line of perspectives in which the penny looked circular, and we
agreed that those in which it looked larger were to be considered as
nearer to the penny. We can form another straight line of perspectives
in which the penny is seen end-on and looks like a straight line of a
certain thickness. These two lines will meet in a certain place in
perspective space, _i.e._ in a certain perspective, which may be defined
as "the place (in perspective space) where the penny is." It is true
that, in order to prolong our lines until they reach this place, we
shall have to make use of other things besides the penny, because, so
far as experience goes, the penny ceases to present any appearance after
we have come so near to it that it touches the eye. But this raises no
real difficulty, because the spatial order of perspectives is found
empirically to be independent of the particular "things" chosen for
defining the order. We can, for example, remove our penny and prolong
each of our two straight lines up to their intersection by placing other
pennies further off in such a way that the aspects of the one are
circular where those of our original penny were circular, and the
aspects of the other are straight where those of our original penny were
straight. There will then be just one perspective in which one of the
new pennies looks circular and the other straight. This will be, by
definition, the place where the original penny was in perspective space.

The above is, of course, only a first rough sketch of the way in which
our definition is to be reached. It neglects the size of the penny, and
it assumes that we can remove the penny without being disturbed by any
simultaneous changes in the positions of other things. But it is plain
that such niceties cannot affect the principle, and can only introduce
complications in its application.

Having now defined the perspective which is the place where a given
thing is, we can understand what is meant by saying that the
perspectives in which a thing looks large are nearer to the thing than
those in which it looks small: they are, in fact, nearer to the
perspective which is the place where the thing is.

We can now also explain the correlation between a private space and
parts of perspective space. If there is an aspect of a given thing in a
certain private space, then we correlate the place where this aspect is
in the private space with the place where the thing is in perspective
space.

We may define "here" as the place, in perspective space, which is
occupied by our private world. Thus we can now understand what is meant
by speaking of a thing as near to or far from "here." A thing is near to
"here" if the place where it is is near to my private world. We can also
understand what is meant by saying that our private world is inside our
head; for our private world is a place in perspective space, and may be
part of the place where our head is.

It will be observed that _two_ places in perspective space are
associated with every aspect of a thing: namely, the place where the
thing is, and the place which is the perspective of which the aspect in
question forms part. Every aspect of a thing is a member of two
different classes of aspects, namely: (1) the various aspects of the
thing, of which at most one appears in any given perspective; (2) the
perspective of which the given aspect is a member, _i.e._ that in which
the thing has the given aspect. The physicist naturally classifies
aspects in the first way, the psychologist in the second. The two places
associated with a single aspect correspond to the two ways of
classifying it. We may distinguish the two places as that _at_ which,
and that _from_ which, the aspect appears. The "place at which" is the
place of the thing to which the aspect belongs; the "place from which"
is the place of the perspective to which the aspect belongs.

Let us now endeavour to state the fact that the aspect which a thing
presents at a given place is affected by the intervening medium. The
aspects of a thing in different perspectives are to be conceived as
spreading outwards from the place where the thing is, and undergoing
various changes as they get further away from this place. The laws
according to which they change cannot be stated if we only take account
of the aspects that are near the thing, but require that we should also
take account of the things that are at the places from which these
aspects appear. This empirical fact can, therefore, be interpreted in
terms of our construction.

We have now constructed a largely hypothetical picture of the world,
which contains and places the experienced facts, including those derived
from testimony. The world we have constructed can, with a certain amount
of trouble, be used to interpret the crude facts of sense, the facts of
physics, and the facts of physiology. It is therefore a world which
_may_ be actual. It fits the facts, and there is no empirical evidence
against it; it also is free from logical impossibilities. But have we
any good reason to suppose that it is real? This brings us back to our
original problem, as to the grounds for believing in the existence of
anything outside my private world. What we have derived from our
hypothetical construction is that there are no grounds _against_ the
truth of this belief, but we have not derived any positive grounds in
its favour. We will resume this inquiry by taking up again the question
of testimony and the evidence for the existence of other minds.

It must be conceded to begin with that the argument in favour of the
existence of other people's minds cannot be conclusive. A phantasm of
our dreams will appear to have a mind--a mind to be annoying, as a rule.
It will give unexpected answers, refuse to conform to our desires, and
show all those other signs of intelligence to which we are accustomed in
the acquaintances of our waking hours. And yet, when we are awake, we do
not believe that the phantasm was, like the appearances of people in
waking life, representative of a private world to which we have no
direct access. If we are to believe this of the people we meet when we
are awake, it must be on some ground short of demonstration, since it is
obviously possible that what we call waking life may be only an
unusually persistent and recurrent nightmare. It may be that our
imagination brings forth all that other people seem to say to us, all
that we read in books, all the daily, weekly, monthly, and quarterly
journals that distract our thoughts, all the advertisements of soap and
all the speeches of politicians. This _may_ be true, since it cannot be
shown to be false, yet no one can really believe it. Is there any
_logical_ ground for regarding this possibility as improbable? Or is
there nothing beyond habit and prejudice?

The minds of other people are among our data, in the very wide sense in
which we used the word at first. That is to say, when we first begin to
reflect, we find ourselves already believing in them, not because of any
argument, but because the belief is natural to us. It is, however, a
psychologically derivative belief, since it results from observation of
people's bodies; and along with other such beliefs, it does not belong
to the hardest of hard data, but becomes, under the influence of
philosophic reflection, just sufficiently questionable to make us desire
some argument connecting it with the facts of sense.

The obvious argument is, of course, derived from analogy. Other people's
bodies behave as ours do when we have certain thoughts and feelings;
hence, by analogy, it is natural to suppose that such behaviour is
connected with thoughts and feelings like our own. Someone says, "Look
out!" and we find we are on the point of being killed by a motor-car; we
therefore attribute the words we heard to the person in question having
seen the motor-car first, in which case there are existing things of
which we are not directly conscious. But this whole scene, with our
inference, may occur in a dream, in which case the inference is
generally considered to be mistaken. Is there anything to make the
argument from analogy more cogent when we are (as we think) awake?

The analogy in waking life is only to be preferred to that in dreams on
the ground of its greater extent and consistency. If a man were to dream
every night about a set of people whom he never met by day, who had
consistent characters and grew older with the lapse of years, he might,
like the man in Calderon's play, find it difficult to decide which was
the dream-world and which was the so-called "real" world. It is only the
failure of our dreams to form a consistent whole either with each other
or with waking life that makes us condemn them. Certain uniformities are
observed in waking life, while dreams seem quite erratic. The natural
hypothesis would be that demons and the spirits of the dead visit us
while we sleep; but the modern mind, as a rule, refuses to entertain
this view, though it is hard to see what could be said against it. On
the other hand, the mystic, in moments of illumination, seems to awaken
from a sleep which has filled all his mundane life: the whole world of
sense becomes phantasmal, and he sees, with the clarity and
convincingness that belongs to our morning realisation after dreams, a
world utterly different from that of our daily cares and troubles. Who
shall condemn him? Who shall justify him? Or who shall justify the
seeming solidity of the common objects among which we suppose ourselves
to live?

The hypothesis that other people have minds must, I think, be allowed to
be not susceptible of any very strong support from the analogical
argument. At the same time, it is a hypothesis which systematises a vast
body of facts and never leads to any consequences which there is reason
to think false. There is therefore nothing to be said against its truth,
and good reason to use it as a working hypothesis. When once it is
admitted, it enables us to extend our knowledge of the sensible world by
testimony, and thus leads to the system of private worlds which we
assumed in our hypothetical construction. In actual fact, whatever we
may try to think as philosophers, we cannot help believing in the minds
of other people, so that the question whether our belief is justified
has a merely speculative interest. And if it is justified, then there is
no further difficulty of principle in that vast extension of our
knowledge, beyond our own private data, which we find in science and
common sense.

This somewhat meagre conclusion must not be regarded as the whole
outcome of our long discussion. The problem of the connection of sense
with objective reality has commonly been dealt with from a standpoint
which did not carry initial doubt so far as we have carried it; most
writers, consciously or unconsciously, have assumed that the testimony
of others is to be admitted, and therefore (at least by implication)
that others have minds. Their difficulties have arisen after this
admission, from the differences in the appearance which one physical
object presents to two people at the same time, or to one person at two
times between which it cannot be supposed to have changed. Such
difficulties have made people doubtful how far objective reality could
be known by sense at all, and have made them suppose that there were
positive arguments against the view that it can be so known. Our
hypothetical construction meets these arguments, and shows that the
account of the world given by common sense and physical science can be
interpreted in a way which is logically unobjectionable, and finds a
place for all the data, both hard and soft. It is this hypothetical
construction, with its reconciliation of psychology and physics, which
is the chief outcome of our discussion. Probably the construction is
only in part necessary as an initial assumption, and can be obtained
from more slender materials by the logical methods of which we shall
have an example in the definitions of points, instants, and particles;
but I do not yet know to what lengths this diminution in our initial
assumptions can be carried.




LECTURE IV

THE WORLD OF PHYSICS AND THE WORLD OF SENSE


Among the objections to the reality of objects of sense, there is one
which is derived from the apparent difference between matter as it
appears in physics and things as they appear in sensation. Men of
science, for the most part, are willing to condemn immediate data as
"merely subjective," while yet maintaining the truth of the physics
inferred from those data. But such an attitude, though it may be
_capable_ of justification, obviously stands in need of it; and the only
justification possible must be one which exhibits matter as a logical
construction from sense-data--unless, indeed, there were some wholly _a
priori_ principle by which unknown entities could be inferred from such
as are known. It is therefore necessary to find some way of bridging the
gulf between the world of physics and the world of sense, and it is this
problem which will occupy us in the present lecture. Physicists appear
to be unconscious of the gulf, while psychologists, who are conscious of
it, have not the mathematical knowledge required for spanning it. The
problem is difficult, and I do not know its solution in detail. All that
I can hope to do is to make the problem felt, and to indicate the kind
of methods by which a solution is to be sought.

Let us begin by a brief description of the two contrasted worlds. We
will take first the world of physics, for, though the other world is
given while the physical world is inferred, to us now the world of
physics is the more familiar, the world of pure sense having become
strange and difficult to rediscover. Physics started from the
common-sense belief in fairly permanent and fairly rigid bodies--tables
and chairs, stones, mountains, the earth and moon and sun. This
common-sense belief, it should be noticed, is a piece of audacious
metaphysical theorising; objects are not continually present to
sensation, and it may be doubted whether they are there when they are
not seen or felt. This problem, which has been acute since the time of
Berkeley, is ignored by common sense, and has therefore hitherto been
ignored by physicists. We have thus here a first departure from the
immediate data of sensation, though it is a departure merely by way of
extension, and was probably made by our savage ancestors in some very
remote prehistoric epoch.

But tables and chairs, stones and mountains, are not _quite_ permanent
or _quite_ rigid. Tables and chairs lose their legs, stones are split by
frost, and mountains are cleft by earthquakes and eruptions. Then there
are other things, which seem material, and yet present almost no
permanence or rigidity. Breath, smoke, clouds, are examples of such
things--so, in a lesser degree, are ice and snow; and rivers and seas,
though fairly permanent, are not in any degree rigid. Breath, smoke,
clouds, and generally things that can be seen but not touched, were
thought to be hardly real; to this day the usual mark of a ghost is that
it can be seen but not touched. Such objects were peculiar in the fact
that they seemed to disappear completely, not merely to be transformed
into something else. Ice and snow, when they disappear, are replaced by
water; and it required no great theoretical effort to invent the
hypothesis that the water was the same thing as the ice and snow, but in
a new form. Solid bodies, when they break, break into parts which are
practically the same in shape and size as they were before. A stone can
be hammered into a powder, but the powder consists of grains which
retain the character they had before the pounding. Thus the ideal of
absolutely rigid and absolutely permanent bodies, which early physicists
pursued throughout the changing appearances, seemed attainable by
supposing ordinary bodies to be composed of a vast number of tiny atoms.
This billiard-ball view of matter dominated the imagination of
physicists until quite modern times, until, in fact, it was replaced by
the electromagnetic theory, which in its turn is developing into a new
atomism. Apart from the special form of the atomic theory which was
invented for the needs of chemistry, some kind of atomism dominated the
whole of traditional dynamics, and was implied in every statement of its
laws and axioms.

The pictorial accounts which physicists give of the material world as
they conceive it undergo violent changes under the influence of
modifications in theory which are much slighter than the layman might
suppose from the alterations of the description. Certain features,
however, have remained fairly stable. It is always assumed that there is
_something_ indestructible which is capable of motion in space; what is
indestructible is always very small, but does not always occupy a mere
point in space. There is supposed to be one all-embracing space in which
the motion takes place, and until lately we might have assumed one
all-embracing time also. But the principle of relativity has given
prominence to the conception of "local time," and has somewhat
diminished men's confidence in the one even-flowing stream of time.
Without dogmatising as to the ultimate outcome of the principle of
relativity, however, we may safely say, I think, that it does not
destroy the possibility of correlating different local times, and does
not therefore have such far-reaching philosophical consequences as is
sometimes supposed. In fact, in spite of difficulties as to measurement,
the one all-embracing time still, I think, underlies all that physics
has to say about motion. We thus have still in physics, as we had in
Newton's time, a set of indestructible entities which may be called
particles, moving relatively to each other in a single space and a
single time.

The world of immediate data is quite different from this. Nothing is
permanent; even the things that we think are fairly permanent, such as
mountains, only become data when we see them, and are not immediately
given as existing at other moments. So far from one all-embracing space
being given, there are several spaces for each person, according to the
different senses which give relations that may be called spatial.
Experience teaches us to obtain one space from these by correlation, and
experience, together with instinctive theorising, teaches us to
correlate our spaces with those which we believe to exist in the
sensible worlds of other people. The construction of a single time
offers less difficulty so long as we confine ourselves to one person's
private world, but the correlation of one private time with another is a
matter of great difficulty. Thus, apart from any of the fluctuating
hypotheses of physics, three main problems arise in connecting the world
of physics with the world of sense, namely (1) the construction of
permanent "things," (2) the construction of a single space, and (3) the
construction of a single time. We will consider these three problems in
succession.

(1) The belief in indestructible "things" very early took the form of
atomism. The underlying motive in atomism was not, I think, any
empirical success in interpreting phenomena, but rather an instinctive
belief that beneath all the changes of the sensible world there must be
something permanent and unchanging. This belief was, no doubt, fostered
and nourished by its practical successes, culminating in the
conservation of mass; but it was not produced by these successes. On the
contrary, they were produced by it. Philosophical writers on physics
sometimes speak as though the conservation of something or other were
essential to the possibility of science, but this, I believe, is an
entirely erroneous opinion. If the _a priori_ belief in permanence had
not existed, the same laws which are now formulated in terms of this
belief might just as well have been formulated without it. Why should we
suppose that, when ice melts, the water which replaces it is the same
thing in a new form? Merely because this supposition enables us to state
the phenomena in a way which is consonant with our prejudices. What we
really know is that, under certain conditions of temperature, the
appearance we call ice is replaced by the appearance we call water. We
can give laws according to which the one appearance will be succeeded by
the other, but there is no reason except prejudice for regarding both as
appearances of the same substance.

One task, if what has just been said is correct, which confronts us in
trying to connect the world of sense with the world of physics, is the
task of reconstructing the conception of matter without the _a priori_
beliefs which historically gave rise to it. In spite of the
revolutionary results of modern physics, the empirical successes of the
conception of matter show that there must be some legitimate conception
which fulfils roughly the same functions. The time has hardly come when
we can state precisely what this legitimate conception is, but we can
see in a general way what it must be like. For this purpose, it is only
necessary to take our ordinary common-sense statements and reword them
without the assumption of permanent substance. We say, for example, that
things change gradually--sometimes very quickly, but not without passing
through a continuous series of intermediate states. What this means is
that, given any sensible appearance, there will usually be, _if we
watch_, a continuous series of appearances connected with the given one,
leading on by imperceptible gradations to the new appearances which
common-sense regards as those of the same thing. Thus a thing may be
defined as a certain series of appearances, connected with each other by
continuity and by certain causal laws. In the case of slowly changing
things, this is easily seen. Consider, say, a wall-paper which fades in
the course of years. It is an effort not to conceive of it as one
"thing" whose colour is slightly different at one time from what it is
at another. But what do we really _know_ about it? We know that under
suitable circumstances--_i.e._ when we are, as is said, "in the
room"--we perceive certain colours in a certain pattern: not always
precisely the same colours, but sufficiently similar to feel familiar.
If we can state the laws according to which the colour varies, we can
state all that is empirically verifiable; the assumption that there is a
constant entity, the wall-paper, which "has" these various colours at
various times, is a piece of gratuitous metaphysics. We may, if we like,
_define_ the wall-paper as the series of its aspects. These are
collected together by the same motives which led us to regard the
wall-paper as one thing, namely a combination of sensible continuity and
causal connection. More generally, a "thing" will be defined as a
certain series of aspects, namely those which would commonly be said to
be _of_ the thing. To say that a certain aspect is an aspect _of_ a
certain thing will merely mean that it is one of those which, taken
serially, _are_ the thing. Everything will then proceed as before:
whatever was verifiable is unchanged, but our language is so interpreted
as to avoid an unnecessary metaphysical assumption of permanence.

The above extrusion of permanent things affords an example of the maxim
which inspires all scientific philosophising, namely "Occam's razor":
_Entities are not to be multiplied without necessity._ In other words,
in dealing with any subject-matter, find out what entities are
undeniably involved, and state everything in terms of these entities.
Very often the resulting statement is more complicated and difficult
than one which, like common sense and most philosophy, assumes
hypothetical entities whose existence there is no good reason to believe
in. We find it easier to imagine a wall-paper with changing colours than
to think merely of the series of colours; but it is a mistake to suppose
that what is easy and natural in thought is what is most free from
unwarrantable assumptions, as the case of "things" very aptly
illustrates.

The above summary account of the genesis of "things," though it may be
correct in outline, has omitted some serious difficulties which it is
necessary briefly to consider. Starting from a world of helter-skelter
sense-data, we wish to collect them into series, each of which can be
regarded as consisting of the successive appearances of one "thing."
There is, to begin with, some conflict between what common sense regards
as one thing, and what physics regards an unchanging collection of
particles. To common sense, a human body is one thing, but to science
the matter composing it is continually changing. This conflict, however,
is not very serious, and may, for our rough preliminary purpose, be
largely ignored. The problem is: by what principles shall we select
certain data from the chaos, and call them all appearances of the same
thing?

A rough and approximate answer to this question is not very difficult.
There are certain fairly stable collections of appearances, such as
landscapes, the furniture of rooms, the faces of acquaintances. In these
cases, we have little hesitation in regarding them on successive
occasions as appearances of one thing or collection of things. But, as
the _Comedy of Errors_ illustrates, we may be led astray if we judge by
mere resemblance. This shows that something more is involved, for two
different things may have any degree of likeness up to exact similarity.

Another insufficient criterion of one thing is _continuity_. As we have
already seen, if we watch what we regard as one changing thing, we
usually find its changes to be continuous so far as our senses can
perceive. We are thus led to assume that, if we see two finitely
different appearances at two different times, and if we have reason to
regard them as belonging to the same thing, then there was a continuous
series of intermediate states of that thing during the time when we were
not observing it. And so it comes to be thought that continuity of
change is necessary and sufficient to constitute one thing. But in fact
it is neither. It is not _necessary_, because the unobserved states, in
the case where our attention has not been concentrated on the thing
throughout, are purely hypothetical, and cannot possibly be our ground
for supposing the earlier and later appearances to belong to the same
thing; on the contrary, it is because we suppose this that we assume
intermediate unobserved states. Continuity is also not sufficient, since
we can, for example, pass by sensibly continuous gradations from any one
drop of the sea to any other drop. The utmost we can say is that
discontinuity during uninterrupted observation is as a rule a mark of
difference between things, though even this cannot be said in such cases
as sudden explosions.

The assumption of continuity is, however, successfully made in physics.
This proves something, though not anything of very obvious utility to
our present problem: it proves that nothing in the known world is
inconsistent with the hypothesis that all changes are really continuous,
though from too great rapidity or from our lack of observation they may
not always appear continuous. In this hypothetical sense, continuity may
be allowed to be a _necessary_ condition if two appearances are to be
classed as appearances of the same thing. But it is not a _sufficient_
condition, as appears from the instance of the drops in the sea. Thus
something more must be sought before we can give even the roughest
definition of a "thing."

What is wanted further seems to be something in the nature of fulfilment
of causal laws. This statement, as it stands, is very vague, but we will
endeavour to give it precision. When I speak of "causal laws," I mean
any laws which connect events at different times, or even, as a limiting
case, events at the same time provided the connection is not logically
demonstrable. In this very general sense, the laws of dynamics are
causal laws, and so are the laws correlating the simultaneous
appearances of one "thing" to different senses. The question is: How do
such laws help in the definition of a "thing"?

To answer this question, we must consider what it is that is proved by
the empirical success of physics. What is proved is that its hypotheses,
though unverifiable where they go beyond sense-data, are at no point in
contradiction with sense-data, but, on the contrary, are ideally such as
to render all sense-data calculable from a sufficient collection of data
all belonging to a given period of time. Now physics has found it
empirically possible to collect sense-data into series, each series
being regarded as belonging to one "thing," and behaving, with regard to
the laws of physics, in a way in which series not belonging to one thing
would in general not behave. If it is to be unambiguous whether two
appearances belong to the same thing or not, there must be only one way
of grouping appearances so that the resulting things obey the laws of
physics. It would be very difficult to prove that this is the case, but
for our present purposes we may let this point pass, and assume that
there is only one way. We must include in our definition of a "thing"
those of its aspects, if any, which are not observed. Thus we may lay
down the following definition: _Things are those series of aspects which
obey the laws of physics._ That such series exist is an empirical fact,
which constitutes the verifiability of physics.

It may still be objected that the "matter" of physics is something other
than series of sense-data. Sense-data, it may be said, belong to
psychology and are, at any rate in some sense, subjective, whereas
physics is quite independent of psychological considerations, and does
not assume that its matter only exists when it is perceived.

To this objection there are two answers, both of some importance.

(a) We have been considering, in the above account, the question of the
_verifiability_ of physics. Now verifiability is by no means the same
thing as truth; it is, in fact, something far more subjective and
psychological. For a proposition to be verifiable, it is not enough that
it should be true, but it must also be such as we can _discover_ to be
true. Thus verifiability depends upon our capacity for acquiring
knowledge, and not only upon the objective truth. In physics, as
ordinarily set forth, there is much that is unverifiable: there are
hypotheses as to () how things would appear to a spectator in a place
where, as it happens, there is no spectator; () how things would appear
at times when, in fact, they are not appearing to anyone; () things
which never appear at all. All these are introduced to simplify the
statement of the causal laws, but none of them form an integral part of
what is _known_ to be true in physics. This brings us to our second
answer.

(b) If physics is to consist wholly of propositions known to be true, or
at least capable of being proved or disproved, the three kinds of
hypothetical entities we have just enumerated must all be capable of
being exhibited as logical functions of sense-data. In order to show how
this might possibly be done, let us recall the hypothetical Leibnizian
universe of Lecture III. In that universe, we had a number of
perspectives, two of which never had any entity in common, but often
contained entities which could be sufficiently correlated to be regarded
as belonging to the same thing. We will call one of these an "actual"
private world when there is an actual spectator to which it appears, and
"ideal" when it is merely constructed on principles of continuity. A
physical thing consists, at each instant, of the whole set of its
aspects at that instant, in all the different worlds; thus a momentary
state of a thing is a whole set of aspects. An "ideal" appearance will
be an aspect merely calculated, but not actually perceived by any
spectator. An "ideal" state of a thing will be a state at a moment when
all its appearances are ideal. An ideal thing will be one whose states
at all times are ideal. Ideal appearances, states, and things, since
they are calculated, must be functions of actual appearances, states,
and things; in fact, ultimately, they must be functions of actual
appearances. Thus it is unnecessary, for the enunciation of the laws of
physics, to assign any reality to ideal elements: it is enough to accept
them as logical constructions, provided we have means of knowing how to
determine when they become actual. This, in fact, we have with some
degree of approximation; the starry heaven, for instance, becomes actual
whenever we choose to look at it. It is open to us to believe that the
ideal elements exist, and there can be no reason for _dis_believing
this; but unless in virtue of some _a priori_ law we cannot _know_ it,
for empirical knowledge is confined to what we actually observe.

(2) The three main conceptions of physics are space, time, and matter.
Some of the problems raised by the conception of matter have been
indicated in the above discussion of "things." But space and time also
raise difficult problems of much the same kind, namely, difficulties in
reducing the haphazard untidy world of immediate sensation to the smooth
orderly world of geometry and kinematics. Let us begin with the
consideration of space.

People who have never read any psychology seldom realise how much mental
labour has gone into the construction of the one all-embracing space
into which all sensible objects are supposed to fit. Kant, who was
unusually ignorant of psychology, described space as "an infinite given
whole," whereas a moment's psychological reflection shows that a space
which is infinite is not given, while a space which can be called given
is not infinite. What the nature of "given" space really is, is a
difficult question, upon which psychologists are by no means agreed. But
some general remarks may be made, which will suffice to show the
problems, without taking sides on any psychological issue still in
debate.

The first thing to notice is that different senses have different
spaces. The space of sight is quite different from the space of touch:
it is only by experience in infancy that we learn to correlate them. In
later life, when we see an object within reach, we know how to touch it,
and more or less what it will feel like; if we touch an object with our
eyes shut, we know where we should have to look for it, and more or less
what it would look like. But this knowledge is derived from early
experience of the correlation of certain kinds of touch-sensations with
certain kinds of sight-sensations. The one space into which both kinds
of sensations fit is an intellectual construction, not a datum. And
besides touch and sight, there are other kinds of sensation which give
other, though less important spaces: these also have to be fitted into
the one space by means of experienced correlations. And as in the case
of things, so here: the one all-embracing space, though convenient as a
way of speaking, need not be supposed really to exist. All that
experience makes certain is the several spaces of the several senses,
correlated by empirically discovered laws. The one space may turn out to
be valid as a logical construction, compounded of the several spaces,
but there is no good reason to assume its independent metaphysical
reality.

Another respect in which the spaces of immediate experience differ from
the space of geometry and physics is in regard to _points_. The space of
geometry and physics consists of an infinite number of points, but no
one has ever seen or touched a point. If there are points in a sensible
space, they must be an inference. It is not easy to see any way in
which, as independent entities, they could be validly inferred from the
data; thus here again, we shall have, if possible, to find some logical
construction, some complex assemblage of immediately given objects,
which will have the geometrical properties required of points. It is
customary to think of points as simple and infinitely small, but
geometry in no way demands that we should think of them in this way. All
that is necessary for geometry is that they should have mutual relations
possessing certain enumerated abstract properties, and it may be that an
assemblage of data of sensation will serve this purpose. Exactly how
this is to be done, I do not yet know, but it seems fairly certain that
it can be done.

The following illustrative method, simplified so as to be easily
manipulated, has been invented by Dr Whitehead for the purpose of
showing how points might be manufactured from sense-data. We have first
of all to observe that there are no infinitesimal sense-data: any
surface we can see, for example, must be of some finite extent. But what
at first appears as one undivided whole is often found, under the
influence of attention, to split up into parts contained within the
whole. Thus one spatial object may be contained within another, and
entirely enclosed by the other. This relation of enclosure, by the help
of some very natural hypotheses, will enable us to define a "point" as a
certain class of spatial objects, namely all those (as it will turn out
in the end) which would naturally be said to contain the point. In order
to obtain a definition of a "point" in this way, we proceed as follows:

Given any set of volumes or surfaces, they will not in general converge
into one point. But if they get smaller and smaller, while of any two of
the set there is always one that encloses the other, then we begin to
have the kind of conditions which would enable us to treat them as
having a point for their limit. The hypotheses required for the relation
of enclosure are that (1) it must be transitive; (2) of two _different_
spatial objects, it is impossible for each to enclose the other, but a
single spatial object always encloses itself; (3) any set of spatial
objects such that there is at least one spatial object enclosed by them
all has a lower limit or minimum, _i.e._ an object enclosed by all of
them and enclosing all objects which are enclosed by all of them; (4) to
prevent trivial exceptions, we must add that there are to be instances
of enclosure, _i.e._ there are really to be objects of which one
encloses the other. When an enclosure-relation has these properties, we
will call it a "point-producer." Given any relation of enclosure, we
will call a set of objects an "enclosure-series" if, of any two of them,
one is contained in the other. We require a condition which shall secure
that an enclosure-series converges to a point, and this is obtained as
follows: Let our enclosure-series be such that, given any other
enclosure-series of which there are members enclosed in any arbitrarily
chosen member of our first series, then there are members of our first
series enclosed in any arbitrarily chosen member of our second series.
In this case, our first enclosure-series may be called a "punctual
enclosure-series." Then a "point" is all the objects which enclose
members of a given punctual enclosure-series. In order to ensure
infinite divisibility, we require one further property to be added to
those defining point-producers, namely that any object which encloses
itself also encloses an object other than itself. The "points" generated
by point-producers with this property will be found to be such as
geometry requires.

(3) The question of time, so long as we confine ourselves to one private
world, is rather less complicated than that of space, and we can see
pretty clearly how it might be dealt with by such methods as we have
been considering. Events of which we are conscious do not last merely
for a mathematical instant, but always for some finite time, however
short. Even if there be a physical world such as the mathematical theory
of motion supposes, impressions on our sense-organs produce sensations
which are not merely and strictly instantaneous, and therefore the
objects of sense of which we are immediately conscious are not strictly
instantaneous. Instants, therefore, are not among the data of
experience, and, if legitimate, must be either inferred or constructed.
It is difficult to see how they can be validly inferred; thus we are
left with the alternative that they must be constructed. How is this to
be done?

Immediate experience provides us with two time-relations among events:
they may be simultaneous, or one may be earlier and the other later.
These two are both part of the crude data; it is not the case that only
the events are given, and their time-order is added by our subjective
activity. The time-order, within certain limits, is as much given as the
events. In any story of adventure you will find such passages as the
following: "With a cynical smile he pointed the revolver at the breast
of the dauntless youth. 'At the word _three_ I shall fire,' he said. The
words one and two had already been spoken with a cool and deliberate
distinctness. The word _three_ was forming on his lips. At this moment a
blinding flash of lightning rent the air." Here we have
simultaneity--not due, as Kant would have us believe, to the subjective
mental apparatus of the dauntless youth, but given as objectively as the
revolver and the lightning. And it is equally given in immediate
experience that the words _one_ and _two_ come earlier than the flash.
These time-relations hold between events which are not strictly
instantaneous. Thus one event may begin sooner than another, and
therefore be before it, but may continue after the other has begun, and
therefore be also simultaneous with it. If it persists after the other
is over, it will also be later than the other. Earlier, simultaneous,
and later, are not inconsistent with each other when we are concerned
with events which last for a finite time, however short; they only
become inconsistent when we are dealing with something instantaneous.

It is to be observed that we cannot give what may be called _absolute_
dates, but only dates determined by events. We cannot point to a time
itself, but only to some event occurring at that time. There is
therefore no reason in experience to suppose that there are times as
opposed to events: the events, ordered by the relations of simultaneity
and succession, are all that experience provides. Hence, unless we are
to introduce superfluous metaphysical entities, we must, in defining
what mathematical physics can regard as an instant, proceed by means of
some construction which assumes nothing beyond events and their temporal
relations.

If we wish to assign a date exactly by means of events, how shall we
proceed? If we take any one event, we cannot assign our date exactly,
because the event is not instantaneous, that is to say, it may be
simultaneous with two events which are not simultaneous with each other.
In order to assign a date exactly, we must be able, theoretically, to
determine whether any given event is before, at, or after this date, and
we must know that any other date is either before or after this date,
but not simultaneous with it. Suppose, now, instead of taking one event
A, we take two events A and B, and suppose A and B partly overlap, but B
ends before A ends. Then an event which is simultaneous with both A and
B must exist during the time when A and B overlap; thus we have come
rather nearer to a precise date than when we considered A and B alone.
Let C be an event which is simultaneous with both A and B, but which
ends before either A or B has ended. Then an event which is simultaneous
with A and B and C must exist during the time when all three overlap,
which is a still shorter time. Proceeding in this way, by taking more
and more events, a new event which is dated as simultaneous with all of
them becomes gradually more and more accurately dated. This suggests a
way by which a completely accurate date can be defined.

        A____________________

    B____________________

            C________

Let us take a group of events of which any two overlap, so that there is
some time, however short, when they all exist. If there is any other
event which is simultaneous with all of these, let us add it to the
group; let us go on until we have constructed a group such that no event
outside the group is simultaneous with all of them, but all the events
inside the group are simultaneous with each other. Let us define this
whole group as an instant of time. It remains to show that it has the
properties we expect of an instant.

What are the properties we expect of instants? First, they must form a
series: of any two, one must be before the other, and the other must be
not before the one; if one is before another, and the other before a
third, the first must be before the third. Secondly, every event must be
at a certain number of instants; two events are simultaneous if they are
at the same instant, and one is before the other if there is an instant,
at which the one is, which is earlier than some instant at which the
other is. Thirdly, if we assume that there is always some change going
on somewhere during the time when any given event persists, the series
of instants ought to be compact, _i.e._ given any two instants, there
ought to be other instants between them. Do instants, as we have defined
them, have these properties?

We shall say that an event is "at" an instant when it is a member of the
group by which the instant is constituted; and we shall say that one
instant is before another if the group which is the one instant contains
an event which is earlier than, but not simultaneous with, some event in
the group which is the other instant. When one event is earlier than,
but not simultaneous with another, we shall say that it "wholly
precedes" the other. Now we know that of two events which are not
simultaneous, there must be one which wholly precedes the other, and in
that case the other cannot also wholly precede the one; we also know
that, if one event wholly precedes another, and the other wholly
precedes a third, then the first wholly precedes the third. From these
facts it is easy to deduce that the instants as we have defined them
form a series.

We have next to show that every event is "at" at least one instant,
_i.e._ that, given any event, there is at least one class, such as we
used in defining instants, of which it is a member. For this purpose,
consider all the events which are simultaneous with a given event, and
do not begin later, _i.e._ are not wholly after anything simultaneous
with it. We will call these the "initial contemporaries" of the given
event. It will be found that this class of events is the first instant
at which the given event exists, provided every event wholly after some
contemporary of the given event is wholly after some _initial_
contemporary of it.

Finally, the series of instants will be compact if, given any two events
of which one wholly precedes the other, there are events wholly after
the one and simultaneous with something wholly before the other. Whether
this is the case or not, is an empirical question; but if it is not,
there is no reason to expect the time-series to be compact.[17]

  [17] The assumptions made concerning time-relations in the above are
  as follows:--

    I. In order to secure that instants form a series, we assume:

      (a) No event wholly precedes itself. (An "event" is defined as
      whatever is simultaneous with something or other.)

      (b) If one event wholly precedes another, and the other wholly
      precedes a third, then the first wholly precedes the third.

      (c) If one event wholly precedes another, it is not simultaneous
      with it.

      (d) Of two events which are not simultaneous, one must wholly
      precede the other.

    II. In order to secure that the initial contemporaries of a given
    event should form an instant, we assume:

      (e) An event wholly after some contemporary of a given event is
      wholly after some _initial_ contemporary of the given event.

    III. In order to secure that the series of instants shall be
    compact, we assume:

      (f) If one event wholly precedes another, there is an event wholly
      after the one and simultaneous with something wholly before the
      other.

  This assumption entails the consequence that if one event covers the
  whole of a stretch of time immediately preceding another event, then
  it must have at least one instant in common with the other event;
  _i.e._ it is impossible for one event to cease just before another
  begins. I do not know whether this should be regarded as inadmissible.
  For a mathematico-logical treatment of the above topics, _cf._ N.
  Wilner, "A Contribution to the Theory of Relative Position," _Proc.
  Camb. Phil. Soc._, xvii. 5, pp. 441-449.

Thus our definition of instants secures all that mathematics requires,
without having to assume the existence of any disputable metaphysical
entities.

Instants may also be defined by means of the enclosure-relation, exactly
as was done in the case of points. One object will be temporally
enclosed by another when it is simultaneous with the other, but not
before or after it. Whatever encloses temporally or is enclosed
temporally we shall call an "event." In order that the relation of
temporal enclosure may be a "point-producer," we require (1) that it
should be transitive, _i.e._ that if one event encloses another, and the
other a third, then the first encloses the third; (2) that every event
encloses itself, but if one event encloses another different event, then
the other does not enclose the one; (3) that given any set of events
such that there is at least one event enclosed by all of them, then
there is an event enclosing all that they all enclose, and itself
enclosed by all of them; (4) that there is at least one event. To ensure
infinite divisibility, we require also that every event should enclose
events other than itself. Assuming these characteristics, temporal
enclosure is an infinitely divisible point-producer. We can now form an
"enclosure-series" of events, by choosing a group of events such that of
any two there is one which encloses the other; this will be a "punctual
enclosure-series" if, given any other enclosure-series such that every
member of our first series encloses some member of our second, then
every member of our second series encloses some member of our first.
Then an "instant" is the class of all events which enclose members of a
given punctual enclosure-series.

The correlation of the times of different private worlds so as to
produce the one all-embracing time of physics is a more difficult
matter. We saw, in Lecture III., that different private worlds often
contain correlated appearances, such as common sense would regard as
appearances of the same "thing." When two appearances in different
worlds are so correlated as to belong to one momentary "state" of a
thing, it would be natural to regard them as simultaneous, and as thus
affording a simple means of correlating different private times. But
this can only be regarded as a first approximation. What we call one
sound will be heard sooner by people near the source of the sound than
by people further from it, and the same applies, though in a less
degree, to light. Thus two correlated appearances in different worlds
are not necessarily to be regarded as occurring at the same date in
physical time, though they will be parts of one momentary state of a
thing. The correlation of different private times is regulated by the
desire to secure the simplest possible statement of the laws of physics,
and thus raises rather complicated technical problems; but from the
point of view of philosophical theory, there is no very serious
difficulty of principle involved.

The above brief outline must not be regarded as more than tentative and
suggestive. It is intended merely to show the kind of way in which,
given a world with the kind of properties that psychologists find in the
world of sense, it may be possible, by means of purely logical
constructions, to make it amenable to mathematical treatment by defining
series or classes of sense-data which can be called respectively
particles, points, and instants. If such constructions are possible,
then mathematical physics is applicable to the real world, in spite of
the fact that its particles, points, and instants are not to be found
among actually existing entities.

The problem which the above considerations are intended to elucidate is
one whose importance and even existence has been concealed by the
unfortunate separation of different studies which prevails throughout
the civilised world. Physicists, ignorant and contemptuous of
philosophy, have been content to assume their particles, points, and
instants in practice, while conceding, with ironical politeness, that
their concepts laid no claim to metaphysical validity. Metaphysicians,
obsessed by the idealistic opinion that only mind is real, and the
Parmenidean belief that the real is unchanging, repeated one after
another the supposed contradictions in the notions of matter, space, and
time, and therefore naturally made no endeavour to invent a tenable
theory of particles, points, and instants. Psychologists, who have done
invaluable work in bringing to light the chaotic nature of the crude
materials supplied by unmanipulated sensation, have been ignorant of
mathematics and modern logic, and have therefore been content to say
that matter, space, and time are "intellectual constructions," without
making any attempt to show in detail either how the intellect can
construct them, or what secures the practical validity which physics
shows them to possess. Philosophers, it is to be hoped, will come to
recognise that they cannot achieve any solid success in such problems
without some slight knowledge of logic, mathematics, and physics;
meanwhile, for want of students with the necessary equipment, this vital
problem remains unattempted and unknown.

There are, it is true, two authors, both physicists, who have done
something, though not much, to bring about a recognition of the problem
as one demanding study. These two authors are Poincar and Mach,
Poincar especially in his _Science and Hypothesis_, Mach especially in
his _Analysis of Sensations_. Both of them, however, admirable as their
work is, seem to me to suffer from a general philosophical bias.
Poincar is Kantian, while Mach is ultra-empiricist; with Poincar
almost all the mathematical part of physics is merely conventional,
while with Mach the sensation as a mental event is identified with its
object as a part of the physical world. Nevertheless, both these
authors, and especially Mach, deserve mention as having made serious
contributions to the consideration of our problem.

When a point or an instant is defined as a class of sensible qualities,
the first impression produced is likely to be one of wild and wilful
paradox. Certain considerations apply here, however, which will again be
relevant when we come to the definition of numbers. There is a whole
type of problems which can be solved by such definitions, and almost
always there will be at first an effect of paradox. Given a set of
objects any two of which have a relation of the sort called "symmetrical
and transitive," it is almost certain that we shall come to regard them
as all having some common quality, or as all having the same relation to
some one object outside the set. This kind of case is important, and I
shall therefore try to make it clear even at the cost of some repetition
of previous definitions.

A relation is said to be "symmetrical" when, if one term has this
relation to another, then the other also has it to the one. Thus
"brother or sister" is a "symmetrical" relation: if one person is a
brother or a sister of another, then the other is a brother or sister of
the one. Simultaneity, again, is a symmetrical relation; so is equality
in size. A relation is said to be "transitive" when, if one term has
this relation to another, and the other to a third, then the one has it
to the third. The symmetrical relations mentioned just now are also
transitive--provided, in the case of "brother or sister," we allow a
person to be counted as his or her own brother or sister, and provided,
in the case of simultaneity, we mean complete simultaneity, _i.e._
beginning and ending together.

But many relations are transitive without being symmetrical--for
instance, such relations as "greater," "earlier," "to the right of,"
"ancestor of," in fact all such relations as give rise to series. Other
relations are symmetrical without being transitive--for example,
difference in any respect. If A is of a different age from B, and B of a
different age from C, it does not follow that A is of a different age
from C. Simultaneity, again, in the case of events which last for a
finite time, will not necessarily be transitive if it only means that
the times of the two events overlap. If A ends just after B has begun,
and B ends just after C has begun, A and B will be simultaneous in this
sense, and so will B and C, but A and C may well not be simultaneous.

All the relations which can naturally be represented as equality in any
respect, or as possession of a common property, are transitive and
symmetrical--this applies, for example, to such relations as being of
the same height or weight or colour. Owing to the fact that possession
of a common property gives rise to a transitive symmetrical relation, we
come to imagine that wherever such a relation occurs it must be due to a
common property. "Being equally numerous" is a transitive symmetrical
relation of two collections; hence we imagine that both have a common
property, called their number. "Existing at a given instant" (in the
sense in which we defined an instant) is a transitive symmetrical
relation; hence we come to think that there really is an instant which
confers a common property on all the things existing at that instant.
"Being states of a given thing" is a transitive symmetrical relation;
hence we come to imagine that there really is a thing, other than the
series of states, which accounts for the transitive symmetrical
relation. In all such cases, the class of terms that have the given
transitive symmetrical relation to a given term will fulfil all the
formal requisites of a common property of all the members of the class.
Since there certainly is the class, while any other common property may
be illusory, it is prudent, in order to avoid needless assumptions, to
substitute the class for the common property which would be ordinarily
assumed. This is the reason for the definitions we have adopted, and
this is the source of the apparent paradoxes. No harm is done if there
are such common properties as language assumes, since we do not deny
them, but merely abstain from asserting them. But if there are not such
common properties in any given case, then our method has secured us
against error. In the absence of special knowledge, therefore, the
method we have adopted is the only one which is safe, and which avoids
the risk of introducing fictitious metaphysical entities.




LECTURE V

THE THEORY OF CONTINUITY


The theory of continuity, with which we shall be occupied in the present
lecture, is, in most of its refinements and developments, a purely
mathematical subject--very beautiful, very important, and very
delightful, but not, strictly speaking, a part of philosophy. The
logical basis of the theory alone belongs to philosophy, and alone will
occupy us to-night. The way the problem of continuity enters into
philosophy is, broadly speaking, the following: Space and time are
treated by mathematicians as consisting of points and instants, but they
also have a property, easier to feel than to define, which is called
continuity, and is thought by many philosophers to be destroyed when
they are resolved into points and instants. Zeno, as we shall see,
proved that analysis into points and instants was impossible if we
adhered to the view that the number of points or instants in a finite
space or time must be finite. Later philosophers, believing infinite
number to be self-contradictory, have found here an antinomy: Spaces and
times could not consist of a _finite_ number of points and instants, for
such reasons as Zeno's; they could not consist of an _infinite_ number
of points and instants, because infinite numbers were supposed to be
self-contradictory. Therefore spaces and times, if real at all, must not
be regarded as composed of points and instants.

But even when points and instants, as independent entities, are
discarded, as they were by the theory advocated in our last lecture, the
problems of continuity, as I shall try to show presently, remain, in a
practically unchanged form. Let us therefore, to begin with, admit
points and instants, and consider the problems in connection with this
simpler or at least more familiar hypothesis.

The argument against continuity, in so far as it rests upon the supposed
difficulties of infinite numbers, has been disposed of by the positive
theory of the infinite, which will be considered in Lecture VII. But
there remains a feeling--of the kind that led Zeno to the contention
that the arrow in its flight is at rest--which suggests that points and
instants, even if they are infinitely numerous, can only give a jerky
motion, a succession of different immobilities, not the smooth
transitions with which the senses have made us familiar. This feeling is
due, I believe, to a failure to realise imaginatively, as well as
abstractly, the nature of continuous series as they appear in
mathematics. When a theory has been apprehended logically, there is
often a long and serious labour still required in order to _feel_ it: it
is necessary to dwell upon it, to thrust out from the mind, one by one,
the misleading suggestions of false but more familiar theories, to
acquire the kind of intimacy which, in the case of a foreign language,
would enable us to think and dream in it, not merely to construct
laborious sentences by the help of grammar and dictionary. It is, I
believe, the absence of this kind of intimacy which makes many
philosophers regard the mathematical doctrine of continuity as an
inadequate explanation of the continuity which we experience in the
world of sense.

In the present lecture, I shall first try to explain in outline what the
mathematical theory of continuity is in its philosophically important
essentials. The application to actual space and time will not be in
question to begin with. I do not see any reason to suppose that the
points and instants which mathematicians introduce in dealing with space
and time are actual physically existing entities, but I do see reason to
suppose that the continuity of actual space and time may be more or less
analogous to mathematical continuity. The theory of mathematical
continuity is an abstract logical theory, not dependent for its validity
upon any properties of actual space and time. What is claimed for it is
that, when it is understood, certain characteristics of space and time,
previously very hard to analyse, are found not to present any logical
difficulty. What we know empirically about space and time is
insufficient to enable us to decide between various mathematically
possible alternatives, but these alternatives are all fully intelligible
and fully adequate to the observed facts. For the present, however, it
will be well to forget space and time and the continuity of sensible
change, in order to return to these topics equipped with the weapons
provided by the abstract theory of continuity.

Continuity, in mathematics, is a property only possible to a _series_ of
terms, _i.e._ to terms arranged in an order, so that we can say of any
two that one comes _before_ the other. Numbers in order of magnitude,
the points on a line from left to right, the moments of time from
earlier to later, are instances of series. The notion of order, which is
here introduced, is one which is not required in the theory of cardinal
number. It is possible to know that two classes have the same number of
terms without knowing any order in which they are to be taken. We have
an instance of this in such a case as English husbands and English
wives: we can see that there must be the same number of husbands as of
wives, without having to arrange them in a series. But continuity, which
we are now to consider, is essentially a property of an order: it does
not belong to a set of terms in themselves, but only to a set in a
certain order. A set of terms which can be arranged in one order can
always also be arranged in other orders, and a set of terms which can be
arranged in a continuous order can always also be arranged in orders
which are not continuous. Thus the essence of continuity must not be
sought in the nature of the set of terms, but in the nature of their
arrangement in a series.

Mathematicians have distinguished different degrees of continuity, and
have confined the word "continuous," for technical purposes, to series
having a certain high degree of continuity. But for philosophical
purposes, all that is important in continuity is introduced by the
lowest degree of continuity, which is called "compactness." A series is
called "compact" when no two terms are consecutive, but between any two
there are others. One of the simplest examples of a compact series is
the series of fractions in order of magnitude. Given any two fractions,
however near together, there are other fractions greater than the one
and smaller than the other, and therefore no two fractions are
consecutive. There is no fraction, for example, which is next after 1/2:
if we choose some fraction which is very little greater than 1/2, say
51/100 we can find others, such as 101/200, which are nearer to 1/2.
Thus between any two fractions, however little they differ, there are an
infinite number of other fractions. Mathematical space and time also
have this property of compactness, though whether actual space and time
have it is a further question, dependent upon empirical evidence, and
probably incapable of being answered with certainty.

In the case of abstract objects such as fractions, it is perhaps not
very difficult to realise the logical possibility of their forming a
compact series. The difficulties that might be felt are those of
infinity, for in a compact series the number of terms between any two
given terms must be infinite. But when these difficulties have been
solved, the mere compactness in itself offers no great obstacle to the
imagination. In more concrete cases, however, such as motion,
compactness becomes much more repugnant to our habits of thought. It
will therefore be desirable to consider explicitly the mathematical
account of motion, with a view to making its logical possibility felt.
The mathematical account of motion is perhaps artificially simplified
when regarded as describing what actually occurs in the physical world;
but what actually occurs must be capable, by a certain amount of logical
manipulation, of being brought within the scope of the mathematical
account, and must, in its analysis, raise just such problems as are
raised in their simplest form by this account. Neglecting, therefore,
for the present, the question of its physical adequacy, let us devote
ourselves merely to considering its possibility as a formal statement of
the nature of motion.

In order to simplify our problem as much as possible, let us imagine a
tiny speck of light moving along a scale. What do we mean by saying that
the motion is continuous? It is not necessary for our purposes to
consider the whole of what the mathematician means by this statement:
only part of what he means is philosophically important. One part of
what he means is that, if we consider any two positions of the speck
occupied at any two instants, there will be other intermediate positions
occupied at intermediate instants. However near together we take the two
positions, the speck will not jump suddenly from the one to the other,
but will pass through an infinite number of other positions on the way.
Every distance, however small, is traversed by passing through all the
infinite series of positions between the two ends of the distance.

But at this point imagination suggests that we may describe the
continuity of motion by saying that the speck always passes from one
position at one instant to _the next_ position at _the next_ instant. As
soon as we say this or imagine it, we fall into error, because there is
no _next_ point or _next_ instant. If there were, we should find Zeno's
paradoxes, in some form, unavoidable, as will appear in our next
lecture. One simple paradox may serve as an illustration. If our speck
is in motion along the scale throughout the whole of a certain time, it
cannot be at the same point at two consecutive instants. But it cannot,
from one instant to the next, travel further than from one point to the
next, for if it did, there would be no instant at which it was in the
positions intermediate between that at the first instant and that at the
next, and we agreed that the continuity of motion excludes the
possibility of such sudden jumps. It follows that our speck must, so
long as it moves, pass from one point at one instant to the next point
at the next instant. Thus there will be just one perfectly definite
velocity with which all motions must take place: no motion can be faster
than this, and no motion can be slower. Since this conclusion is false,
we must reject the hypothesis upon which it is based, namely that there
are consecutive points and instants.[18] Hence the continuity of motion
must not be supposed to consist in a body's occupying consecutive
positions at consecutive times.

  [18] The above paradox is essentially the same as Zeno's argument of
  the stadium which will be considered in our next lecture.

The difficulty to imagination lies chiefly, I think, in keeping out the
suggestion of _infinitesimal_ distances and times. Suppose we halve a
given distance, and then halve the half, and so on, we can continue the
process as long as we please, and the longer we continue it, the smaller
the resulting distance becomes. This infinite divisibility seems, at
first sight, to imply that there are infinitesimal distances, _i.e._
distances so small that any finite fraction of an inch would be greater.
This, however, is an error. The continued bisection of our distance,
though it gives us continually smaller distances, gives us always
_finite_ distances. If our original distance was an inch, we reach
successively half an inch, a quarter of an inch, an eighth, a sixteenth,
and so on; but every one of this infinite series of diminishing
distances is finite. "But," it may be said, "_in the end_ the distance
will grow infinitesimal." No, because there is no end. The process of
bisection is one which can, theoretically, be carried on for ever,
without any last term being attained. Thus infinite divisibility of
distances, which must be admitted, does not imply that there are
distances so small that any finite distance would be larger.

It is easy, in this kind of question, to fall into an elementary logical
blunder. Given any finite distance, we can find a smaller distance; this
may be expressed in the ambiguous form "there is a distance smaller than
any finite distance." But if this is then interpreted as meaning "there
is a distance such that, whatever finite distance may be chosen, the
distance in question is smaller," then the statement is false. Common
language is ill adapted to expressing matters of this kind, and
philosophers who have been dependent on it have frequently been misled
by it.

In a continuous motion, then, we shall say that at any given instant the
moving body occupies a certain position, and at other instants it
occupies other positions; the interval between any two instants and
between any two positions is always finite, but the continuity of the
motion is shown in the fact that, however near together we take the two
positions and the two instants, there are an infinite number of
positions still nearer together, which are occupied at instants that are
also still nearer together. The moving body never jumps from one
position to another, but always passes by a gradual transition through
an infinite number of intermediaries. At a given instant, it is where it
is, like Zeno's arrow;[19] but we cannot say that it is at rest at the
instant, since the instant does not last for a finite time, and there is
not a beginning and end of the instant with an interval between them.
Rest consists in being in the same position at all the instants
throughout a certain finite period, however short; it does not consist
simply in a body's being where it is at a given instant. This whole
theory, as is obvious, depends upon the nature of compact series, and
demands, for its full comprehension, that compact series should have
become familiar and easy to the imagination as well as to deliberate
thought.

  [19] See next lecture.

What is required may be expressed in mathematical language by saying
that the position of a moving body must be a continuous function of the
time. To define accurately what this means, we proceed as follows.
Consider a particle which, at the moment _t_, is at the point P. Choose
now any small portion P1P2 of the path of the particle, this portion
being one which contains P. We say then that, if the motion of the
particle is continuous at the time _t_, it must be possible to find two
instants _t_1, _t_2, one earlier than _t_ and one later, such that
throughout the whole time from _t_1 to _t_2 (both included), the
particle lies between P1 and P2. And we say that this must still hold
however small we make the portion P1P2. When this is the case, we say
that the motion is continuous at the time _t_; and when the motion is
continuous at all times, we say that the motion as a whole is
continuous. It is obvious that if the particle were to jump suddenly
from P to some other point Q, our definition would fail for all
intervals P1P2 which were too small to include Q. Thus our definition
affords an analysis of the continuity of motion, while admitting points
and instants and denying infinitesimal distances in space or periods in
time.

        P1   P    P2   Q
  ------|----|----|----|------>

Philosophers, mostly in ignorance of the mathematician's analysis, have
adopted other and more heroic methods of dealing with the _prim facie_
difficulties of continuous motion. A typical and recent example of
philosophic theories of motion is afforded by Bergson, whose views on
this subject I have examined elsewhere.[20]

  [20] _Monist_, July 1912, pp. 337-341.

Apart from definite arguments, there are certain feelings, rather than
reasons, which stand in the way of an acceptance of the mathematical
account of motion. To begin with, if a body is moving at all fast, we
_see_ its motion just as we see its colour. A _slow_ motion, like that
of the hour-hand of a watch, is only known in the way which mathematics
would lead us to expect, namely by observing a change of position after
a lapse of time; but, when we observe the motion of the second-hand, we
do not merely see first one position and then another--we see something
as directly sensible as colour. What is this something that we see, and
that we call visible motion? Whatever it is, it is _not_ the successive
occupation of successive positions: something beyond the mathematical
theory of motion is required to account for it. Opponents of the
mathematical theory emphasise this fact. "Your theory," they say, "may
be very logical, and might apply admirably to some other world; but in
this actual world, actual motions are quite different from what your
theory would declare them to be, and require, therefore, some different
philosophy from yours for their adequate explanation."

The objection thus raised is one which I have no wish to underrate, but
I believe it can be fully answered without departing from the methods
and the outlook which have led to the mathematical theory of motion. Let
us, however, first try to state the objection more fully.

If the mathematical theory is adequate, nothing happens when a body
moves except that it is in different places at different times. But in
this sense the hour-hand and the second-hand are equally in motion, yet
in the second-hand there is something perceptible to our senses which is
absent in the hour-hand. We can see, at each moment, that the
second-hand _is moving_, which is different from seeing it first in one
place and then in another. This seems to involve our seeing it
simultaneously in a number of places, although it must also involve our
seeing that it is in some of these places earlier than in others. If,
for example, I move my hand quickly from left to right, you seem to see
the whole movement at once, in spite of the fact that you know it begins
at the left and ends at the right. It is this kind of consideration, I
think, which leads Bergson and many others to regard a movement as
really one indivisible whole, not the series of separate states imagined
by the mathematician.

To this objection there are three supplementary answers, physiological,
psychological, and logical. We will consider them successively.

(1) The physiological answer merely shows that, if the physical world is
what the mathematician supposes, its sensible appearance may
nevertheless be expected to be what it is. The aim of this answer is
thus the modest one of showing that the mathematical account is not
impossible as applied to the physical world; it does not even attempt to
show that this account is necessary, or that an analogous account
applies in psychology.

When any nerve is stimulated, so as to cause a sensation, the sensation
does not cease instantaneously with the cessation of the stimulus, but
dies away in a short finite time. A flash of lightning, brief as it is
to our sight, is briefer still as a physical phenomenon: we continue to
see it for a few moments after the light-waves have ceased to strike the
eye. Thus in the case of a physical motion, if it is sufficiently swift,
we shall actually at one instant see the moving body throughout a finite
portion of its course, and not only at the exact spot where it is at
that instant. Sensations, however, as they die away, grow gradually
fainter; thus the sensation due to a stimulus which is recently past is
not exactly like the sensation due to a present stimulus. It follows
from this that, when we see a rapid motion, we shall not only see a
number of positions of the moving body simultaneously, but we shall see
them with different degrees of intensity--the present position most
vividly, and the others with diminishing vividness, until sensation
fades away into immediate memory. This state of things accounts fully
for the perception of motion. A motion is _perceived_, not merely
_inferred_, when it is sufficiently swift for many positions to be
sensible at one time; and the earlier and later parts of one perceived
motion are distinguished by the less and greater vividness of the
sensations.

This answer shows that physiology can account for our perception of
motion. But physiology, in speaking of stimulus and sense-organs and a
physical motion distinct from the immediate object of sense, is assuming
the truth of physics, and is thus only capable of showing the physical
account to be possible, not of showing it to be _necessary_. This
consideration brings us to the psychological answer.

(2) The psychological answer to our difficulty about motion is part of a
vast theory, not yet worked out, and only capable, at present, of being
vaguely outlined. We considered this theory in the third and fourth
lectures; for the present, a mere sketch of its application to our
present problem must suffice. The world of physics, which was assumed in
the physiological answer, is obviously inferred from what is given in
sensation; yet as soon as we seriously consider what is actually given
in sensation, we find it apparently very different from the world of
physics. The question is thus forced upon us: Is the inference from
sense to physics a valid one? I believe the answer to be affirmative,
for reasons which I suggested in the third and fourth lectures; but the
answer cannot be either short or easy. It consists, broadly speaking, in
showing that, although the particles, points, and instants with which
physics operates are not themselves given in experience, and are very
likely not actually existing things, yet, out of the materials provided
in sensation, it is possible to make logical constructions having the
mathematical properties which physics assigns to particles, points, and
instants. If this can be done, then all the propositions of physics can
be translated, by a sort of dictionary, into propositions about the
kinds of objects which are given in sensation.

Applying these general considerations to the case of motion, we find
that, even within the sphere of immediate sense-data, it is necessary,
or at any rate more consonant with the facts than any other equally
simple view, to distinguish instantaneous states of objects, and to
regard such states as forming a compact series. Let us consider a body
which is moving swiftly enough for its motion to be perceptible, and
long enough for its motion to be not wholly comprised in one sensation.
Then, in spite of the fact that we see a finite extent of the motion at
one instant, the extent which we see at one instant is different from
that which we see at another. Thus we are brought back, after all, to a
series of momentary views of the moving body, and this series will be
compact, like the former physical series of points. In fact, though the
_terms_ of the series seem different, the mathematical character of the
series is unchanged, and the whole mathematical theory of motion will
apply to it _verbatim_.

When we are considering the actual data of sensation in this connection,
it is important to realise that two sense-data may be, and _must_
sometimes be, really different when we cannot perceive any difference
between them. An old but conclusive reason for believing this was
emphasised by Poincar.[21] In all cases of sense-data capable of
gradual change, we may find one sense-datum indistinguishable from
another, and that other indistinguishable from a third, while yet the
first and third are quite easily distinguishable. Suppose, for example,
a person with his eyes shut is holding a weight in his hand, and someone
noiselessly adds a small extra weight. If the extra weight is small
enough, no difference will be perceived in the sensation. After a time,
another small extra weight may be added, and still no change will be
perceived; but if both extra weights had been added at once, it may be
that the change would be quite easily perceptible. Or, again, take
shades of colour. It would be easy to find three stuffs of such closely
similar shades that no difference could be perceived between the first
and second, nor yet between the second and third, while yet the first
and third would be distinguishable. In such a case, the second shade
cannot be the same as the first, or it would be distinguishable from the
third; nor the same as the third, or it would be distinguishable from
the first. It must, therefore, though indistinguishable from both, be
really intermediate between them.

  [21] "Le continu mathmatique," _Revue de Mtaphysique et de Morale_,
  vol. i. p. 29.

Such considerations as the above show that, although we cannot
distinguish sense-data unless they differ by more than a certain amount,
it is perfectly reasonable to suppose that sense-data of a given kind,
such as weights or colours, really form a compact series. The objections
which may be brought from a psychological point of view against the
mathematical theory of motion are not, therefore, objections to this
theory properly understood, but only to a quite unnecessary assumption
of simplicity in the momentary object of sense. Of the immediate object
of sense, in the case of a visible motion, we may say that at each
instant it is in all the positions which remain sensible at that
instant; but this set of positions changes continuously from moment to
moment, and is amenable to exactly the same mathematical treatment as if
it were a mere point. When we assert that some mathematical account of
phenomena is correct, all that we primarily assert is that _something_
definable in terms of the crude phenomena satisfies our formul; and in
this sense the mathematical theory of motion is applicable to the data
of sensation as well as to the supposed particles of abstract physics.

There are a number of distinct questions which are apt to be confused
when the mathematical continuum is said to be inadequate to the facts of
sense. We may state these, in order of diminishing generality, as
follows:--

    (a) Are series possessing mathematical continuity logically
    possible?

    (b) Assuming that they are possible logically, are they not
    impossible as applied to actual sense-data, because, among actual
    sense-data, there are no such fixed mutually external terms as are
    to be found, _e.g._, in the series of fractions?

    (c) Does not the assumption of points and instants make the whole
    mathematical account fictitious?

    (d) Finally, assuming that all these objections have been answered,
    is there, in actual empirical fact, any sufficient reason to believe
    the world of sense continuous?

Let us consider these questions in succession.

(a) The question of the logical possibility of the mathematical
continuum turns partly on the elementary misunderstandings we considered
at the beginning of the present lecture, partly on the possibility of
the mathematical infinite, which will occupy our next two lectures, and
partly on the logical form of the answer to the Bergsonian objection
which we stated a few minutes ago. I shall say no more on this topic at
present, since it is desirable first to complete the psychological
answer.

(b) The question whether sense-data are composed of mutually external
units is not one which can be decided by empirical evidence. It is often
urged that, as a matter of immediate experience, the sensible flux is
devoid of divisions, and is falsified by the dissections of the
intellect. Now I have no wish to argue that this view is _contrary_ to
immediate experience: I wish only to maintain that it is essentially
incapable of being _proved_ by immediate experience. As we saw, there
must be among sense-data differences so slight as to be imperceptible:
the fact that sense-data are immediately given does not mean that their
differences also _must_ be immediately given (though they _may_ be).
Suppose, for example, a coloured surface on which the colour changes
gradually--so gradually that the difference of colour in two very
neighbouring portions is imperceptible, while the difference between
more widely separated portions is quite noticeable. The effect produced,
in such a case, will be precisely that of "interpenetration," of
transition which is not a matter of discrete units. And since it tends
to be supposed that the colours, being immediate data, must _appear_
different if they _are_ different, it seems easily to follow that
"interpenetration" must be the ultimately right account. But this does
not follow. It is unconsciously assumed, as a premiss for a _reductio ad
absurdum_ of the analytic view, that, if A and B are immediate data, and
A differs from B, then the fact that they differ must also be an
immediate datum. It is difficult to say how this assumption arose, but I
think it is to be connected with the confusion between "acquaintance"
and "knowledge about." Acquaintance, which is what we derive from sense,
does not, theoretically at least, imply even the smallest "knowledge
about," _i.e._ it does not imply knowledge of any proposition concerning
the object with which we are acquainted. It is a mistake to speak as if
acquaintance had degrees: there is merely acquaintance and
non-acquaintance. When we speak of becoming "better acquainted," as for
instance with a person, what we must mean is, becoming acquainted with
more parts of a certain whole; but the acquaintance with each part is
either complete or nonexistent. Thus it is a mistake to say that if we
were perfectly acquainted with an object we should know all about it.
"Knowledge about" is knowledge of propositions, which is not involved
necessarily in acquaintance with the constituents of the propositions.
To know that two shades of colour are different is knowledge about them;
hence acquaintance with the two shades does not in any way necessitate
the knowledge that they are different.

From what has just been said it follows that the nature of sense-data
cannot be validly used to prove that they are not composed of mutually
external units. It may be admitted, on the other hand, that nothing in
their empirical character specially necessitates the view that they are
composed of mutually external units. This view, if it is held, must be
held on logical, not on empirical, grounds. I believe that the logical
grounds are adequate to the conclusion. They rest, at bottom, upon the
impossibility of explaining complexity without assuming constituents. It
is undeniable that the visual field, for example, is complex; and so far
as I can see, there is always self-contradiction in the theories which,
while admitting this complexity, attempt to deny that it results from a
combination of mutually external units. But to pursue this topic would
lead us too far from our theme, and I shall therefore say no more about
it at present.

(c) It is sometimes urged that the mathematical account of motion is
rendered fictitious by its assumption of points and instants. Now there
are here two different questions to be distinguished. There is the
question of absolute or relative space and time, and there is the
question whether what occupies space and time must be composed of
elements which have no extension or duration. And each of these
questions in turn may take two forms, namely: () is the hypothesis
_consistent_ with the facts and with logic? () is it _necessitated_ by
the facts or by logic? I wish to answer, in each case, yes to the first
form of the question, and no to the second. But in any case the
mathematical account of motion will not be fictitious, provided a right
interpretation is given to the words "point" and "instant." A few words
on each alternative will serve to make this clear.

Formally, mathematics adopts an absolute theory of space and time,
_i.e._ it assumes that, besides the things which are in space and time,
there are also entities, called "points" and "instants," which are
occupied by things. This view, however, though advocated by Newton, has
long been regarded by mathematicians as merely a convenient fiction.
There is, so far as I can see, no conceivable evidence either for or
against it. It is logically possible, and it is consistent with the
facts. But the facts are also consistent with the denial of spatial and
temporal entities over and above things with spatial and temporal
relations. Hence, in accordance with Occam's razor, we shall do well to
abstain from either assuming or denying points and instants. This means,
so far as practical working out is concerned, that we adopt the
relational theory; for in practice the refusal to assume points and
instants has the same effect as the denial of them. But in strict theory
the two are quite different, since the denial introduces an element of
unverifiable dogma which is wholly absent when we merely refrain from
the assertion. Thus, although we shall derive points and instants from
things, we shall leave the bare possibility open that they may also have
an independent existence as simple entities.

We come now to the question whether the things in space and time are to
be conceived as composed of elements without extension or duration,
_i.e._ of elements which only occupy a point and an instant. Physics,
formally, assumes in its differential equations that things consist of
elements which occupy only a point at each instant, but persist
throughout time. For reasons explained in Lecture IV., the persistence
of things through time is to be regarded as the formal result of a
logical construction, not as necessarily implying any actual
persistence. The same motives, in fact, which lead to the division of
things into point-particles, ought presumably to lead to their division
into instant-particles, so that the ultimate _formal_ constituent of the
matter in physics will be a point-instant-particle. But such objects, as
well as the particles of physics, are not data. The same economy of
hypothesis, which dictates the practical adoption of a relative rather
than an absolute space and time, also dictates the practical adoption of
material elements which have a finite extension and duration. Since, as
we saw in Lecture IV., points and instants can be constructed as logical
functions of such elements, the mathematical account of motion, in which
a particle passes continuously through a continuous series of points,
can be interpreted in a form which assumes only elements which agree
with our actual data in having a finite extension and duration. Thus, so
far as the use of points and instants is concerned, the mathematical
account of motion can be freed from the charge of employing fictions.

(d) But we must now face the question: Is there, in actual empirical
fact, any sufficient reason to believe the world of sense continuous?
The answer here must, I think, be in the negative. We may say that the
hypothesis of continuity is perfectly consistent with the facts and with
logic, and that it is technically simpler than any other tenable
hypothesis. But since our powers of discrimination among very similar
sensible objects are not infinitely precise, it is quite impossible to
decide between different theories which only differ in regard to what is
below the margin of discrimination. If, for example, a coloured surface
which we see consists of a finite number of very small surfaces, and if
a motion which we see consists, like a cinematograph, of a large finite
number of successive positions, there will be nothing empirically
discoverable to show that objects of sense are not continuous. In what
is called _experienced_ continuity, such as is said to be given in
sense, there is a large negative element: absence of perception of
difference occurs in cases which are _thought_ to give perception of
absence of difference. When, for example, we cannot distinguish a colour
A from a colour B, nor a colour B from a colour C, but can distinguish A
from C, the indistinguishability is a purely negative fact, namely, that
we do not _perceive_ a difference. Even in regard to immediate data,
this is no reason for denying that there is a difference. Thus, if we
see a coloured surface whose colour changes gradually, its sensible
appearance if the change is continuous will be indistinguishable from
what it would be if the change were by small finite jumps. If this is
true, as it seems to be, it follows that there can never be any
empirical evidence to demonstrate that the sensible world is continuous,
and not a collection of a very large finite number of elements of which
each differs from its neighbour in a finite though very small degree.
The continuity of space and time, the infinite number of different
shades in the spectrum, and so on, are all in the nature of unverifiable
hypotheses--perfectly possible logically, perfectly consistent with the
known facts, and simpler technically than any other tenable hypotheses,
but not the sole hypotheses which are logically and empirically
adequate.

If a relational theory of instants is constructed, in which an "instant"
is defined as a group of events simultaneous with each other and not all
simultaneous with any event outside the group, then if our resulting
series of instants is to be compact, it must be possible, if _x_ wholly
precedes _y_, to find an event _z_, simultaneous with part of _x_, which
wholly precedes some event which wholly precedes _y_. Now this requires
that the number of events concerned should be infinite in any finite
period of time. If this is to be the case in the world of one man's
sense-data, and if each sense-datum is to have not less than a certain
finite temporal extension, it will be necessary to assume that we always
have an infinite number of sense-data simultaneous with any given
sense-datum. Applying similar considerations to space, and assuming that
sense-data are to have not less than a certain spatial extension, it
will be necessary to suppose that an infinite number of sense-data
overlap spatially with any given sense-datum. This hypothesis is
possible, if we suppose a single sense-datum, _e.g._ in sight, to be a
finite surface, enclosing other surfaces which are also single
sense-data. But there are difficulties in such a hypothesis, and I do
not know whether these difficulties could be successfully met. If they
cannot, we must do one of two things: either declare that the world of
one man's sense-data is not continuous, or else refuse to admit that
there is any lower limit to the duration and extension of a single
sense-datum. I do not know what is the right course to adopt as regards
these alternatives. The logical analysis we have been considering
provides the apparatus for dealing with the various hypotheses, and the
empirical decision between them is a problem for the psychologist.

(3) We have now to consider the _logical_ answer to the alleged
difficulties of the mathematical theory of motion, or rather to the
positive theory which is urged on the other side. The view urged
explicitly by Bergson, and implied in the doctrines of many
philosophers, is, that a motion is something indivisible, not validly
analysable into a series of states. This is part of a much more general
doctrine, which holds that analysis always falsifies, because the parts
of a complex whole are different, as combined in that whole, from what
they would otherwise be. It is very difficult to state this doctrine in
any form which has a precise meaning. Often arguments are used which
have no bearing whatever upon the question. It is urged, for example,
that when a man becomes a father, his nature is altered by the new
relation in which he finds himself, so that he is not strictly identical
with the man who was previously not a father. This may be true, but it
is a causal psychological fact, not a logical fact. The doctrine would
require that a man who is a father cannot be strictly identical with a
man who is a son, because he is modified in one way by the relation of
fatherhood and in another by that of sonship. In fact, we may give a
precise statement of the doctrine we are combating in the form: _There
can never be two facts concerning the same thing._ A fact concerning a
thing always is or involves a relation to one or more entities; thus two
facts concerning the same thing would involve two relations of the same
thing. But the doctrine in question holds that a thing is so modified by
its relations that it cannot be the same in one relation as in another.
Hence, if this doctrine is true, there can never be more than one fact
concerning any one thing. I do not think the philosophers in question
have realised that this is the precise statement of the view they
advocate, because in this form the view is so contrary to plain truth
that its falsehood is evident as soon as it is stated. The discussion of
this question, however, involves so many logical subtleties, and is so
beset with difficulties, that I shall not pursue it further at present.

When once the above general doctrine is rejected, it is obvious that,
where there is change, there must be a succession of states. There
cannot be change--and motion is only a particular case of change--unless
there is something different at one time from what there is at some
other time. Change, therefore, must involve relations and complexity,
and must demand analysis. So long as our analysis has only gone as far
as other smaller changes, it is not complete; if it is to be complete,
it must end with terms that are not changes, but are related by a
relation of earlier and later. In the case of changes which appear
continuous, such as motions, it seems to be impossible to find anything
other than change so long as we deal with finite periods of time,
however short. We are thus driven back, by the logical necessities of
the case, to the conception of instants without duration, or at any rate
without any duration which even the most delicate instruments can
reveal. This conception, though it can be made to seem difficult, is
really easier than any other that the facts allow. It is a kind of
logical framework into which any tenable theory must fit--not
necessarily itself the statement of the crude facts, but a form in which
statements which are true of the crude facts can be made by a suitable
interpretation. The direct consideration of the crude facts of the
physical world has been undertaken in earlier lectures; in the present
lecture, we have only been concerned to show that nothing in the crude
facts is inconsistent with the mathematical doctrine of continuity, or
demands a continuity of a radically different kind from that of
mathematical motion.




LECTURE VI

THE PROBLEM OF INFINITY CONSIDERED HISTORICALLY


It will be remembered that, when we enumerated the grounds upon which
the reality of the sensible world has been questioned, one of those
mentioned was the supposed impossibility of infinity and continuity. In
view of our earlier discussion of physics, it would seem that no
_conclusive_ empirical evidence exists in favour of infinity or
continuity in objects of sense or in matter. Nevertheless, the
explanation which assumes infinity and continuity remains incomparably
easier and more natural, from a scientific point of view, than any
other, and since Georg Cantor has shown that the supposed contradictions
are illusory, there is no longer any reason to struggle after a finitist
explanation of the world.

The supposed difficulties of continuity all have their source in the
fact that a continuous series must have an infinite number of terms, and
are in fact difficulties concerning infinity. Hence, in freeing the
infinite from contradiction, we are at the same time showing the logical
possibility of continuity as assumed in science.

The kind of way in which infinity has been used to discredit the world
of sense may be illustrated by Kant's first two antinomies. In the
first, the thesis states: "The world has a beginning in time, and as
regards space is enclosed within limits"; the antithesis states: "The
world has no beginning and no limits in space, but is infinite in
respect of both time and space." Kant professes to prove both these
propositions, whereas, if what we have said on modern logic has any
truth, it must be impossible to prove either. In order, however, to
rescue the world of sense, it is enough to destroy the proof of _one_ of
the two. For our present purpose, it is the proof that the world is
_finite_ that interests us. Kant's argument as regards space here rests
upon his argument as regards time. We need therefore only examine the
argument as regards time. What he says is as follows:

"For let us assume that the world has no beginning as regards time, so
that up to every given instant an eternity has elapsed, and therefore an
infinite series of successive states of the things in the world has
passed by. But the infinity of a series consists just in this, that it
can never be completed by successive synthesis. Therefore an infinite
past world-series is impossible, and accordingly a beginning of the
world is a necessary condition of its existence; which was the first
thing to be proved."

Many different criticisms might be passed on this argument, but we will
content ourselves with a bare minimum. To begin with, it is a mistake to
define the infinity of a series as "impossibility of completion by
successive synthesis." The notion of infinity, as we shall see in the
next lecture, is primarily a property of _classes_, and only
derivatively applicable to series; classes which are infinite are given
all at once by the defining property of their members, so that there is
no question of "completion" or of "successive synthesis." And the word
"synthesis," by suggesting the mental activity of synthesising,
introduces, more or less surreptitiously, that reference to mind by
which all Kant's philosophy was infected. In the second place, when Kant
says that an infinite series can "never" be completed by successive
synthesis, all that he has even conceivably a right to say is that it
cannot be completed _in a finite time_. Thus what he really proves is,
at most, that if the world had no beginning, it must have already
existed for an infinite time. This, however, is a very poor conclusion,
by no means suitable for his purposes. And with this result we might, if
we chose, take leave of the first antinomy.

It is worth while, however, to consider how Kant came to make such an
elementary blunder. What happened in his imagination was obviously
something like this: Starting from the present and going backwards in
time, we have, if the world had no beginning, an infinite series of
events. As we see from the word "synthesis," he imagined a mind trying
to grasp these successively, _in the reverse order_ to that in which
they had occurred, _i.e._ going from the present backwards. _This_
series is obviously one which has no end. But the series of events up to
the present has an end, since it ends with the present. Owing to the
inveterate subjectivism of his mental habits, he failed to notice that
he had reversed the sense of the series by substituting backward
synthesis for forward happening, and thus he supposed that it was
necessary to identify the mental series, which had no end, with the
physical series, which had an end but no beginning. It was this mistake,
I think, which, operating unconsciously, led him to attribute validity
to a singularly flimsy piece of fallacious reasoning.

The second antinomy illustrates the dependence of the problem of
continuity upon that of infinity. The thesis states: "Every complex
substance in the world consists of simple parts, and there exists
everywhere nothing but the simple or what is composed of it." The
antithesis states: "No complex thing in the world consists of simple
parts, and everywhere in it there exists nothing simple." Here, as
before, the proofs of both thesis and antithesis are open to criticism,
but for the purpose of vindicating physics and the world of sense it is
enough to find a fallacy in _one_ of the proofs. We will choose for this
purpose the proof of the antithesis, which begins as follows:

"Assume that a complex thing (as substance) consists of simple parts.
Since all external relation, and therefore all composition out of
substances, is only possible in space, the space occupied by a complex
thing must consist of as many parts as the thing consists of. Now space
does not consist of simple parts, but of spaces."

The rest of his argument need not concern us, for the nerve of the proof
lies in the one statement: "Space does not consist of simple parts, but
of spaces." This is like Bergson's objection to "the absurd proposition
that motion is made up of immobilities." Kant does not tell us why he
holds that a space must consist of spaces rather than of simple parts.
Geometry regards space as made up of points, which are simple; and
although, as we have seen, this view is not scientifically or logically
_necessary_, it remains _prim facie_ possible, and its mere possibility
is enough to vitiate Kant's argument. For, if his proof of the thesis of
the antinomy were valid, and if the antithesis could only be avoided by
assuming points, then the antinomy itself would afford a conclusive
reason in favour of points. Why, then, did Kant think it impossible that
space should be composed of points?

I think two considerations probably influenced him. In the first place,
the essential thing about space is spatial order, and mere points, by
themselves, will not account for spatial order. It is obvious that his
argument assumes absolute space; but it is spatial _relations_ that are
alone important, and they cannot be reduced to points. This ground for
his view depends, therefore, upon his ignorance of the logical theory of
order and his oscillations between absolute and relative space. But
there is also another ground for his opinion, which is more relevant to
our present topic. This is the ground derived from infinite
divisibility. A space may be halved, and then halved again, and so on
_ad infinitum_, and at every stage of the process the parts are still
spaces, not points. In order to reach points by such a method, it would
be necessary to come to the end of an unending process, which is
impossible. But just as an infinite class can be given all at once by
its defining concept, though it cannot be reached by successive
enumeration, so an infinite set of points can be given all at once as
making up a line or area or volume, though they can never be reached by
the process of successive division. Thus the infinite divisibility of
space gives no ground for denying that space is composed of points. Kant
does not give his grounds for this denial, and we can therefore only
conjecture what they were. But the above two grounds, which we have seen
to be fallacious, seem sufficient to account for his opinion, and we may
therefore conclude that the antithesis of the second antinomy is
unproved.

The above illustration of Kant's antinomies has only been introduced in
order to show the relevance of the problem of infinity to the problem of
the reality of objects of sense. In the remainder of the present
lecture, I wish to state and explain the problem of infinity, to show
how it arose, and to show the irrelevance of all the solutions proposed
by philosophers. In the following lecture, I shall try to explain the
true solution, which has been discovered by the mathematicians, but
nevertheless belongs essentially to philosophy. The solution is
definitive, in the sense that it entirely satisfies and convinces all
who study it carefully. For over two thousand years the human intellect
was baffled by the problem; its many failures and its ultimate success
make this problem peculiarly apt for the illustration of method.

The problem appears to have first arisen in some such way as the
following.[22] Pythagoras and his followers, who were interested, like
Descartes, in the application of number to geometry, adopted in that
science more arithmetical methods than those with which Euclid has made
us familiar. They, or their contemporaries the atomists, believed,
apparently, that space is composed of indivisible points, while time is
composed of indivisible instants.[23] This belief would not, by itself,
have raised the difficulties which they encountered, but it was
presumably accompanied by another belief, that the number of points in
any finite area or of instants in any finite period must be finite. I do
not suppose that this latter belief was a conscious one, because
probably no other possibility had occurred to them. But the belief
nevertheless operated, and very soon brought them into conflict with
facts which they themselves discovered. Before explaining how this
occurred, however, it is necessary to say one word in explanation of the
phrase "finite number." The _exact_ explanation is a matter for our next
lecture; for the present, it must suffice to say that I mean 0 and 1 and
2 and 3 and so on, for ever--in other words, any number that can be
obtained by successively adding ones. This includes all the numbers that
can be expressed by means of our ordinary numerals, and since such
numbers can be made greater and greater, without ever reaching an
unsurpassable maximum, it is easy to suppose that there are no other
numbers. But this supposition, natural as it is, is mistaken.

  [22] In what concerns the early Greek philosophers, my knowledge is
  largely derived from Burnet's valuable work, _Early Greek Philosophy_
  (2nd ed., London, 1908). I have also been greatly assisted by Mr D. S.
  Robertson of Trinity College, who has supplied the deficiencies of my
  knowledge of Greek, and brought important references to my notice.

  [23] _Cf._ Aristotle, _Metaphysics_, M. 6, 1080b, 18 _sqq._, and
  1083b, 8 _sqq._

Whether the Pythagoreans themselves believed space and time to be
composed of indivisible points and instants is a debatable question.[24]
It would seem that the distinction between space and matter had not yet
been clearly made, and that therefore, when an atomistic view is
expressed, it is difficult to decide whether particles of matter or
points of space are intended. There is an interesting passage[25] in
Aristotle's _Physics_,[26] where he says:

"The Pythagoreans all maintained the existence of the void, and said
that it enters into the heaven itself from the boundless breath,
inasmuch as the heaven breathes in the void also; and the void
differentiates natures, as if it were a sort of separation of
consecutives, and as if it were their differentiation; and that this
also is what is first in numbers, for it is the void which
differentiates them."

  [24] There is some reason to think that the Pythagoreans distinguished
  between discrete and continuous quantity. G. J. Allman, in his _Greek
  Geometry from Thales to Euclid_, says (p. 23): "The Pythagoreans made
  a fourfold division of mathematical science, attributing one of its
  parts to the how many,  , and the other to the how much, 
  ; and they assigned to each of these parts a twofold division.
  For they said that discrete quantity, or the _how many_, either
  subsists by itself or must be considered with relation to some other;
  but that continued quantity, or the _how much_, is either stable or in
  motion. Hence they affirmed that arithmetic contemplates that discrete
  quantity which subsists by itself, but music that which is related to
  another; and that geometry considers continued quantity so far as it
  is immovable; but astronomy ( ) contemplates continued
  quantity so far as it is of a self-motive nature. (Proclus, ed.
  Friedlein, p. 35. As to the distinction between  ,
  continuous, and  , discrete quantity, see Iambl., _in Nicomachi
  Geraseni Arithmeticam introductionem_, ed. Tennulius, p. 148.)" _Cf._
  p. 48.

  [25] Referred to by Burnet, _op. cit._, p. 120.

  [26] iv., 6. 213b, 22; H. Ritter and L. Preller, _Historia Philosophi
  Grc_, 8th ed., Gotha, 1898, p. 75 (this work will be referred to in
  future as "R. P.").

This seems to imply that they regarded matter as consisting of atoms
with empty space in between. But if so, they must have thought space
could be studied by only paying attention to the atoms, for otherwise it
would be hard to account for their arithmetical methods in geometry, or
for their statement that "things are numbers."

The difficulty which beset the Pythagoreans in their attempts to apply
numbers arose through their discovery of incommensurables, and this, in
turn, arose as follows. Pythagoras, as we all learnt in youth,
discovered the proposition that the sum of the squares on the sides of a
right-angled triangle is equal to the square on the hypotenuse. It is
said that he sacrificed an ox when he discovered this theorem; if so,
the ox was the first martyr to science. But the theorem, though it has
remained his chief claim to immortality, was soon found to have a
consequence fatal to his whole philosophy. Consider the case of a
right-angled triangle whose two sides are equal, such a triangle as is
formed by two sides of a square and a diagonal. Here, in virtue of the
theorem, the square on the diagonal is double of the square on either of
the sides. But Pythagoras or his early followers easily proved that the
square of one whole number cannot be double of the square of
another.[27] Thus the length of the side and the length of the diagonal
are incommensurable; that is to say, however small a unit of length you
take, if it is contained an exact number of times in the side, it is not
contained any exact number of times in the diagonal, and _vice versa_.

  [27] The Pythagorean proof is roughly as follows. If possible, let the
  ratio of the diagonal to the side of a square be _m_/_n_, where _m_
  and _n_ are whole numbers having no common factor. Then we must have
  _m_2 = 2_n_2. Now the square of an odd number is odd, but _m_2, being
  equal to 2_n_2, is even. Hence _m_ must be even. But the square of an
  even number divides by 4, therefore _n_2, which is half of _m_2, must
  be even. Therefore _n_ must be even. But, since _m_ is even, and _m_
  and _n_ have no common factor, _n_ must be odd. Thus _n_ must be both
  odd and even, which is impossible; and therefore the diagonal and the
  side cannot have a rational ratio.

Now this fact might have been assimilated by some philosophies without
any great difficulty, but to the philosophy of Pythagoras it was
absolutely fatal. Pythagoras held that number is the constitutive
essence of all things, yet no two numbers could express the ratio of the
side of a square to the diagonal. It would seem probable that we may
expand his difficulty, without departing from his thought, by assuming
that he regarded the length of a line as determined by the number of
atoms contained in it--a line two inches long would contain twice as
many atoms as a line one inch long, and so on. But if this were the
truth, then there must be a definite numerical ratio between any two
finite lengths, because it was supposed that the number of atoms in
each, however large, must be finite. Here there was an insoluble
contradiction. The Pythagoreans, it is said, resolved to keep the
existence of incommensurables a profound secret, revealed only to a few
of the supreme heads of the sect; and one of their number, Hippasos of
Metapontion, is even said to have been shipwrecked at sea for impiously
disclosing the terrible discovery to their enemies. It must be
remembered that Pythagoras was the founder of a new religion as well as
the teacher of a new science: if the science came to be doubted, the
disciples might fall into sin, and perhaps even eat beans, which
according to Pythagoras is as bad as eating parents' bones.

The problem first raised by the discovery of incommensurables proved, as
time went on, to be one of the most severe and at the same time most
far-reaching problems that have confronted the human intellect in its
endeavour to understand the world. It showed at once that numerical
measurement of lengths, if it was to be made accurate, must require an
arithmetic more advanced and more difficult than any that the ancients
possessed. They therefore set to work to reconstruct geometry on a basis
which did not assume the universal possibility of numerical
measurement--a reconstruction which, as may be seen in Euclid, they
effected with extraordinary skill and with great logical acumen. The
moderns, under the influence of Cartesian geometry, have reasserted the
universal possibility of numerical measurement, extending arithmetic,
partly for that purpose, so as to include what are called "irrational"
numbers, which give the ratios of incommensurable lengths. But although
irrational numbers have long been used without a qualm, it is only in
quite recent years that logically satisfactory definitions of them have
been given. With these definitions, the first and most obvious form of
the difficulty which confronted the Pythagoreans has been solved; but
other forms of the difficulty remain to be considered, and it is these
that introduce us to the problem of infinity in its pure form.

We saw that, accepting the view that a length is composed of points, the
existence of incommensurables proves that every finite length must
contain an infinite number of points. In other words, if we were to take
away points one by one, we should never have taken away all the points,
however long we continued the process. The number of points, therefore,
cannot be _counted_, for counting is a process which enumerates things
one by one. The property of being unable to be counted is characteristic
of infinite collections, and is a source of many of their paradoxical
qualities. So paradoxical are these qualities that until our own day
they were thought to constitute logical contradictions. A long line of
philosophers, from Zeno[28] to M. Bergson, have based much of their
metaphysics upon the supposed impossibility of infinite collections.
Broadly speaking, the difficulties were stated by Zeno, and nothing
material was added until we reach Bolzano's _Paradoxien des
Unendlichen_, a little work written in 1847-8, and published
posthumously in 1851. Intervening attempts to deal with the problem are
futile and negligible. The definitive solution of the difficulties is
due, not to Bolzano, but to Georg Cantor, whose work on this subject
first appeared in 1882.

  [28] In regard to Zeno and the Pythagoreans, I have derived much
  valuable information and criticism from Mr P. E. B. Jourdain.

In order to understand Zeno, and to realise how little modern orthodox
metaphysics has added to the achievements of the Greeks, we must
consider for a moment his master Parmenides, in whose interest the
paradoxes were invented.[29] Parmenides expounded his views in a poem
divided into two parts, called "the way of truth" and "the way of
opinion"--like Mr Bradley's "Appearance" and "Reality," except that
Parmenides tells us first about reality and then about appearance. "The
way of opinion," in his philosophy, is, broadly speaking,
Pythagoreanism; it begins with a warning: "Here I shall close my
trustworthy speech and thought about the truth. Henceforward learn the
opinions of mortals, giving ear to the deceptive ordering of my words."
What has gone before has been revealed by a goddess, who tells him what
really _is_. Reality, she says, is uncreated, indestructible,
unchanging, indivisible; it is "immovable in the bonds of mighty chains,
without beginning and without end; since coming into being and passing
away have been driven afar, and true belief has cast them away." The
fundamental principle of his inquiry is stated in a sentence which would
not be out of place in Hegel:[30] "Thou canst not know what is not--that
is impossible--nor utter it; for it is the same thing that can be
thought and that can be." And again: "It needs must be that what can be
thought and spoken of is; for it is possible for it to be, and it is not
possible for what is nothing to be." The impossibility of change follows
from this principle; for what is past can be spoken of, and therefore,
by the principle, still is.

  [29] So Plato makes Zeno say in the _Parmenides_, apropos of his
  philosophy as a whole; and all internal and external evidence supports
  this view.

  [30] "With Parmenides," Hegel says, "philosophising proper began."
  _Werke_ (edition of 1840), vol. xiii. p. 274.

The great conception of a reality behind the passing illusions of sense,
a reality one, indivisible, and unchanging, was thus introduced into
Western philosophy by Parmenides, not, it would seem, for mystical or
religious reasons, but on the basis of a logical argument as to the
impossibility of not-being. All the great metaphysical systems--notably
those of Plato, Spinoza, and Hegel--are the outcome of this fundamental
idea. It is difficult to disentangle the truth and the error in this
view. The contention that time is unreal and that the world of sense is
illusory must, I think, be regarded as based upon fallacious reasoning.
Nevertheless, there is some sense--easier to feel than to state--in
which time is an unimportant and superficial characteristic of reality.
Past and future must be acknowledged to be as real as the present, and a
certain emancipation from slavery to time is essential to philosophic
thought. The importance of time is rather practical than theoretical,
rather in relation to our desires than in relation to truth. A truer
image of the world, I think, is obtained by picturing things as entering
into the stream of time from an eternal world outside, than from a view
which regards time as the devouring tyrant of all that is. Both in
thought and in feeling, to realise the unimportance of time is the gate
of wisdom. But unimportance is not unreality; and therefore what we
shall have to say about Zeno's arguments in support of Parmenides must
be mainly critical.

The relation of Zeno to Parmenides is explained by Plato[31] in the
dialogue in which Socrates, as a young man, learns logical acumen and
philosophic disinterestedness from their dialectic. I quote from
Jowett's translation:

"I see, Parmenides, said Socrates, that Zeno is your second self in his
writings too; he puts what you say in another way, and would fain
deceive us into believing that he is telling us what is new. For you, in
your poems, say All is one, and of this you adduce excellent proofs; and
he on the other hand says There is no Many; and on behalf of this he
offers overwhelming evidence. To deceive the world, as you have done, by
saying the same thing in different ways, one of you affirming the one,
and the other denying the many, is a strain of art beyond the reach of
most of us.

"Yes, Socrates, said Zeno. But although you are as keen as a Spartan
hound in pursuing the track, you do not quite apprehend the true motive
of the composition, which is not really such an ambitious work as you
imagine; for what you speak of was an accident; I had no serious
intention of deceiving the world. The truth is, that these writings of
mine were meant to protect the arguments of Parmenides against those who
scoff at him and show the many ridiculous and contradictory results
which they suppose to follow from the affirmation of the one. My answer
is an address to the partisans of the many, whose attack I return with
interest by retorting upon them that their hypothesis of the being of
the many if carried out appears in a still more ridiculous light than
the hypothesis of the being of the one."

  [31] _Parmenides_, 128 A-D.

Zeno's four arguments against motion were intended to exhibit the
contradictions that result from supposing that there is such a thing as
change, and thus to support the Parmenidean doctrine that reality is
unchanging.[32] Unfortunately, we only know his arguments through
Aristotle,[33] who stated them in order to refute them. Those
philosophers in the present day who have had their doctrines stated by
opponents will realise that a just or adequate presentation of Zeno's
position is hardly to be expected from Aristotle; but by some care in
interpretation it seems possible to reconstruct the so-called "sophisms"
which have been "refuted" by every tyro from that day to this.

  [32] This interpretation is combated by Milhaud, _Les
  philosophes-gomtres de la Grce_, p. 140 n., but his reasons do not
  seem to me convincing. All the interpretations in what follows are
  open to question, but all have the support of reputable authorities.

  [33] _Physics_, vi. 9. 2396 (R.P. 136-139).

Zeno's arguments would seem to be "ad hominem"; that is to say, they
seem to assume premisses granted by his opponents, and to show that,
granting these premisses, it is possible to deduce consequences which
his opponents must deny. In order to decide whether they are valid
arguments or "sophisms," it is necessary to guess at the tacit
premisses, and to decide who was the "homo" at whom they were aimed.
Some maintain that they were aimed at the Pythagoreans,[34] while others
have held that they were intended to refute the atomists.[35] M.
Evellin, on the contrary, holds that they constitute a refutation of
infinite divisibility,[36] while M. G. Nol, in the interests of Hegel,
maintains that the first two arguments refute infinite divisibility,
while the next two refute indivisibles.[37] Amid such a bewildering
variety of interpretations, we can at least not complain of any
restrictions on our liberty of choice.

  [34] _Cf._ Gaston Milhaud, _Les philosophes-gomtres de la Grce_,
  p. 140 n.; Paul Tannery, _Pour l'histoire de la science hellne_,
  p. 249; Burnet, _op. cit._, p. 362.

  [35] _Cf._ R. K. Gaye, "On Aristotle, _Physics_, Z ix." _Journal of
  Philology_, vol. xxxi., esp. p. 111. Also Moritz Cantor, _Vorlesungen
  ber Geschichte der Mathematik_, 1st ed., vol. i., 1880, p. 168, who,
  however, subsequently adopted Paul Tannery's opinion, _Vorlesungen_,
  3rd ed. (vol. i. p. 200).

  [36] "Le mouvement et les partisans des indivisibles," _Revue de
  Mtaphysique et de Morale_, vol. i. pp. 382-395.

  [37] "Le mouvement et les arguments de Znon d'le," _Revue de
  Mtaphysique et de Morale_, vol. i. pp. 107-125.

The historical questions raised by the above-mentioned discussions are
no doubt largely insoluble, owing to the very scanty material from which
our evidence is derived. The points which seem fairly clear are the
following: (1) That, in spite of MM. Milhaud and Paul Tannery, Zeno is
anxious to prove that motion is really impossible, and that he desires
to prove this because he follows Parmenides in denying plurality;[38]
(2) that the third and fourth arguments proceed on the hypothesis of
indivisibles, a hypothesis which, whether adopted by the Pythagoreans or
not, was certainly much advocated, as may be seen from the treatise _On
Indivisible Lines_ attributed to Aristotle. As regards the first two
arguments, they would seem to be valid on the hypothesis of
indivisibles, and also, without this hypothesis, to be such as would be
valid if the traditional contradictions in infinite numbers were
insoluble, which they are not.

  [38] _Cf._ M. Brochard, "Les prtendus sophismes de Znon d'le,"
  _Revue de Mtaphysique et de Morale_, vol. i. pp. 209-215.

We may conclude, therefore, that Zeno's polemic is directed against the
view that space and time consist of points and instants; and that as
against the view that a finite stretch of space or time consists of a
finite number of points and instants, his arguments are not sophisms,
but perfectly valid.

The conclusion which Zeno wishes us to draw is that plurality is a
delusion, and spaces and times are really indivisible. The other
conclusion which is possible, namely, that the number of points and
instants is infinite, was not tenable so long as the infinite was
infected with contradictions. In a fragment which is not one of the four
famous arguments against motion, Zeno says:

"If things are a many, they must be just as many as they are, and
neither more nor less. Now, if they are as many as they are, they will
be finite in number.

"If things are a many, they will be infinite in number; for there will
always be other things between them, and others again between these. And
so things are infinite in number."[39]

  [39] Simplicius, _Phys._, 140, 28 D (R.P. 133); Burnet, _op. cit._,
  pp. 364-365.

This argument attempts to prove that, if there are many things, the
number of them must be both finite and infinite, which is impossible;
hence we are to conclude that there is only one thing. But the weak
point in the argument is the phrase: "If they are just as many as they
are, they will be finite in number." This phrase is not very clear, but
it is plain that it assumes the impossibility of definite infinite
numbers. Without this assumption, which is now known to be false, the
arguments of Zeno, though they suffice (on certain very reasonable
assumptions) to dispel the hypothesis of finite indivisibles, do not
suffice to prove that motion and change and plurality are impossible.
They are not, however, on any view, mere foolish quibbles: they are
serious arguments, raising difficulties which it has taken two thousand
years to answer, and which even now are fatal to the teachings of most
philosophers.

The first of Zeno's arguments is the argument of the race-course, which
is paraphrased by Burnet as follows:[40]

"You cannot get to the end of a race-course. You cannot traverse an
infinite number of points in a finite time. You must traverse the half
of any given distance before you traverse the whole, and the half of
that again before you can traverse it. This goes on _ad infinitum_, so
that there are an infinite number of points in any given space, and you
cannot touch an infinite number one by one in a finite time."[41]

  [40] _Op. cit._, p. 367.

  [41] Aristotle's words are: "The first is the one on the non-existence
  of motion on the ground that what is moved must always attain the
  middle point sooner than the end-point, on which we gave our opinion
  in the earlier part of our discourse." _Phys._, vi. 9. 939B (R.P.
  136). Aristotle seems to refer to _Phys._, vi. 2. 223AB [R.P. 136A]:
  "All space is continuous, for time and space are divided into the same
  and equal divisions.... Wherefore also Zeno's argument is fallacious,
  that it is impossible to go through an infinite collection or to touch
  an infinite collection one by one in a finite time. For there are two
  senses in which the term 'infinite' is applied both to length and to
  time, and in fact to all continuous things, either in regard to
  divisibility, or in regard to the ends. Now it is not possible to
  touch things infinite in regard to number in a finite time, but it is
  possible to touch things infinite in regard to divisibility: for time
  itself also is infinite in this sense. So that in fact we go through
  an infinite, [space] in an infinite [time] and not in a finite [time],
  and we touch infinite things with infinite things, not with finite
  things." Philoponus, a sixth-century commentator (R.P. 136A, _Exc.
  Paris Philop. in Arist. Phys._, 803, 2. Vit.), gives the following
  illustration: "For if a thing were moved the space of a cubit in one
  hour, since in every space there are an infinite number of points, the
  thing moved must needs touch all the points of the space: it will then
  go through an infinite collection in a finite time, which is
  impossible."

Zeno appeals here, in the first place, to the fact that any distance,
however small, can be halved. From this it follows, of course, that
there must be an infinite number of points in a line. But, Aristotle
represents him as arguing, you cannot touch an infinite number of points
_one by one_ in a finite time. The words "one by one" are important. (1)
If _all_ the points touched are concerned, then, though you pass through
them continuously, you do not touch them "one by one." That is to say,
after touching one, there is not another which you touch next: no two
points are next each other, but between any two there are always an
infinite number of others, which cannot be enumerated one by one. (2)
If, on the other hand, only the successive middle points are concerned,
obtained by always halving what remains of the course, then the points
are reached one by one, and, though they are infinite in number, they
are in fact all reached in a finite time. His argument to the contrary
may be supposed to appeal to the view that a finite time must consist of
a finite number of instants, in which case what he says would be
perfectly true on the assumption that the possibility of continued
dichotomy is undeniable. If, on the other hand, we suppose the argument
directed against the partisans of infinite divisibility, we must suppose
it to proceed as follows:[42] "The points given by successive halving of
the distances still to be traversed are infinite in number, and are
reached in succession, each being reached a finite time later than its
predecessor; but the sum of an infinite number of finite times must be
infinite, and therefore the process will never be completed." It is very
possible that this is historically the right interpretation, but in this
form the argument is invalid. If half the course takes half a minute,
and the next quarter takes a quarter of a minute, and so on, the whole
course will take a minute. The apparent force of the argument, on this
interpretation, lies solely in the mistaken supposition that there
cannot be anything beyond the whole of an infinite series, which can be
seen to be false by observing that 1 is beyond the whole of the infinite
series 1/2, 3/4, 7/8, 15/16, ...

  [42] _Cf._ Mr C. D. Broad, "Note on Achilles and the Tortoise,"
  _Mind_, N.S., vol. xxii. pp. 318-9.

The second of Zeno's arguments is the one concerning Achilles and the
tortoise, which has achieved more notoriety than the others. It is
paraphrased by Burnet as follows:[43]

"Achilles will never overtake the tortoise. He must first reach the
place from which the tortoise started. By that time the tortoise will
have got some way ahead. Achilles must then make up that, and again the
tortoise will be ahead. He is always coming nearer, but he never makes
up to it."[44]

  [43] _Op. cit._

  [44] Aristotle's words are: "The second is the so-called Achilles. It
  consists in this, that the slower will never be overtaken in its
  course by the quickest, for the pursuer must always come first to the
  point from which the pursued has just departed, so that the slower
  must necessarily be always still more or less in advance." _Phys._,
  vi. 9. 239B (R.P. 137).

This argument is essentially the same as the previous one. It shows
that, if Achilles ever overtakes the tortoise, it must be after an
infinite number of instants have elapsed since he started. This is in
fact true; but the view that an infinite number of instants make up an
infinitely long time is not true, and therefore the conclusion that
Achilles will never overtake the tortoise does not follow.

The third argument,[45] that of the arrow, is very interesting. The text
has been questioned. Burnet accepts the alterations of Zeller, and
paraphrases thus:

"The arrow in flight is at rest. For, if everything is at rest when it
occupies a space equal to itself, and what is in flight at any given
moment always occupies a space equal to itself, it cannot move."

  [45] _Phys._, vi. 9. 239B (R.P. 138).

But according to Prantl, the literal translation of the unemended text
of Aristotle's statement of the argument is as follows: "If everything,
when it is behaving in a uniform manner, is continually either moving or
at rest, but what is moving is always in the _now_, then the moving
arrow is motionless." This form of the argument brings out its force
more clearly than Burnet's paraphrase.

Here, if not in the first two arguments, the view that a finite part of
time consists of a finite series of successive instants seems to be
assumed; at any rate the plausibility of the argument seems to depend
upon supposing that there are consecutive instants. Throughout an
instant, it is said, a moving body is where it is: it cannot move during
the instant, for that would require that the instant should have parts.
Thus, suppose we consider a period consisting of a thousand instants,
and suppose the arrow is in flight throughout this period. At each of
the thousand instants, the arrow is where it is, though at the next
instant it is somewhere else. It is never moving, but in some miraculous
way the change of position has to occur _between_ the instants, that is
to say, not at any time whatever. This is what M. Bergson calls the
cinematographic representation of reality. The more the difficulty is
meditated, the more real it becomes. The solution lies in the theory of
continuous series: we find it hard to avoid supposing that, when the
arrow is in flight, there is a _next_ position occupied at the _next_
moment; but in fact there is no next position and no next moment, and
when once this is imaginatively realised, the difficulty is seen to
disappear.

The fourth and last of Zeno's arguments is[46] the argument of the
stadium.

  [46] _Phys._, vi. 9. 239B (R.P. 139).

The argument as stated by Burnet is as follows:

  First Position.  Second Position.
      A ....           A  ....
      B ....           B ....
      C ....           C   ....

"Half the time may be equal to double the time. Let us suppose three
rows of bodies, one of which (A) is at rest while the other two (B, C)
are moving with equal velocity in opposite directions. By the time they
are all in the same part of the course, B will have passed twice as many
of the bodies in C as in A. Therefore the time which it takes to pass C
is twice as long as the time it takes to pass A. But the time which B
and C take to reach the position of A is the same. Therefore double the
time is equal to the half."

Gaye[47] devoted an interesting article to the interpretation of this
argument. His translation of Aristotle's statement is as follows:

"The fourth argument is that concerning the two rows of bodies, each row
being composed of an equal number of bodies of equal size, passing each
other on a race-course as they proceed with equal velocity in opposite
directions, the one row originally occupying the space between the goal
and the middle point of the course, and the other that between the
middle point and the starting-post. This, he thinks, involves the
conclusion that half a given time is equal to double the time. The
fallacy of the reasoning lies in the assumption that a body occupies an
equal time in passing with equal velocity a body that is in motion and a
body of equal size that is at rest, an assumption which is false. For
instance (so runs the argument), let A A ... be the stationary bodies of
equal size, B B ... the bodies, equal in number and in size to A A ...,
originally occupying the half of the course from the starting-post to
the middle of the A's, and C C ... those originally occupying the other
half from the goal to the middle of the A's, equal in number, size, and
velocity, to B B ... Then three consequences follow. First, as the B's
and C's pass one another, the first B reaches the last C at the same
moment at which the first C reaches the last B. Secondly, at this moment
the first C has passed all the A's, whereas the first B has passed only
half the A's and has consequently occupied only half the time occupied
by the first C, since each of the two occupies an equal time in passing
each A. Thirdly, at the same moment all the B's have passed all the C's:
for the first C and the first B will simultaneously reach the opposite
ends of the course, since (so says Zeno) the time occupied by the first
C in passing each of the B's is equal to that occupied by it in passing
each of the A's, because an equal time is occupied by both the first B
and the first C in passing all the A's. This is the argument: but it
presupposes the aforesaid fallacious assumption."

  [47] _Loc. cit._

  First Position.     Second Position.
  B  B B              B  B B
                         

  A  A A           A  A A
                      

  C  C C        C  C C
                   

This argument is not quite easy to follow, and it is only valid as
against the assumption that a finite time consists of a finite number of
instants. We may re-state it in different language. Let us suppose three
drill-sergeants, A, A, and A, standing in a row, while the two files
of soldiers march past them in opposite directions. At the first moment
which we consider, the three men B, B, B in one row, and the three men
C, C, C in the other row, are respectively opposite to A, A, and A.
At the very next moment, each row has moved on, and now B and C are
opposite A. Thus B and C are opposite each other. When, then, did B
pass C? It must have been somewhere between the two moments which we
supposed consecutive, and therefore the two moments cannot really have
been consecutive. It follows that there must be other moments between
any two given moments, and therefore that there must be an infinite
number of moments in any given interval of time.

The above difficulty, that B must have passed C at some time between
two consecutive moments, is a genuine one, but is not precisely the
difficulty raised by Zeno. What Zeno professes to prove is that "half of
a given time is equal to double that time." The most intelligible
explanation of the argument known to me is that of Gaye.[48] Since,
however, his explanation is not easy to set forth shortly, I will
re-state what seems to me to be the logical essence of Zeno's
contention. If we suppose that time consists of a series of consecutive
instants, and that motion consists in passing through a series of
consecutive points, then the fastest possible motion is one which, at
each instant, is at a point consecutive to that at which it was at the
previous instant. Any slower motion must be one which has intervals of
rest interspersed, and any faster motion must wholly omit some points.
All this is evident from the fact that we cannot have more than one
event for each instant. But now, in the case of our A's and B's and C's,
B is opposite a fresh A every instant, and therefore the number of A's
passed gives the number of instants since the beginning of the motion.
But during the motion B has passed twice as many C's, and yet cannot
have passed more than one each instant. Hence the number of instants
since the motion began is twice the number of A's passed, though we
previously found it was equal to this number. From this result, Zeno's
conclusion follows.

  [48] _Loc. cit._, p. 105.

Zeno's arguments, in some form, have afforded grounds for almost all the
theories of space and time and infinity which have been constructed from
his day to our own. We have seen that all his arguments are valid (with
certain reasonable hypotheses) on the assumption that finite spaces and
times consist of a finite number of points and instants, and that the
third and fourth almost certainly in fact proceeded on this assumption,
while the first and second, which were perhaps intended to refute the
opposite assumption, were in that case fallacious. We may therefore
escape from his paradoxes either by maintaining that, though space and
time do consist of points and instants, the number of them in any finite
interval is infinite; or by denying that space and time consist of
points and instants at all; or lastly, by denying the reality of space
and time altogether. It would seem that Zeno himself, as a supporter of
Parmenides, drew the last of these three possible deductions, at any
rate in regard to time. In this a very large number of philosophers have
followed him. Many others, like M. Bergson, have preferred to deny that
space and time consist of points and instants. Either of these solutions
will meet the difficulties in the form in which Zeno raised them. But,
as we saw, the difficulties can also be met if infinite numbers are
admissible. And on grounds which are independent of space and time,
infinite numbers, and series in which no two terms are consecutive, must
in any case be admitted. Consider, for example, all the fractions less
than 1, arranged in order of magnitude. Between any two of them, there
are others, for example, the arithmetical mean of the two. Thus no two
fractions are consecutive, and the total number of them is infinite. It
will be found that much of what Zeno says as regards the series of
points on a line can be equally well applied to the series of fractions.
And we cannot deny that there are fractions, so that two of the above
ways of escape are closed to us. It follows that, if we are to solve the
whole class of difficulties derivable from Zeno's by analogy, we must
discover some tenable theory of infinite numbers. What, then, are the
difficulties which, until the last thirty years, led philosophers to the
belief that infinite numbers are impossible?

The difficulties of infinity are of two kinds, of which the first may be
called sham, while the others involve, for their solution, a certain
amount of new and not altogether easy thinking. The sham difficulties
are those suggested by the etymology, and those suggested by confusion
of the mathematical infinite with what philosophers impertinently call
the "true" infinite. Etymologically, "infinite" should mean "having no
end." But in fact some infinite series have ends, some have not; while
some collections are infinite without being serial, and can therefore
not properly be regarded as either endless or having ends. The series of
instants from any earlier one to any later one (both included) is
infinite, but has two ends; the series of instants from the beginning of
time to the present moment has one end, but is infinite. Kant, in his
first antinomy, seems to hold that it is harder for the past to be
infinite than for the future to be so, on the ground that the past is
now completed, and that nothing infinite can be completed. It is very
difficult to see how he can have imagined that there was any sense in
this remark; but it seems most probable that he was thinking of the
infinite as the "unended." It is odd that he did not see that the future
too has one end at the present, and is precisely on a level with the
past. His regarding the two as different in this respect illustrates
just that kind of slavery to time which, as we agreed in speaking of
Parmenides, the true philosopher must learn to leave behind him.

The confusions introduced into the notions of philosophers by the
so-called "true" infinite are curious. They see that this notion is not
the same as the mathematical infinite, but they choose to believe that
it is the notion which the mathematicians are vainly trying to reach.
They therefore inform the mathematicians, kindly but firmly, that they
are mistaken in adhering to the "false" infinite, since plainly the
"true" infinite is something quite different. The reply to this is that
what they call the "true" infinite is a notion totally irrelevant to the
problem of the mathematical infinite, to which it has only a fanciful
and verbal analogy. So remote is it that I do not propose to confuse the
issue by even mentioning what the "true" infinite is. It is the "false"
infinite that concerns us, and we have to show that the epithet "false"
is undeserved.

There are, however, certain genuine difficulties in understanding the
infinite, certain habits of mind derived from the consideration of
finite numbers, and easily extended to infinite numbers under the
mistaken notion that they represent logical necessities. For example,
every number that we are accustomed to, except 0, has another number
immediately before it, from which it results by adding 1; but the first
infinite number does not have this property. The numbers before it form
an infinite series, containing all the ordinary finite numbers, having
no maximum, no last finite number, after which one little step would
plunge us into the infinite. If it is assumed that the first infinite
number is reached by a succession of small steps, it is easy to show
that it is self-contradictory. The first infinite number is, in fact,
beyond the whole unending series of finite numbers. "But," it will be
said, "there cannot be anything beyond the whole of an unending series."
This, we may point out, is the very principle upon which Zeno relies in
the arguments of the race-course and the Achilles. Take the race-course:
there is the moment when the runner still has half his distance to run,
then the moment when he still has a quarter, then when he still has an
eighth, and so on in a strictly unending series. Beyond the whole of
this series is the moment when he reaches the goal. Thus there certainly
can be something beyond the whole of an unending series. But it remains
to show that this fact is only what might have been expected.

The difficulty, like most of the vaguer difficulties besetting the
mathematical infinite, is derived, I think, from the more or less
unconscious operation of the idea of _counting_. If you set to work to
count the terms in an infinite collection, you will never have completed
your task. Thus, in the case of the runner, if half, three-quarters,
seven-eighths, and so on of the course were marked, and the runner was
not allowed to pass any of the marks until the umpire said "Now," then
Zeno's conclusion would be true in practice, and he would never reach
the goal.

But it is not essential to the existence of a collection, or even to
knowledge and reasoning concerning it, that we should be able to pass
its terms in review one by one. This may be seen in the case of finite
collections; we can speak of "mankind" or "the human race," though many
of the individuals in this collection are not personally known to us. We
can do this because we know of various characteristics which every
individual has if he belongs to the collection, and not if he does not.
And exactly the same happens in the case of infinite collections: they
may be known by their characteristics although their terms cannot be
enumerated. In this sense, an unending series may nevertheless form a
whole, and there may be new terms beyond the whole of it.

Some purely arithmetical peculiarities of infinite numbers have also
caused perplexity. For instance, an infinite number is not increased by
adding one to it, or by doubling it. Such peculiarities have seemed to
many to contradict logic, but in fact they only contradict confirmed
mental habits. The whole difficulty of the subject lies in the necessity
of thinking in an unfamiliar way, and in realising that many properties
which we have thought inherent in number are in fact peculiar to finite
numbers. If this is remembered, the positive theory of infinity, which
will occupy the next lecture, will not be found so difficult as it is to
those who cling obstinately to the prejudices instilled by the
arithmetic which is learnt in childhood.




LECTURE VII

THE POSITIVE THEORY OF INFINITY


The positive theory of infinity, and the general theory of number to
which it has given rise, are among the triumphs of scientific method in
philosophy, and are therefore specially suitable for illustrating the
logical-analytic character of that method. The work in this subject has
been done by mathematicians, and its results can be expressed in
mathematical symbolism. Why, then, it may be said, should the subject be
regarded as philosophy rather than as mathematics? This raises a
difficult question, partly concerned with the use of words, but partly
also of real importance in understanding the function of philosophy.
Every subject-matter, it would seem, can give rise to philosophical
investigations as well as to the appropriate science, the difference
between the two treatments being in the direction of movement and in the
kind of truths which it is sought to establish. In the special sciences,
when they have become fully developed, the movement is forward and
synthetic, from the simpler to the more complex. But in philosophy we
follow the inverse direction: from the complex and relatively concrete
we proceed towards the simple and abstract by means of analysis,
seeking, in the process, to eliminate the particularity of the original
subject-matter, and to confine our attention entirely to the logical
_form_ of the facts concerned.

Between philosophy and pure mathematics there is a certain affinity, in
the fact that both are general and _a priori_. Neither of them asserts
propositions which, like those of history and geography, depend upon the
actual concrete facts being just what they are. We may illustrate this
characteristic by means of Leibniz's conception of many _possible_
worlds, of which one only is _actual_. In all the many possible worlds,
philosophy and mathematics will be the same; the differences will only
be in respect of those particular facts which are chronicled by the
descriptive sciences. Any quality, therefore, by which our actual world
is distinguished from other abstractly possible worlds, must be ignored
by mathematics and philosophy alike. Mathematics and philosophy differ,
however, in their manner of treating the general properties in which all
possible worlds agree; for while mathematics, starting from
comparatively simple propositions, seeks to build up more and more
complex results by deductive synthesis, philosophy, starting from data
which are common knowledge, seeks to purify and generalise them into the
simplest statements of abstract form that can be obtained from them by
logical analysis.

The difference between philosophy and mathematics may be illustrated by
our present problem, namely, the nature of number. Both start from
certain facts about numbers which are evident to inspection. But
mathematics uses these facts to deduce more and more complicated
theorems, while philosophy seeks, by analysis, to go behind these facts
to others, simpler, more fundamental, and inherently more fitted to form
the premisses of the science of arithmetic. The question, "What is a
number?" is the pre-eminent philosophic question in this subject, but it
is one which the mathematician as such need not ask, provided he knows
enough of the properties of numbers to enable him to deduce his
theorems. We, since our object is philosophical, must grapple with the
philosopher's question. The answer to the question, "What is a number?"
which we shall reach in this lecture, will be found to give also, by
implication, the answer to the difficulties of infinity which we
considered in the previous lecture.

The question "What is a number?" is one which, until quite recent times,
was never considered in the kind of way that is capable of yielding a
precise answer. Philosophers were content with some vague dictum such
as, "Number is unity in plurality." A typical definition of the kind
that contented philosophers is the following from Sigwart's _Logic_
( 66, section 3): "Every number is not merely a _plurality_, but a
plurality thought _as held together and closed, and to that extent as a
unity_." Now there is in such definitions a very elementary blunder, of
the same kind that would be committed if we said "yellow is a flower"
because some flowers are yellow. Take, for example, the number 3. A
single collection of three things might conceivably be described as "a
plurality thought as held together and closed, and to that extent as a
unity"; but a collection of three things is not the number 3. The number
3 is something which all collections of three things have in common, but
is not itself a collection of three things. The definition, therefore,
apart from any other defects, has failed to reach the necessary degree
of abstraction: the number 3 is something more abstract than any
collection of three things.

Such vague philosophic definitions, however, remained inoperative
because of their very vagueness. What most men who thought about numbers
really had in mind was that numbers are the result of _counting_. "On
the consciousness of the law of counting," says Sigwart at the beginning
of his discussion of number, "rests the possibility of spontaneously
prolonging the series of numbers _ad infinitum_." It is this view of
number as generated by counting which has been the chief psychological
obstacle to the understanding of infinite numbers. Counting, because it
is familiar, is erroneously supposed to be simple, whereas it is in fact
a highly complex process, which has no meaning unless the numbers
reached in counting have some significance independent of the process by
which they are reached. And infinite numbers cannot be reached at all in
this way. The mistake is of the same kind as if cows were defined as
what can be bought from a cattle-merchant. To a person who knew several
cattle-merchants, but had never seen a cow, this might seem an admirable
definition. But if in his travels he came across a herd of wild cows, he
would have to declare that they were not cows at all, because no
cattle-merchant could sell them. So infinite numbers were declared not
to be numbers at all, because they could not be reached by counting.

It will be worth while to consider for a moment what counting actually
is. We count a set of objects when we let our attention pass from one to
another, until we have attended once to each, saying the names of the
numbers in order with each successive act of attention. The last number
named in this process is the number of the objects, and therefore
counting is a method of finding out what the number of the objects is.
But this operation is really a very complicated one, and those who
imagine that it is the logical source of number show themselves
remarkably incapable of analysis. In the first place, when we say "one,
two, three ..." as we count, we cannot be said to be discovering the
number of the objects counted unless we attach some meaning to the words
one, two, three, ... A child may learn to know these words in order, and
to repeat them correctly like the letters of the alphabet, without
attaching any meaning to them. Such a child may count correctly from the
point of view of a grown-up listener, without having any idea of numbers
at all. The operation of counting, in fact, can only be intelligently
performed by a person who already has some idea what the numbers are;
and from this it follows that counting does not give the logical basis
of number.

Again, how do we know that the last number reached in the process of
counting is the number of the objects counted? This is just one of those
facts that are too familiar for their significance to be realised; but
those who wish to be logicians must acquire the habit of dwelling upon
such facts. There are two propositions involved in this fact: first,
that the number of numbers from 1 up to any given number is that given
number--for instance, the number of numbers from 1 to 100 is a hundred;
secondly, that if a set of numbers can be used as names of a set of
objects, each number occurring only once, then the number of numbers
used as names is the same as the number of objects. The first of these
propositions is capable of an easy arithmetical proof so long as finite
numbers are concerned; but with infinite numbers, after the first, it
ceases to be true. The second proposition remains true, and is in fact,
as we shall see, an immediate consequence of the definition of number.
But owing to the falsehood of the first proposition where infinite
numbers are concerned, counting, even if it were practically possible,
would not be a valid method of discovering the number of terms in an
infinite collection, and would in fact give different results according
to the manner in which it was carried out.

There are two respects in which the infinite numbers that are known
differ from finite numbers: first, infinite numbers have, while finite
numbers have not, a property which I shall call _reflexiveness_;
secondly, finite numbers have, while infinite numbers have not, a
property which I shall call _inductiveness_. Let us consider these two
properties successively.

(1) _Reflexiveness._--A number is said to be _reflexive_ when it is not
increased by adding 1 to it. It follows at once that any finite number
can be added to a reflexive number without increasing it. This property
of infinite numbers was always thought, until recently, to be
self-contradictory; but through the work of Georg Cantor it has come to
be recognised that, though at first astonishing, it is no more
self-contradictory than the fact that people at the antipodes do not
tumble off. In virtue of this property, given any infinite collection of
objects, any finite number of objects can be added or taken away without
increasing or diminishing the number of the collection. Even an infinite
number of objects may, under certain conditions, be added or taken away
without altering the number. This may be made clearer by the help of
some examples.

Imagine all the natural numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, ... to be written down in a
row, and immediately beneath them write down the numbers 1, 2, 3,
4, ..., so that 1 is under 0, 2 is under 1, and so on. Then every number
in the top row has a number directly under it in the bottom row, and no
number occurs twice in either row. It follows that the number of numbers
in the two rows must be the same. But all the numbers that occur in the
bottom row also occur in the top row, and one more, namely 0; thus the
number of terms in the top row is obtained by adding one to the number
of the bottom row. So long, therefore, as it was supposed that a number
must be increased by adding 1 to it, this state of things constituted a
contradiction, and led to the denial that there are infinite numbers.

  0, 1, 2, 3, ... _n_ ...
  1, 2, 3, 4, ... _n_ + 1 ...

The following example is even more surprising. Write the natural numbers
1, 2, 3, 4, ... in the top row, and the even numbers 2, 4, 6, 8, ... in
the bottom row, so that under each number in the top row stands its
double in the bottom row. Then, as before, the number of numbers in the
two rows is the same, yet the second row results from taking away all
the odd numbers--an infinite collection--from the top row. This example
is given by Leibniz to prove that there can be no infinite numbers. He
believed in infinite collections, but, since he thought that a number
must always be increased when it is added to and diminished when it is
subtracted from, he maintained that infinite collections do not have
numbers. "The number of all numbers," he says, "implies a contradiction,
which I show thus: To any number there is a corresponding number equal
to its double. Therefore the number of all numbers is not greater than
the number of even numbers, _i.e._ the whole is not greater than its
part."[49] In dealing with this argument, we ought to substitute "the
number of all finite numbers" for "the number of all numbers"; we then
obtain exactly the illustration given by our two rows, one containing
all the finite numbers, the other only the even finite numbers. It will
be seen that Leibniz regards it as self-contradictory to maintain that
the whole is not greater than its part. But the word "greater" is one
which is capable of many meanings; for our purpose, we must substitute
the less ambiguous phrase "containing a greater number of terms." In
this sense, it is not self-contradictory for whole and part to be equal;
it is the realisation of this fact which has made the modern theory of
infinity possible.

  [49] _Phil. Werke_, Gerhardt's edition, vol. i. p. 338.

There is an interesting discussion of the reflexiveness of infinite
wholes in the first of Galileo's Dialogues on Motion. I quote from a
translation published in 1730.[50] The personages in the dialogue are
Salviati, Sagredo, and Simplicius, and they reason as follows:

"_Simp._ Here already arises a Doubt which I think is not to be
resolv'd; and that is this: Since 'tis plain that one Line is given
greater than another, and since both contain infinite Points, we must
surely necessarily infer, that we have found in the same Species
something greater than Infinite, since the Infinity of Points of the
greater Line exceeds the Infinity of Points of the lesser. But now, to
assign an Infinite greater than an Infinite, is what I can't possibly
conceive.

"_Salv._ These are some of those Difficulties which arise from
Discourses which our finite Understanding makes about Infinites, by
ascribing to them Attributes which we give to Things finite and
terminate, which I think most improper, because those Attributes of
Majority, Minority, and Equality, agree not with Infinities, of which we
can't say that one is greater than, less than, or equal to another. For
Proof whereof I have something come into my Head, which (that I may be
the better understood) I will propose by way of Interrogatories to
_Simplicius_, who started this Difficulty. To begin then: I suppose you
know which are square Numbers, and which not?

"_Simp._ I know very well that a square Number is that which arises from
the Multiplication of any Number into itself; thus 4 and 9 are square
Numbers, that arising from 2, and this from 3, multiplied by themselves.

"_Salv._ Very well; And you also know, that as the Products are call'd
Squares, the Factors are call'd Roots: And that the other Numbers, which
proceed not from Numbers multiplied into themselves, are not Squares.
Whence taking in all Numbers, both Squares and Not Squares, if I should
say, that the Not Squares are more than the Squares, should I not be in
the right?

"_Simp._ Most certainly.

"_Salv._ If I go on with you then, and ask you, How many squar'd Numbers
there are? you may truly answer, That there are as many as are their
proper Roots, since every Square has its own Root, and every Root its
own Square, and since no Square has more than one Root, nor any Root
more than one Square.

"_Simp._ Very true.

"_Salv._ But now, if I should ask how many Roots there are, you can't
deny but there are as many as there are Numbers, since there's no Number
but what's the Root to some Square. And this being granted, we may
likewise affirm, that there are as many square Numbers, as there are
Numbers; for there are as many Squares as there are Roots, and as many
Roots as Numbers. And yet in the Beginning of this, we said, there were
many more Numbers than Squares, the greater Part of Numbers being not
Squares: And tho' the Number of Squares decreases in a greater
proportion, as we go on to bigger Numbers, for count to an Hundred
you'll find 10 Squares, viz. 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81, 100, which
is the same as to say the 10th Part are Squares; in Ten thousand only
the 100th Part are Squares; in a Million only the 1000th: And yet in an
infinite Number, if we can but comprehend it, we may say the Squares are
as many as all the Numbers taken together.

"_Sagr._ What must be determin'd then in this Case?

"_Salv._ I see no other way, but by saying that all Numbers are
infinite; Squares are Infinite, their Roots Infinite, and that the
Number of Squares is not less than the Number of Numbers, nor this less
than that: and then by concluding that the Attributes or Terms of
Equality, Majority, and Minority, have no Place in Infinites, but are
confin'd to terminate Quantities."

  [50] _Mathematical Discourses concerning two new sciences relating to
  mechanics and local motion, in four dialogues._ By Galileo Galilei,
  Chief Philosopher and Mathematician to the Grand Duke of Tuscany. Done
  into English from the Italian, by Tho. Weston, late Master, and now
  published by John Weston, present Master, of the Academy at Greenwich.
  See pp. 46 ff.

The way in which the problem is expounded in the above discussion is
worthy of Galileo, but the solution suggested is not the right one. It
is actually the case that the number of square (finite) numbers is the
same as the number of (finite) numbers. The fact that, so long as we
confine ourselves to numbers less than some given finite number, the
proportion of squares tends towards zero as the given finite number
increases, does not contradict the fact that the number of all finite
squares is the same as the number of all finite numbers. This is only an
instance of the fact, now familiar to mathematicians, that the _limit_
of a function as the variable _approaches_ a given point may not be the
same as its _value_ when the variable actually _reaches_ the given
point. But although the infinite numbers which Galileo discusses are
equal, Cantor has shown that what Simplicius could not conceive is true,
namely, that there are an infinite number of different infinite numbers,
and that the conception of _greater_ and _less_ can be perfectly well
applied to them. The whole of Simplicius's difficulty comes, as is
evident, from his belief that, if _greater_ and _less_ can be applied, a
part of an infinite collection must have fewer terms than the whole; and
when this is denied, all contradictions disappear. As regards greater
and less lengths of lines, which is the problem from which the above
discussion starts, that involves a meaning of _greater_ and _less_ which
is not arithmetical. The number of points is the same in a long line and
in a short one, being in fact the same as the number of points in all
space. The _greater_ and _less_ of metrical geometry involves the new
metrical conception of _congruence_, which cannot be developed out of
arithmetical considerations alone. But this question has not the
fundamental importance which belongs to the arithmetical theory of
infinity.

(2) _Non-inductiveness._--The second property by which infinite numbers
are distinguished from finite numbers is the property of
non-inductiveness. This will be best explained by defining the positive
property of inductiveness which characterises the finite numbers, and
which is named after the method of proof known as "mathematical
induction."

Let us first consider what is meant by calling a property "hereditary"
in a given series. Take such a property as being named Jones. If a man
is named Jones, so is his son; we will therefore call the property of
being called Jones hereditary with respect to the relation of father and
son. If a man is called Jones, all his descendants in the direct male
line are called Jones; this follows from the fact that the property is
hereditary. Now, instead of the relation of father and son, consider the
relation of a finite number to its immediate successor, that is, the
relation which holds between 0 and 1, between 1 and 2, between 2 and 3,
and so on. If a property of numbers is hereditary with respect to this
relation, then if it belongs to (say) 100, it must belong also to all
finite numbers greater than 100; for, being hereditary, it belongs to
101 because it belongs to 100, and it belongs to 102 because it belongs
to 101, and so on--where the "and so on" will take us, sooner or later,
to any finite number greater than 100. Thus, for example, the property
of being greater than 99 is hereditary in the series of finite numbers;
and generally, a property is hereditary in this series when, given any
number that possesses the property, the next number must always also
possess it.

It will be seen that a hereditary property, though it must belong to all
the finite numbers greater than a given number possessing the property,
need not belong to all the numbers less than this number. For example,
the hereditary property of being greater than 99 belongs to 100 and all
greater numbers, but not to any smaller number. Similarly, the
hereditary property of being called Jones belongs to all the descendants
(in the direct male line) of those who have this property, but not to
all their ancestors, because we reach at last a first Jones, before whom
the ancestors have no surname. It is obvious, however, that any
hereditary property possessed by Adam must belong to all men; and
similarly any hereditary property possessed by 0 must belong to all
finite numbers. This is the principle of what is called "mathematical
induction." It frequently happens, when we wish to prove that all finite
numbers have some property, that we have first to prove that 0 has the
property, and then that the property is hereditary, _i.e._ that, if it
belongs to a given number, then it belongs to the next number. Owing to
the fact that such proofs are called "inductive," I shall call the
properties to which they are applicable "inductive" properties. Thus an
inductive property of numbers is one which is hereditary and belongs to
0.

Taking any one of the natural numbers, say 29, it is easy to see that it
must have all inductive properties. For since such properties belong to
0 and are hereditary, they belong to 1; therefore, since they are
hereditary, they belong to 2, and so on; by twenty-nine repetitions of
such arguments we show that they belong to 29. We may _define_ the
"inductive" numbers as _all those that possess all inductive
properties_; they will be the same as what are called the "natural"
numbers, _i.e._ the ordinary finite whole numbers. To all such numbers,
proofs by mathematical induction can be validly applied. They are those
numbers, we may loosely say, which can be reached from 0 by successive
additions of 1; in other words, they are all the numbers that can be
reached by counting.

But beyond all these numbers, there are the infinite numbers, and
infinite numbers do not have all inductive properties. Such numbers,
therefore, may be called non-inductive. All those properties of numbers
which are proved by an imaginary step-by-step process from one number to
the next are liable to fail when we come to infinite numbers. The first
of the infinite numbers has no immediate predecessor, because there is
no greatest finite number; thus no succession of steps from one number
to the next will ever reach from a finite number to an infinite one, and
the step-by-step method of proof fails. This is another reason for the
supposed self-contradictions of infinite numbers. Many of the most
familiar properties of numbers, which custom had led people to regard as
logically necessary, are in fact only demonstrable by the step-by-step
method, and fail to be true of infinite numbers. But so soon as we
realise the necessity of proving such properties by mathematical
induction, and the strictly limited scope of this method of proof, the
supposed contradictions are seen to contradict, not logic, but only our
prejudices and mental habits.

The property of being increased by the addition of 1--_i.e._ the
property of non-reflexiveness--may serve to illustrate the limitations
of mathematical induction. It is easy to prove that 0 is increased by
the addition of 1, and that, if a given number is increased by the
addition of 1, so is the next number, _i.e._ the number obtained by the
addition of 1. It follows that each of the natural numbers is increased
by the addition of 1. This follows generally from the general argument,
and follows for each particular case by a sufficient number of
applications of the argument. We first prove that 0 is not equal to 1;
then, since the property of being increased by 1 is hereditary, it
follows that 1 is not equal to 2; hence it follows that 2 is not equal
to 3; if we wish to prove that 30,000 is not equal to 30,001, we can do
so by repeating this reasoning 30,000 times. But we cannot prove in this
way that _all_ numbers are increased by the addition of 1; we can only
prove that this holds of the numbers attainable by successive additions
of 1 starting from 0. The reflexive numbers, which lie beyond all those
attainable in this way, are as a matter of fact not increased by the
addition of 1.

The two properties of reflexiveness and non-inductiveness, which we have
considered as characteristics of infinite numbers, have not so far been
proved to be always found together. It is known that all reflexive
numbers are non-inductive, but it is not known that all non-inductive
numbers are reflexive. Fallacious proofs of this proposition have been
published by many writers, including myself, but up to the present no
valid proof has been discovered. The infinite numbers actually known,
however, are all reflexive as well as non-inductive; thus, in
mathematical practice, if not in theory, the two properties are always
associated. For our purposes, therefore, it will be convenient to ignore
the bare possibility that there may be non-inductive non-reflexive
numbers, since all known numbers are either inductive or reflexive.

When infinite numbers are first introduced to people, they are apt to
refuse the name of numbers to them, because their behaviour is so
different from that of finite numbers that it seems a wilful misuse of
terms to call them numbers at all. In order to meet this feeling, we
must now turn to the logical basis of arithmetic, and consider the
logical definition of numbers.

The logical definition of numbers, though it seems an essential support
to the theory of infinite numbers, was in fact discovered independently
and by a different man. The theory of infinite numbers--that is to say,
the arithmetical as opposed to the logical part of the theory--was
discovered by Georg Cantor, and published by him in 1882-3.[51] The
definition of number was discovered about the same time by a man whose
great genius has not received the recognition it deserves--I mean
Gottlob Frege of Jena. His first work, _Begriffsschrift_, published in
1879, contained the very important theory of hereditary properties in a
series to which I alluded in connection with inductiveness. His
definition of number is contained in his second work, published in 1884,
and entitled _Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik, eine logisch-mathematische
Untersuchung ber den Begriff der Zahl_.[52] It is with this book that
the logical theory of arithmetic begins, and it will repay us to
consider Frege's analysis in some detail.

  [51] In his _Grundlagen einer allgemeinen Mannichfaltigkeitslehre_ and
  in articles in _Acta Mathematica_, vol. ii.

  [52] The definition of number contained in this book, and elaborated
  in the _Grundgesetze der Arithmetik_ (vol. i., 1893; vol. ii., 1903),
  was rediscovered by me in ignorance of Frege's work. I wish to state
  as emphatically as possible--what seems still often ignored--that his
  discovery antedated mine by eighteen years.

Frege begins by noting the increased desire for logical strictness in
mathematical demonstrations which distinguishes modern mathematicians
from their predecessors, and points out that this must lead to a
critical investigation of the definition of number. He proceeds to show
the inadequacy of previous philosophical theories, especially of the
"synthetic _a priori_" theory of Kant and the empirical theory of Mill.
This brings him to the question: What kind of object is it that number
can properly be ascribed to? He points out that physical things may be
regarded as one or many: for example, if a tree has a thousand leaves,
they may be taken altogether as constituting its foliage, which would
count as one, not as a thousand; and _one_ pair of boots is the same
object as _two_ boots. It follows that physical things are not the
subjects of which number is properly predicated; for when we have
discovered the proper subjects, the number to be ascribed must be
unambiguous. This leads to a discussion of the very prevalent view that
number is really something psychological and subjective, a view which
Frege emphatically rejects. "Number," he says, "is as little an object
of psychology or an outcome of psychical processes as the North Sea....
The botanist wishes to state something which is just as much a fact when
he gives the number of petals in a flower as when he gives its colour.
The one depends as little as the other upon our caprice. There is
therefore a certain similarity between number and colour; but this does
not consist in the fact that both are sensibly perceptible in external
things, but in the fact that both are objective" (p. 34).

"I distinguish the objective," he continues, "from the palpable, the
spatial, the actual. The earth's axis, the centre of mass of the solar
system, are objective, but I should not call them actual, like the earth
itself" (p. 35). He concludes that number is neither spatial and
physical, nor subjective, but non-sensible and objective. This
conclusion is important, since it applies to all the subject-matter of
mathematics and logic. Most philosophers have thought that the physical
and the mental between them exhausted the world of being. Some have
argued that the objects of mathematics were obviously not subjective,
and therefore must be physical and empirical; others have argued that
they were obviously not physical, and therefore must be subjective and
mental. Both sides were right in what they denied, and wrong in what
they asserted; Frege has the merit of accepting both denials, and
finding a third assertion by recognising the world of logic, which is
neither mental nor physical.

The fact is, as Frege points out, that no number, not even 1, is
applicable to physical things, but only to general terms or
descriptions, such as "man," "satellite of the earth," "satellite of
Venus." The general term "man" is applicable to a certain number of
objects: there are in the world so and so many men. The unity which
philosophers rightly feel to be necessary for the assertion of a number
is the unity of the general term, and it is the general term which is
the proper subject of number. And this applies equally when there is one
object or none which falls under the general term. "Satellite of the
earth" is a term only applicable to one object, namely, the moon. But
"one" is not a property of the moon itself, which may equally well be
regarded as many molecules: it is a property of the general term
"earth's satellite." Similarly, 0 is a property of the general term
"satellite of Venus," because Venus has no satellite. Here at last we
have an intelligible theory of the number 0. This was impossible if
numbers applied to physical objects, because obviously no physical
object could have the number 0. Thus, in seeking our definition of
number we have arrived so far at the result that numbers are properties
of general terms or general descriptions, not of physical things or of
mental occurrences.

Instead of speaking of a general term, such as "man," as the subject of
which a number can be asserted, we may, without making any serious
change, take the subject as the class or collection of objects--_i.e._
"mankind" in the above instance--to which the general term in question
is applicable. Two general terms, such as "man" and "featherless biped,"
which are applicable to the same collection of objects, will obviously
have the same number of instances; thus the number depends upon the
class, not upon the selection of this or that general term to describe
it, provided several general terms can be found to describe the same
class. But some general term is always necessary in order to describe a
class. Even when the terms are enumerated, as "this and that and the
other," the collection is constituted by the general property of being
either this, or that, or the other, and only so acquires the unity which
enables us to speak of it as _one_ collection. And in the case of an
infinite class, enumeration is impossible, so that description by a
general characteristic common and peculiar to the members of the class
is the only possible description. Here, as we see, the theory of number
to which Frege was led by purely logical considerations becomes of use
in showing how infinite classes can be amenable to number in spite of
being incapable of enumeration.

Frege next asks the question: When do two collections have the same
number of terms? In ordinary life, we decide this question by counting;
but counting, as we saw, is impossible in the case of infinite
collections, and is not logically fundamental with finite collections.
We want, therefore, a different method of answering our question. An
illustration may help to make the method clear. I do not know how many
married men there are in England, but I do know that the number is the
same as the number of married women. The reason I know this is that the
relation of husband and wife relates one man to one woman and one woman
to one man. A relation of this sort is called a one-one relation. The
relation of father to son is called a one-many relation, because a man
can have only one father but may have many sons; conversely, the
relation of son to father is called a many-one relation. But the
relation of husband to wife (in Christian countries) is called one-one,
because a man cannot have more than one wife, or a woman more than one
husband. Now, whenever there is a one-one relation between all the terms
of one collection and all the terms of another severally, as in the case
of English husbands and English wives, the number of terms in the one
collection is the same as the number in the other; but when there is not
such a relation, the number is different. This is the answer to the
question: When do two collections have the same number of terms?

We can now at last answer the question: What is meant by the number of
terms in a given collection? When there is a one-one relation between
all the terms of one collection and all the terms of another severally,
we shall say that the two collections are "similar." We have just seen
that two similar collections have the same number of terms. This leads
us to define the number of a given collection as the class of all
collections that are similar to it; that is to say, we set up the
following formal definition:

"The number of terms in a given class" is defined as meaning "the class
of all classes that are similar to the given class."

This definition, as Frege (expressing it in slightly different terms)
showed, yields the usual arithmetical properties of numbers. It is
applicable equally to finite and infinite numbers, and it does not
require the admission of some new and mysterious set of metaphysical
entities. It shows that it is not physical objects, but classes or the
general terms by which they are defined, of which numbers can be
asserted; and it applies to 0 and 1 without any of the difficulties
which other theories find in dealing with these two special cases.

The above definition is sure to produce, at first sight, a feeling of
oddity, which is liable to cause a certain dissatisfaction. It defines
the number 2, for instance, as the class of all couples, and the number
3 as the class of all triads. This does not _seem_ to be what we have
hitherto been meaning when we spoke of 2 and 3, though it would be
difficult to say _what_ we had been meaning. The answer to a feeling
cannot be a logical argument, but nevertheless the answer in this case
is not without importance. In the first place, it will be found that
when an idea which has grown familiar as an unanalysed whole is first
resolved accurately into its component parts--which is what we do when
we define it--there is almost always a feeling of unfamiliarity produced
by the analysis, which tends to cause a protest against the definition.
In the second place, it may be admitted that the definition, like all
definitions, is to a certain extent arbitrary. In the case of the small
finite numbers, such as 2 and 3, it would be possible to frame
definitions more nearly in accordance with our unanalysed feeling of
what we mean; but the method of such definitions would lack uniformity,
and would be found to fail sooner or later--at latest when we reached
infinite numbers.

In the third place, the real desideratum about such a definition as that
of number is not that it should represent as nearly as possible the
ideas of those who have not gone through the analysis required in order
to reach a definition, but that it should give us objects having the
requisite properties. Numbers, in fact, must satisfy the formul of
arithmetic; any indubitable set of objects fulfilling this requirement
may be called numbers. So far, the simplest set known to fulfil this
requirement is the set introduced by the above definition. In comparison
with this merit, the question whether the objects to which the
definition applies are like or unlike the vague ideas of numbers
entertained by those who cannot give a definition, is one of very little
importance. All the important requirements are fulfilled by the above
definition, and the sense of oddity which is at first unavoidable will
be found to wear off very quickly with the growth of familiarity.

There is, however, a certain logical doctrine which may be thought to
form an objection to the above definition of numbers as classes of
classes--I mean the doctrine that there are no such objects as classes
at all. It might be thought that this doctrine would make havoc of a
theory which reduces numbers to classes, and of the many other theories
in which we have made use of classes. This, however, would be a mistake:
none of these theories are any the worse for the doctrine that classes
are fictions. What the doctrine is, and why it is not destructive, I
will try briefly to explain.

On account of certain rather complicated difficulties, culminating in
definite contradictions, I was led to the view that nothing that can be
said significantly about things, _i.e._ particulars, can be said
significantly (_i.e._ either truly or falsely) about classes of things.
That is to say, if, in any sentence in which a thing is mentioned, you
substitute a class for the thing, you no longer have a sentence that has
any meaning: the sentence is no longer either true or false, but a
meaningless collection of words. Appearances to the contrary can be
dispelled by a moment's reflection. For example, in the sentence, "Adam
is fond of apples," you may substitute _mankind_, and say, "Mankind is
fond of apples." But obviously you do not mean that there is one
individual, called "mankind," which munches apples: you mean that the
separate individuals who compose mankind are each severally fond of
apples.

Now, if nothing that can be said significantly about a thing can be said
significantly about a class of things, it follows that classes of things
cannot have the same kind of reality as things have; for if they had, a
class could be substituted for a thing in a proposition predicating the
kind of reality which would be common to both. This view is really
consonant to common sense. In the third or fourth century B.C. there
lived a Chinese philosopher named Hui Tz, who maintained that "a bay
horse and a dun cow are three; because taken separately they are two,
and taken together they are one: two and one make three."[53] The author
from whom I quote says that Hui Tz "was particularly fond of the
quibbles which so delighted the sophists or unsound reasoners of ancient
Greece," and this no doubt represents the judgment of common sense upon
such arguments. Yet if collections of things were things, his contention
would be irrefragable. It is only because the bay horse and the dun cow
taken together are not a new thing that we can escape the conclusion
that there are three things wherever there are two.

  [53] Giles, _The Civilisation of China_ (Home University Library),
  p. 147.

When it is admitted that classes are not things, the question arises:
What do we mean by statements which are nominally about classes? Take
such a statement as, "The class of people interested in mathematical
logic is not very numerous." Obviously this reduces itself to, "Not very
many people are interested in mathematical logic." For the sake of
definiteness, let us substitute some particular number, say 3, for "very
many." Then our statement is, "Not three people are interested in
mathematical logic." This may be expressed in the form: "If _x_ is
interested in mathematical logic, and also _y_ is interested, and also
_z_ is interested, then _x_ is identical with _y_, or _x_ is identical
with _z_, or _y_ is identical with _z_." Here there is no longer any
reference at all to a "class." In some such way, all statements
nominally about a class can be reduced to statements about what follows
from the hypothesis of anything's having the defining property of the
class. All that is wanted, therefore, in order to render the _verbal_
use of classes legitimate, is a uniform method of interpreting
propositions in which such a use occurs, so as to obtain propositions in
which there is no longer any such use. The definition of such a method
is a technical matter, which Dr Whitehead and I have dealt with
elsewhere, and which we need not enter into on this occasion.[54]

  [54] Cf. _Principia Mathematica_,  20, and Introduction, chapter iii.

If the theory that classes are merely symbolic is accepted, it follows
that numbers are not actual entities, but that propositions in which
numbers verbally occur have not really any constituents corresponding to
numbers, but only a certain logical form which is not a part of
propositions having this form. This is in fact the case with all the
apparent objects of logic and mathematics. Such words as _or_, _not_,
_if_, _there is_, _identity_, _greater_, _plus_, _nothing_,
_everything_, _function_, and so on, are not names of definite objects,
like "John" or "Jones," but are words which require a context in order
to have meaning. All of them are _formal_, that is to say, their
occurrence indicates a certain form of proposition, not a certain
constituent. "Logical constants," in short, are not entities; the words
expressing them are not names, and cannot significantly be made into
logical subjects except when it is the words themselves, as opposed to
their meanings, that are being discussed.[55] This fact has a very
important bearing on all logic and philosophy, since it shows how they
differ from the special sciences. But the questions raised are so large
and so difficult that it is impossible to pursue them further on this
occasion.

  [55] In the above remarks I am making use of unpublished work by my
  friend Ludwig Wittgenstein.




LECTURE VIII

ON THE NOTION OF CAUSE, WITH APPLICATIONS TO THE FREE-WILL PROBLEM


The nature of philosophic analysis, as illustrated in our previous
lectures, can now be stated in general terms. We start from a body of
common knowledge, which constitutes our data. On examination, the data
are found to be complex, rather vague, and largely interdependent
logically. By analysis we reduce them to propositions which are as
nearly as possible simple and precise, and we arrange them in deductive
chains, in which a certain number of initial propositions form a logical
guarantee for all the rest. These initial propositions are _premisses_
for the body of knowledge in question. Premisses are thus quite
different from data--they are simpler, more precise, and less infected
with logical redundancy. If the work of analysis has been performed
completely, they will be wholly free from logical redundancy, wholly
precise, and as simple as is logically compatible with their leading to
the given body of knowledge. The discovery of these premisses belongs to
philosophy; but the work of deducing the body of common knowledge from
them belongs to mathematics, if "mathematics" is interpreted in a
somewhat liberal sense.

But besides the logical analysis of the common knowledge which forms our
data, there is the consideration of its degree of certainty. When we
have arrived at its premisses, we may find that some of them seem open
to doubt, and we may find further that this doubt extends to those of
our original data which depend upon these doubtful premisses. In our
third lecture, for example, we saw that the part of physics which
depends upon testimony, and thus upon the existence of other minds than
our own, does not seem so certain as the part which depends exclusively
upon our own sense-data and the laws of logic. Similarly, it used to be
felt that the parts of geometry which depend upon the axiom of parallels
have less certainty than the parts which are independent of this
premiss. We may say, generally, that what commonly passes as knowledge
is not all equally certain, and that, when analysis into premisses has
been effected, the degree of certainty of any consequence of the
premisses will depend upon that of the most doubtful premiss employed in
proving this consequence. Thus analysis into premisses serves not only a
logical purpose, but also the purpose of facilitating an estimate as to
the degree of certainty to be attached to this or that derivative
belief. In view of the fallibility of all human beliefs, this service
seems at least as important as the purely logical services rendered by
philosophical analysis.

In the present lecture, I wish to apply the analytic method to the
notion of "cause," and to illustrate the discussion by applying it to
the problem of free will. For this purpose I shall inquire: I., what is
meant by a causal law; II., what is the evidence that causal laws have
held hitherto; III., what is the evidence that they will continue to
hold in the future; IV., how the causality which is used in science
differs from that of common sense and traditional philosophy; V., what
new light is thrown on the question of free will by our analysis of the
notion of "cause."

I. By a "causal law" I mean any general proposition in virtue of which
it is possible to infer the existence of one thing or event from the
existence of another or of a number of others. If you hear thunder
without having seen lightning, you infer that there nevertheless was a
flash, because of the general proposition, "All thunder is preceded by
lightning." When Robinson Crusoe sees a footprint, he infers a human
being, and he might justify his inference by the general proposition,
"All marks in the ground shaped like a human foot are subsequent to a
human being's standing where the marks are." When we see the sun set, we
expect that it will rise again the next day. When we hear a man
speaking, we infer that he has certain thoughts. All these inferences
are due to causal laws.

A causal law, we said, allows us to infer the existence of one _thing_
(or _event_) from the existence of one or more others. The word "thing"
here is to be understood as only applying to particulars, _i.e._ as
excluding such logical objects as numbers or classes or abstract
properties and relations, and including sense-data, with whatever is
logically of the same type as sense-data.[56] In so far as a causal law
is directly verifiable, the thing inferred and the thing from which it
is inferred must both be data, though they need not both be data at the
same time. In fact, a causal law which is being used to extend our
knowledge of existence must be applied to what, at the moment, is not a
datum; it is in the possibility of such application that the practical
utility of a causal law consists. The important point, for our present
purpose, however, is that what is inferred is a "thing," a "particular,"
an object having the kind of reality that belongs to objects of sense,
not an abstract object such as virtue or the square root of two.

  [56] Thus we are not using "thing" here in the sense of a class of
  correlated "aspects," as we did in Lecture III. Each "aspect" will
  count separately in stating causal laws.

But we cannot become acquainted with a particular except by its being
actually given. Hence the particular inferred by a causal law must be
only _described_ with more or less exactness; it cannot be _named_ until
the inference is verified. Moreover, since the causal law is _general_,
and capable of applying to many cases, the given particular from which
we infer must allow the inference in virtue of some general
characteristic, not in virtue of its being just the particular that it
is. This is obvious in all our previous instances: we infer the
unperceived lightning from the thunder, not in virtue of any peculiarity
of the thunder, but in virtue of its resemblance to other claps of
thunder. Thus a causal law must state that the existence of a thing of a
certain sort (or of a number of things of a number of assigned sorts)
implies the existence of another thing having a relation to the first
which remains invariable so long as the first is of the kind in
question.

It is to be observed that what is constant in a causal law is not the
object or objects given, nor yet the object inferred, both of which may
vary within wide limits, but the _relation_ between what is given and
what is inferred. The principle, "same cause, same effect," which is
sometimes said to be the principle of causality, is much narrower in its
scope than the principle which really occurs in science; indeed, if
strictly interpreted, it has no scope at all, since the "same" cause
never recurs exactly. We shall return to this point at a later stage of
the discussion.

The particular which is inferred may be uniquely determined by the
causal law, or may be only described in such general terms that many
different particulars might satisfy the description. This depends upon
whether the constant relation affirmed by the causal law is one which
only one term can have to the data, or one which many terms may have. If
many terms may have the relation in question, science will not be
satisfied until it has found some more stringent law, which will enable
us to determine the inferred things uniquely.

Since all known things are in time, a causal law must take account of
temporal relations. It will be part of the causal law to state a
relation of succession or coexistence between the thing given and the
thing inferred. When we hear thunder and infer that there was lightning,
the law states that the thing inferred is earlier than the thing given.
Conversely, when we see lightning and wait expectantly for the thunder,
the law states that the thing given is earlier than the thing inferred.
When we infer a man's thoughts from his words, the law states that the
two are (at least approximately) simultaneous.

If a causal law is to achieve the precision at which science aims, it
must not be content with a vague _earlier_ or _later_, but must state
how much earlier or how much later. That is to say, the time-relation
between the thing given and the thing inferred ought to be capable of
exact statement; and usually the inference to be drawn is different
according to the length and direction of the interval. "A quarter of an
hour ago this man was alive; an hour hence he will be cold." Such a
statement involves two causal laws, one inferring from a datum something
which existed a quarter of an hour ago, the other inferring from the
same datum something which will exist an hour hence.

Often a causal law involves not one datum, but many, which need not be
all simultaneous with each other, though their time-relations must be
given. The general scheme of a causal law will be as follows:

"Whenever things occur in certain relations to each other (among which
their time-relations must be included), then a thing having a fixed
relation to these things will occur at a date fixed relatively to their
dates."

The things given will not, in practice, be things that only exist for an
instant, for such things, if there are any, can never be data. The
things given will each occupy some finite time. They may be not static
things, but processes, especially motions. We have considered in an
earlier lecture the sense in which a motion may be a datum, and need not
now recur to this topic.

It is not essential to a causal law that the object inferred should be
later than some or all of the data. It may equally well be earlier or at
the same time. The only thing essential is that the law should be such
as to enable us to infer the existence of an object which we can more or
less accurately describe in terms of the data.

II. I come now to our second question, namely: What is the nature of the
evidence that causal laws have held hitherto, at least in the observed
portions of the past? This question must not be confused with the
further question: Does this evidence warrant us in assuming the truth of
causal laws in the future and in unobserved portions of the past? For
the present, I am only asking what are the grounds which lead to a
belief in causal laws, not whether these grounds are adequate to support
the belief in universal causation.

The first step is the discovery of approximate unanalysed uniformities
of sequence or coexistence. After lightning comes thunder, after a blow
received comes pain, after approaching a fire comes warmth; again, there
are uniformities of coexistence, for example between touch and sight,
between certain sensations in the throat and the sound of one's own
voice, and so on. Every such uniformity of sequence or coexistence,
after it has been experienced a certain number of times, is followed by
an expectation that it will be repeated on future occasions, _i.e._ that
where one of the correlated events is found, the other will be found
also. The connection of experienced past uniformity with expectation as
to the future is just one of those uniformities of sequence which we
have observed to be true hitherto. This affords a psychological account
of what may be called the animal belief in causation, because it is
something which can be observed in horses and dogs, and is rather a
habit of acting than a real belief. So far, we have merely repeated
Hume, who carried the discussion of cause up to this point, but did not,
apparently, perceive how much remained to be said.

Is there, in fact, any characteristic, such as might be called causality
or uniformity, which is found to hold throughout the observed past? And
if so, how is it to be stated?

The particular uniformities which we mentioned before, such as lightning
being followed by thunder, are not found to be free from exceptions. We
sometimes see lightning without hearing thunder; and although, in such a
case, we suppose that thunder might have been heard if we had been
nearer to the lightning, that is a supposition based on theory, and
therefore incapable of being invoked to support the theory. What does
seem, however, to be shown by scientific experience is this: that where
an observed uniformity fails, some wider uniformity can be found,
embracing more circumstances, and subsuming both the successes and the
failures of the previous uniformity. Unsupported bodies in air fall,
unless they are balloons or aeroplanes; but the principles of mechanics
give uniformities which apply to balloons and aeroplanes just as
accurately as to bodies that fall. There is much that is hypothetical
and more or less artificial in the uniformities affirmed by mechanics,
because, when they cannot otherwise be made applicable, unobserved
bodies are inferred in order to account for observed peculiarities.
Still, it is an empirical fact that it is possible to preserve the laws
by assuming such bodies, and that they never have to be assumed in
circumstances in which they ought to be observable. Thus the empirical
verification of mechanical laws may be admitted, although we must also
admit that it is less complete and triumphant than is sometimes
supposed.

Assuming now, what must be admitted to be doubtful, that the whole of
the past has proceeded according to invariable laws, what can we say as
to the nature of these laws? They will not be of the simple type which
asserts that the same cause always produces the same effect. We may take
the law of gravitation as a sample of the kind of law that appears to be
verified without exception. In order to state this law in a form which
observation can confirm, we will confine it to the solar system. It then
states that the motions of planets and their satellites have at every
instant an acceleration compounded of accelerations towards all the
other bodies in the solar system, proportional to the masses of those
bodies and inversely proportional to the squares of their distances. In
virtue of this law, given the state of the solar system throughout any
finite time, however short, its state at all earlier and later times is
determinate except in so far as other forces than gravitation or other
bodies than those in the solar system have to be taken into
consideration. But other forces, so far as science can discover, appear
to be equally regular, and equally capable of being summed up in single
causal laws. If the mechanical account of matter were complete, the
whole physical history of the universe, past and future, could be
inferred from a sufficient number of data concerning an assigned finite
time, however short.

In the mental world, the evidence for the universality of causal laws is
less complete than in the physical world. Psychology cannot boast of any
triumph comparable to gravitational astronomy. Nevertheless, the
evidence is not very greatly less than in the physical world. The crude
and approximate causal laws from which science starts are just as easy
to discover in the mental sphere as in the physical. In the world of
sense, there are to begin with the correlations of sight and touch and
so on, and the facts which lead us to connect various kinds of
sensations with eyes, ears, nose, tongue, etc. Then there are such facts
as that our body moves in answer to our volitions. Exceptions exist, but
are capable of being explained as easily as the exceptions to the rule
that unsupported bodies in air fall. There is, in fact, just such a
degree of evidence for causal laws in psychology as will warrant the
psychologist in assuming them as a matter of course, though not such a
degree as will suffice to remove all doubt from the mind of a sceptical
inquirer. It should be observed that causal laws in which the given term
is mental and the inferred term physical, or _vice versa_, are at least
as easy to discover as causal laws in which both terms are mental.

It will be noticed that, although we have spoken of causal laws, we have
not hitherto introduced the word "cause." At this stage, it will be well
to say a few words on legitimate and illegitimate uses of this word. The
word "cause," in the scientific account of the world, belongs only to
the early stages, in which small preliminary, approximate
generalisations are being ascertained with a view to subsequent larger
and more invariable laws. We may say, "Arsenic causes death," so long as
we are ignorant of the precise process by which the result is brought
about. But in a sufficiently advanced science, the word "cause" will not
occur in any statement of invariable laws. There is, however, a somewhat
rough and loose use of the word "cause" which may be preserved. The
approximate uniformities which lead to its pre-scientific employment may
turn out to be true in all but very rare and exceptional circumstances,
perhaps in all circumstances that actually occur. In such cases, it is
convenient to be able to speak of the antecedent event as the "cause"
and the subsequent event as the "effect." In this sense, provided it is
realised that the sequence is not necessary and may have exceptions, it
is still possible to employ the words "cause" and "effect." It is in
this sense, and in this sense only, that we shall intend the words when
we speak of one particular event "causing" another particular event, as
we must sometimes do if we are to avoid intolerable circumlocution.

III. We come now to our third question, namely: What reason can be given
for believing that causal laws will hold in future, or that they have
held in unobserved portions of the past?

What we have said so far is that there have been hitherto certain
observed causal laws, and that all the empirical evidence we possess is
compatible with the view that everything, both mental and physical, so
far as our observation has extended, has happened in accordance with
causal laws. The law of universal causation, suggested by these facts,
may be enunciated as follows:

"There are such invariable relations between different events at the
same or different times that, given the state of the whole universe
throughout any finite time, however short, every previous and subsequent
event can theoretically be determined as a function of the given events
during that time."

Have we any reason to believe this universal law? Or, to ask a more
modest question, have we any reason to believe that a particular causal
law, such as the law of gravitation, will continue to hold in the
future?

Among observed causal laws is this, that observation of uniformities is
followed by expectation of their recurrence. A horse who has been driven
always along a certain road expects to be driven along that road again;
a dog who is always fed at a certain hour expects food at that hour and
not at any other. Such expectations, as Hume pointed out, explain only
too well the common-sense belief in uniformities of sequence, but they
afford absolutely no logical ground for beliefs as to the future, not
even for the belief that we shall continue to expect the continuation of
experienced uniformities, for that is precisely one of those causal laws
for which a ground has to be sought. If Hume's account of causation is
the last word, we have not only no reason to suppose that the sun will
rise to-morrow, but no reason to suppose that five minutes hence we
shall still expect it to rise to-morrow.

It may, of course, be said that all inferences as to the future are in
fact invalid, and I do not see how such a view could be disproved. But,
while admitting the legitimacy of such a view, we may nevertheless
inquire: If inferences as to the future _are_ valid, what principle must
be involved in making them?

The principle involved is the principle of induction, which, if it is
true, must be an _a priori_ logical law, not capable of being proved or
disproved by experience. It is a difficult question how this principle
ought to be formulated; but if it is to warrant the inferences which we
wish to make by its means, it must lead to the following proposition:
"If, in a great number of instances, a thing of a certain kind is
associated in a certain way with a thing of a certain other kind, it is
probable that a thing of the one kind is always similarly associated
with a thing of the other kind; and as the number of instances
increases, the probability approaches indefinitely near to certainty."
It may well be questioned whether this proposition is true; but if we
admit it, we can infer that any characteristic of the whole of the
observed past is likely to apply to the future and to the unobserved
past. This proposition, therefore, if it is true, will warrant the
inference that causal laws probably hold at all times, future as well as
past; but without this principle, the observed cases of the truth of
causal laws afford no presumption as to the unobserved cases, and
therefore the existence of a thing not directly observed can never be
validly inferred.

It is thus the principle of induction, rather than the law of causality,
which is at the bottom of all inferences as to the existence of things
not immediately given. With the principle of induction, all that is
wanted for such inferences can be proved; without it, all such
inferences are invalid. This principle has not received the attention
which its great importance deserves. Those who were interested in
deductive logic naturally enough ignored it, while those who emphasised
the scope of induction wished to maintain that all logic is empirical,
and therefore could not be expected to realise that induction itself,
their own darling, required a logical principle which obviously could
not be proved inductively, and must therefore be _a priori_ if it could
be known at all.

The view that the law of causality itself is _a priori_ cannot, I think,
be maintained by anyone who realises what a complicated principle it is.
In the form which states that "every event has a cause" it looks simple;
but on examination, "cause" is merged in "causal law," and the
definition of a "causal law" is found to be far from simple. There must
necessarily be _some a priori_ principle involved in inference from
the existence of one thing to that of another, if such inference is ever
valid; but it would appear from the above analysis that the principle in
question is induction, not causality. Whether inferences from past to
future are valid depends wholly, if our discussion has been sound, upon
the inductive principle: if it is true, such inferences are valid, and
if it is false, they are invalid.

IV. I come now to the question how the conception of causal laws which
we have arrived at is related to the traditional conception of cause as
it occurs in philosophy and common sense.

Historically, the notion of cause has been bound up with that of human
volition. The typical cause would be the fiat of a king. The cause is
supposed to be "active," the effect "passive." From this it is easy to
pass on to the suggestion that a "true" cause must contain some
prevision of the effect; hence the effect becomes the "end" at which the
cause aims, and teleology replaces causation in the explanation of
nature. But all such ideas, as applied to physics, are mere
anthropomorphic superstitions. It is as a reaction against these errors
that Mach and others have urged a purely "descriptive" view of physics:
physics, they say, does not aim at telling us "why" things happen, but
only "how" they happen. And if the question "why?" means anything more
than the search for a general law according to which a phenomenon
occurs, then it is certainly the case that this question cannot be
answered in physics and ought not to be asked. In this sense, the
descriptive view is indubitably in the right. But in using causal laws
to support inferences from the observed to the unobserved, physics
ceases to be _purely_ descriptive, and it is these laws which give the
scientifically useful part of the traditional notion of "cause." There
is therefore _something_ to preserve in this notion, though it is a very
tiny part of what is commonly assumed in orthodox metaphysics.

In order to understand the difference between the kind of cause which
science uses and the kind which we naturally imagine, it is necessary to
shut out, by an effort, everything that differentiates between past and
future. This is an extraordinarily difficult thing to do, because our
mental life is so intimately bound up with difference. Not only do
memory and hope make a difference in our feelings as regards past and
future, but almost our whole vocabulary is filled with the idea of
activity, of things done now for the sake of their future effects. All
transitive verbs involve the notion of cause as activity, and would have
to be replaced by some cumbrous periphrasis before this notion could be
eliminated.

Consider such a statement as, "Brutus killed Csar." On another
occasion, Brutus and Csar might engage our attention, but for the
present it is the killing that we have to study. We may say that to kill
a person is to cause his death intentionally. This means that desire for
a person's death causes a certain act, because it is believed that that
act will cause the person's death; or more accurately, the desire and
the belief jointly cause the act. Brutus desires that Csar should be
dead, and believes that he will be dead if he is stabbed; Brutus
therefore stabs him, and the stab causes Csar's death, as Brutus
expected it would. Every act which realises a purpose involves two
causal steps in this way: C is desired, and it is believed (truly if the
purpose is achieved) that B will cause C; the desire and the belief
together cause B, which in turn causes C. Thus we have first A, which is
a desire for C and a belief that B (an act) will cause C; then we have
B, the act caused by A, and believed to be a cause of C; then, if the
belief was correct, we have C, caused by B, and if the belief was
incorrect we have disappointment. Regarded purely scientifically, this
series A, B, C may equally well be considered in the inverse order, as
they would be at a coroner's inquest. But from the point of view of
Brutus, the desire, which comes at the beginning, is what makes the
whole series interesting. We feel that if his desires had been
different, the effects which he in fact produced would not have
occurred. This is true, and gives him a sense of power and freedom. It
is equally true that if the effects had not occurred, his desires would
have been different, since being what they were the effects did occur.
Thus the desires are determined by their consequences just as much as
the consequences by the desires; but as we cannot (in general) know in
advance the consequences of our desires without knowing our desires,
this form of inference is uninteresting as applied to our own acts,
though quite vital as applied to those of others.

A cause, considered scientifically, has none of that analogy with
volition which makes us imagine that the effect is _compelled_ by it. A
cause is an event or group of events, of some known general character,
and having a known relation to some other event, called the effect; the
relation being of such a kind that only one event, or at any rate only
one well-defined sort of event, can have the relation to a given cause.
It is customary only to give the name "effect" to an event which is
later than the cause, but there is no kind of reason for this
restriction. We shall do better to allow the effect to be before the
cause or simultaneous with it, because nothing of any scientific
importance depends upon its being after the cause.

If the inference from cause to effect is to be indubitable, it seems
that the cause can hardly stop short of the whole universe. So long as
anything is left out, something may be left out which alters the
expected result. But for practical and scientific purposes, phenomena
can be collected into groups which are causally self-contained, or
nearly so. In the common notion of causation, the cause is a single
event--we say the lightning causes the thunder, and so on. But it is
difficult to know what we mean by a single event; and it generally
appears that, in order to have anything approaching certainty concerning
the effect, it is necessary to include many more circumstances in the
cause than unscientific common sense would suppose. But often a probable
causal connection, where the cause is fairly simple, is of more
practical importance than a more indubitable connection in which the
cause is so complex as to be hard to ascertain.

To sum up: the strict, certain, universal law of causation which
philosophers advocate is an ideal, possibly true, but not _known_ to be
true in virtue of any available evidence. What is actually known, as a
matter of empirical science, is that certain constant relations are
observed to hold between the members of a group of events at certain
times, and that when such relations fail, as they sometimes do, it is
usually possible to discover a new, more constant relation by enlarging
the group. Any such constant relation between events of specified kinds
with given intervals of time between them is a "causal law." But all
causal laws are liable to exceptions, if the cause is less than the
whole state of the universe; we believe, on the basis of a good deal of
experience, that such exceptions can be dealt with by enlarging the
group we call the cause, but this belief, wherever it is still
unverified, ought not to be regarded as certain, but only as suggesting
a direction for further inquiry.

A very common causal group consists of volitions and the consequent
bodily acts, though exceptions arise (for example) through sudden
paralysis. Another very frequent connection (though here the exceptions
are much more numerous) is between a bodily act and the realisation of
the purpose which led to the act. These connections are patent, whereas
the causes of desires are more obscure. Thus it is natural to begin
causal series with desires, to suppose that all causes are analogous to
desires, and that desires themselves arise spontaneously. Such a view,
however, is not one which any serious psychologist would maintain. But
this brings us to the question of the application of our analysis of
cause to the problem of free will.

V. The problem of free will is so intimately bound up with the analysis
of causation that, old as it is, we need not despair of obtaining new
light on it by the help of new views on the notion of cause. The
free-will problem has, at one time or another, stirred men's passions
profoundly, and the fear that the will might not be free has been to
some men a source of great unhappiness. I believe that, under the
influence of a cool analysis, the doubtful questions involved will be
found to have no such emotional importance as is sometimes thought,
since the disagreeable consequences supposed to flow from a denial of
free will do not flow from this denial in any form in which there is
reason to make it. It is not, however, on this account chiefly that I
wish to discuss this problem, but rather because it affords a good
example of the clarifying effect of analysis and of the interminable
controversies which may result from its neglect.

Let us first try to discover what it is we really desire when we desire
free will. Some of our reasons for desiring free will are profound, some
trivial. To begin with the former: we do not wish to feel ourselves in
the hands of fate, so that, however much we may desire to will one
thing, we may nevertheless be compelled by an outside force to will
another. We do not wish to think that, however much we may desire to act
well, heredity and surroundings may force us into acting ill. We wish to
feel that, in cases of doubt, our choice is momentous and lies within
our power. Besides these desires, which are worthy of all respect, we
have, however, others not so respectable, which equally make us desire
free will. We do not like to think that other people, if they knew
enough, could predict our actions, though we know that we can often
predict those of other people, especially if they are elderly. Much as
we esteem the old gentleman who is our neighbour in the country, we know
that when grouse are mentioned he will tell the story of the grouse in
the gun-room. But we ourselves are not so mechanical: we never tell an
anecdote to the same person twice, or even once unless he is sure to
enjoy it; although we once met (say) Bismarck, we are quite capable of
hearing him mentioned without relating the occasion when we met him. In
this sense, everybody thinks that he himself has free will, though he
knows that no one else has. The desire for this kind of free will seems
to be no better than a form of vanity. I do not believe that this desire
can be gratified with any certainty; but the other, more respectable
desires are, I believe, not inconsistent with any tenable form of
determinism.

We have thus two questions to consider: (1) Are human actions
theoretically predictable from a sufficient number of antecedents? (2)
Are human actions subject to an external compulsion? The two questions,
as I shall try to show, are entirely distinct, and we may answer the
first in the affirmative without therefore being forced to give an
affirmative answer to the second.

(1) _Are human actions theoretically predictable from a sufficient
number of antecedents?_ Let us first endeavour to give precision to this
question. We may state the question thus: Is there some constant
relation between an act and a certain number of earlier events, such
that, when the earlier events are given, only one act, or at most only
acts with some well-marked character, can have this relation to the
earlier events? If this is the case, then, as soon as the earlier events
are known, it is theoretically possible to predict either the precise
act, or at least the character necessary to its fulfilling the constant
relation.

To this question, a negative answer has been given by Bergson, in a form
which calls in question the general applicability of the law of
causation. He maintains that every event, and more particularly every
mental event, embodies so much of the past that it could not possibly
have occurred at any earlier time, and is therefore necessarily quite
different from all previous and subsequent events. If, for example, I
read a certain poem many times, my experience on each occasion is
modified by the previous readings, and my emotions are never repeated
exactly. The principle of causation, according to him, asserts that the
same cause, if repeated, will produce the same effect. But owing to
memory, he contends, this principle does not apply to mental events.
What is apparently the same cause, if repeated, is modified by the mere
fact of repetition, and cannot produce the same effect. He infers that
every mental event is a genuine novelty, not predictable from the past,
because the past contains nothing exactly like it by which we could
imagine it. And on this ground he regards the freedom of the will as
unassailable.

Bergson's contention has undoubtedly a great deal of truth, and I have
no wish to deny its importance. But I do not think its consequences are
quite what he believes them to be. It is not necessary for the
determinist to maintain that he can foresee the whole particularity of
the act which will be performed. If he could foresee that A was going to
murder B, his foresight would not be invalidated by the fact that he
could not know all the infinite complexity of A's state of mind in
committing the murder, nor whether the murder was to be performed with a
knife or with a revolver. If the _kind_ of act which will be performed
can be foreseen within narrow limits, it is of little practical interest
that there are fine shades which cannot be foreseen. No doubt every time
the story of the grouse in the gun-room is told, there will be slight
differences due to increasing habitualness, but they do not invalidate
the prediction that the story will be told. And there is nothing in
Bergson's argument to show that we can never predict what _kind_ of act
will be performed.

Again, his statement of the law of causation is inadequate. The law does
not state merely that, if the _same_ cause is repeated, the _same_
effect will result. It states rather that there is a constant relation
between causes of certain kinds and effects of certain kinds. For
example, if a body falls freely, there is a constant relation between
the height through which it falls and the time it takes in falling. It
is not necessary to have a body fall through the _same_ height which has
been previously observed, in order to be able to foretell the length of
time occupied in falling. If this were necessary, no prediction would be
possible, since it would be impossible to make the height exactly the
same on two occasions. Similarly, the attraction which the sun will
exert on the earth is not only known at distances for which it has been
observed, but at all distances, because it is known to vary as the
inverse square of the distance. In fact, what is found to be repeated is
always the _relation_ of cause and effect, not the cause itself; all
that is necessary as regards the cause is that it should be of the same
_kind_ (in the relevant respect) as earlier causes whose effects have
been observed.

Another respect in which Bergson's statement of causation is inadequate
is in its assumption that the cause must be _one_ event, whereas it may
be two or more events, or even some continuous process. The substantive
question at issue is whether mental events are determined by the past.
Now in such a case as the repeated reading of a poem, it is obvious that
our feelings in reading the poem are most emphatically dependent upon
the past, but not upon one single event in the past. All our previous
readings of the poem must be included in the cause. But we easily
perceive a certain law according to which the effect varies as the
previous readings increase in number, and in fact Bergson himself
tacitly assumes such a law. We decide at last not to read the poem
again, because we know that this time the effect would be boredom. We
may not know all the niceties and shades of the boredom we should feel,
but we know enough to guide our decision, and the prophecy of boredom is
none the less true for being more or less general. Thus the kinds of
cases upon which Bergson relies are insufficient to show the
impossibility of prediction in the only sense in which prediction has
practical or emotional interest. We may therefore leave the
consideration of his arguments and address ourselves to the problem
directly.

The law of causation, according to which later events can theoretically
be predicted by means of earlier events, has often been held to be _a
priori_, a necessity of thought, a category without which science would
be impossible. These claims seem to me excessive. In certain directions
the law has been verified empirically, and in other directions there is
no positive evidence against it. But science can use it where it has
been found to be true, without being forced into any assumption as to
its truth in other fields. We cannot, therefore, feel any _a priori_
certainty that causation must apply to human volitions.

The question how far human volitions are subject to causal laws is a
purely empirical one. Empirically it seems plain that the great majority
of our volitions have causes, but it cannot, on this account, be held
necessarily certain that all have causes. There are, however, precisely
the same kinds of reasons for regarding it as probable that they all
have causes as there are in the case of physical events.

We may suppose--though this is doubtful--that there are laws of
correlation of the mental and the physical, in virtue of which, given
the state of all the matter in the world, and therefore of all the
brains and living organisms, the state of all the minds in the world
could be inferred, while conversely the state of all the matter in the
world could be inferred if the state of all the minds were given. It is
obvious that there is _some_ degree of correlation between brain and
mind, and it is impossible to say how complete it may be. This, however,
is not the point which I wish to elicit. What I wish to urge is that,
even if we admit the most extreme claims of determinism and of
correlation of mind and brain, still the consequences inimical to what
is worth preserving in free will do not follow. The belief that they
follow results, I think, entirely from the assimilation of causes to
volitions, and from the notion that causes _compel_ their effects in
some sense analogous to that in which a human authority can compel a man
to do what he would rather not do. This assimilation, as soon as the
true nature of scientific causal laws is realised, is seen to be a sheer
mistake. But this brings us to the second of the two questions which we
raised in regard to free will, namely, whether, assuming determinism,
our actions can be in any proper sense regarded as compelled by outside
forces.

(2) _Are human actions subject to an external compulsion?_ We have, in
deliberation, a subjective sense of freedom, which is sometimes alleged
against the view that volitions have causes. This sense of freedom,
however, is only a sense that we can choose which we please of a number
of alternatives: it does not show us that there is no causal connection
between what we please to choose and our previous history. The supposed
inconsistency of these two springs from the habit of conceiving causes
as analogous to volitions--a habit which often survives unconsciously in
those who intend to conceive causes in a more scientific manner. If a
cause is analogous to a volition, outside causes will be analogous to an
alien will, and acts predictable from outside causes will be subject to
compulsion. But this view of cause is one to which science lends no
countenance. Causes, we have seen, do not _compel_ their effects, any
more than effects _compel_ their causes. There is a mutual relation, so
that either can be inferred from the other. When the geologist infers
the past state of the earth from its present state, we should not say
that the present state _compels_ the past state to have been what it
was; yet it renders it necessary as a consequence of the data, in the
only sense in which effects are rendered necessary by their causes. The
difference which we _feel_, in this respect, between causes and effects
is a mere confusion due to the fact that we remember past events but do
not happen to have memory of the future.

The apparent indeterminateness of the future, upon which some advocates
of free will rely, is merely a result of our ignorance. It is plain that
no desirable kind of free will can be dependent simply upon our
ignorance; for if that were the case, animals would be more free than
men, and savages than civilised people. Free will in any valuable sense
must be compatible with the fullest knowledge. Now, quite apart from any
assumption as to causality, it is obvious that complete knowledge would
embrace the future as well as the past. Our knowledge of the past is not
wholly based upon causal inferences, but is partly derived from memory.
It is a mere accident that we have no memory of the future. We might--as
in the pretended visions of seers--see future events immediately, in the
way in which we see past events. They certainly will be what they will
be, and are in this sense just as determined as the past. If we saw
future events in the same immediate way in which we see past events,
what kind of free will would still be possible? Such a kind would be
wholly independent of determinism: it could not be contrary to even the
most entirely universal reign of causality. And such a kind must contain
whatever is worth having in free will, since it is impossible to believe
that mere ignorance can be the essential condition of any good thing.
Let us therefore imagine a set of beings who know the whole future with
absolute certainty, and let us ask ourselves whether they could have
anything that we should call free will.

Such beings as we are imagining would not have to wait for the event in
order to know what decision they were going to adopt on some future
occasion. They would know now what their volitions were going to be. But
would they have any reason to regret this knowledge? Surely not, unless
the foreseen volitions were in themselves regrettable. And it is less
likely that the foreseen volitions would be regrettable if the steps
which would lead to them were also foreseen. It is difficult not to
suppose that what is foreseen is fated, and must happen however much it
may be dreaded. But human actions are the outcome of desire, and no
foreseeing can be true unless it takes account of desire. A foreseen
volition will have to be one which does not become odious through being
foreseen. The beings we are imagining would easily come to know the
causal connections of volitions, and therefore their volitions would be
better calculated to satisfy their desires than ours are. Since
volitions are the outcome of desires, a prevision of volitions contrary
to desires could not be a true one. It must be remembered that the
supposed prevision would not create the future any more than memory
creates the past. We do not think we were necessarily not free in the
past, merely because we can now remember our past volitions. Similarly,
we might be free in the future, even if we could now see what our future
volitions were going to be. Freedom, in short, in any valuable sense,
demands only that our volitions shall be, as they are, the result of our
own desires, not of an outside force compelling us to will what we would
rather not will. Everything else is confusion of thought, due to the
feeling that knowledge _compels_ the happening of what it knows when
this is future, though it is at once obvious that knowledge has no such
power in regard to the past. Free will, therefore, is true in the only
form which is important; and the desire for other forms is a mere effect
of insufficient analysis.

                   *       *       *       *       *

What has been said on philosophical method in the foregoing lectures has
been rather by means of illustrations in particular cases than by means
of general precepts. Nothing of any value can be said on method except
through examples; but now, at the end of our course, we may collect
certain general maxims which may possibly be a help in acquiring a
philosophical habit of mind and a guide in looking for solutions of
philosophic problems.

Philosophy does not become scientific by making use of other sciences,
in the kind of way in which (_e.g._) Herbert Spencer does. Philosophy
aims at what is _general_, and the special sciences, however they may
_suggest_ large generalisations, cannot make them certain. And a hasty
generalisation, such as Spencer's generalisation of evolution, is none
the less hasty because what is generalised is the latest scientific
theory. Philosophy is a study apart from the other sciences: its results
cannot be established by the other sciences, and conversely must not be
such as some other science might conceivably contradict. Prophecies as
to the future of the universe, for example, are not the business of
philosophy; whether the universe is progressive, retrograde, or
stationary, it is not for the philosopher to say.

In order to become a scientific philosopher, a certain peculiar mental
discipline is required. There must be present, first of all, the desire
to know philosophical truth, and this desire must be sufficiently strong
to survive through years when there seems no hope of its finding any
satisfaction. The desire to know philosophical truth is very rare--in
its purity, it is not often found even among philosophers. It is
obscured sometimes--particularly after long periods of fruitless
search--by the desire to _think_ we know. Some plausible opinion
presents itself, and by turning our attention away from the objections
to it, or merely by not making great efforts to find objections to it,
we may obtain the comfort of believing it, although, if we had resisted
the wish for comfort, we should have come to see that the opinion was
false. Again the desire for unadulterated truth is often obscured, in
professional philosophers, by love of system: the one little fact which
will not come inside the philosopher's edifice has to be pushed and
tortured until it seems to consent. Yet the one little fact is more
likely to be important for the future than the system with which it is
inconsistent. Pythagoras invented a system which fitted admirably with
all the facts he knew, except the incommensurability of the diagonal of
a square and the side; this one little fact stood out, and remained a
fact even after Hippasos of Metapontion was drowned for revealing it. To
us, the discovery of this fact is the chief claim of Pythagoras to
immortality, while his system has become a matter of merely historical
curiosity.[57] Love of system, therefore, and the system-maker's vanity
which becomes associated with it, are among the snares that the student
of philosophy must guard against.

  [57] The above remarks, for purposes of illustration, adopt one of
  several possible opinions on each of several disputed points.

The desire to establish this or that result, or generally to discover
evidence for agreeable results, of whatever kind, has of course been the
chief obstacle to honest philosophising. So strangely perverted do men
become by unrecognised passions, that a determination in advance to
arrive at this or that conclusion is generally regarded as a mark of
virtue, and those whose studies lead to an opposite conclusion are
thought to be wicked. No doubt it is commoner to wish to arrive at an
agreeable result than to wish to arrive at a true result. But only those
in whom the desire to arrive at a _true_ result is paramount can hope to
serve any good purpose by the study of philosophy.

But even when the desire to know exists in the requisite strength, the
mental vision by which abstract truth is recognised is hard to
distinguish from vivid imaginability and consonance with mental habits.
It is necessary to practise methodological doubt, like Descartes, in
order to loosen the hold of mental habits; and it is necessary to
cultivate logical imagination, in order to have a number of hypotheses
at command, and not to be the slave of the one which common sense has
rendered easy to imagine. These two processes, of doubting the familiar
and imagining the unfamiliar, are correlative, and form the chief part
of the mental training required for a philosopher.

The nave beliefs which we find in ourselves when we first begin the
process of philosophic reflection may turn out, in the end, to be almost
all capable of a true interpretation; but they ought all, before being
admitted into philosophy, to undergo the ordeal of sceptical criticism.
Until they have gone through this ordeal, they are mere blind habits,
ways of behaving rather than intellectual convictions. And although it
may be that a majority will pass the test, we may be pretty sure that
some will not, and that a serious readjustment of our outlook ought to
result. In order to break the dominion of habit, we must do our best to
doubt the senses, reason, morals, everything in short. In some
directions, doubt will be found possible; in others, it will be checked
by that direct vision of abstract truth upon which the possibility of
philosophical knowledge depends.

At the same time, and as an essential aid to the direct perception of
the truth, it is necessary to acquire fertility in imagining abstract
hypotheses. This is, I think, what has most of all been lacking hitherto
in philosophy. So meagre was the logical apparatus that all the
hypotheses philosophers could imagine were found to be inconsistent with
the facts. Too often this state of things led to the adoption of heroic
measures, such as a wholesale denial of the facts, when an imagination
better stocked with logical tools would have found a key to unlock the
mystery. It is in this way that the study of logic becomes the central
study in philosophy: it gives the method of research in philosophy, just
as mathematics gives the method in physics. And as physics, which, from
Plato to the Renaissance, was as unprogressive, dim, and superstitious
as philosophy, became a science through Galileo's fresh observation of
facts and subsequent mathematical manipulation, so philosophy, in our
own day, is becoming scientific through the simultaneous acquisition of
new facts and logical methods.

In spite, however, of the new possibility of progress in philosophy, the
first effect, as in the case of physics, is to diminish very greatly the
extent of what is thought to be known. Before Galileo, people believed
themselves possessed of immense knowledge on all the most interesting
questions in physics. He established certain facts as to the way in
which bodies fall, not very interesting on their own account, but of
quite immeasurable interest as examples of real knowledge and of a new
method whose future fruitfulness he himself divined. But his few facts
sufficed to destroy the whole vast system of supposed knowledge handed
down from Aristotle, as even the palest morning sun suffices to
extinguish the stars. So in philosophy: though some have believed one
system, and others another, almost all have been of opinion that a great
deal was known; but all this supposed knowledge in the traditional
systems must be swept away, and a new beginning must be made, which we
shall esteem fortunate indeed if it can attain results comparable to
Galileo's law of falling bodies.

By the practice of methodological doubt, if it is genuine and prolonged,
a certain humility as to our knowledge is induced: we become glad to
know _anything_ in philosophy, however seemingly trivial. Philosophy has
suffered from the lack of this kind of modesty. It has made the mistake
of attacking the interesting problems at once, instead of proceeding
patiently and slowly, accumulating whatever solid knowledge was
obtainable, and trusting the great problems to the future. Men of
science are not ashamed of what is intrinsically trivial, if its
consequences are likely to be important; the _immediate_ outcome of an
experiment is hardly ever interesting on its own account. So in
philosophy, it is often desirable to expend time and care on matters
which, judged alone, might seem frivolous, for it is often only through
the consideration of such matters that the greater problems can be
approached.

When our problem has been selected, and the necessary mental discipline
has been acquired, the method to be pursued is fairly uniform. The big
problems which provoke philosophical inquiry are found, on examination,
to be complex, and to depend upon a number of component problems,
usually more abstract than those of which they are the components. It
will generally be found that all our initial data, all the facts that we
seem to know to begin with, suffer from vagueness, confusion, and
complexity. Current philosophical ideas share these defects; it is
therefore necessary to create an apparatus of precise conceptions as
general and as free from complexity as possible, before the data can be
analysed into the kind of premisses which philosophy aims at
discovering. In this process of analysis, the source of difficulty is
tracked further and further back, growing at each stage more abstract,
more refined, more difficult to apprehend. Usually it will be found that
a number of these extraordinarily abstract questions underlie any one of
the big obvious problems. When everything has been done that can be done
by method, a stage is reached where only direct philosophic vision can
carry matters further. Here only genius will avail. What is wanted, as a
rule, is some new effort of logical imagination, some glimpse of a
possibility never conceived before, and then the direct perception that
this possibility is realised in the case in question. Failure to think
of the right possibility leaves insoluble difficulties, balanced
arguments pro and con, utter bewilderment and despair. But the right
possibility, as a rule, when once conceived, justifies itself swiftly by
its astonishing power of absorbing apparently conflicting facts. From
this point onward, the work of the philosopher is synthetic and
comparatively easy; it is in the very last stage of the analysis that
the real difficulty consists.

Of the prospect of progress in philosophy, it would be rash to speak
with confidence. Many of the traditional problems of philosophy, perhaps
most of those which have interested a wider circle than that of
technical students, do not appear to be soluble by scientific methods.
Just as astronomy lost much of its human interest when it ceased to be
astrology, so philosophy must lose in attractiveness as it grows less
prodigal of promises. But to the large and still growing body of men
engaged in the pursuit of science--men who hitherto, not without
justification, have turned aside from philosophy with a certain
contempt--the new method, successful already in such time-honoured
problems as number, infinity, continuity, space and time, should make an
appeal which the older methods have wholly failed to make. Physics, with
its principle of relativity and its revolutionary investigations into
the nature of matter, is feeling the need for that kind of novelty in
fundamental hypotheses which scientific philosophy aims at facilitating.
The one and only condition, I believe, which is necessary in order to
secure for philosophy in the near future an achievement surpassing all
that has hitherto been accomplished by philosophers, is the creation of
a school of men with scientific training and philosophical interests,
unhampered by the traditions of the past, and not misled by the literary
methods of those who copy the ancients in all except their merits.




INDEX


  Absolute, 6, 39.

  Abstraction, principle of, 42, 124 ff.

  Achilles, Zeno's argument of, 173.

  Acquaintance, 25, 144.

  Activity, 224 ff.

  Allman, 161 n.

  Analysis, 185, 204, 211, 241.
    legitimacy of, 150.

  Anaximander, 3.

  Antinomies, Kant's, 155 ff.

  Aquinas, 10.

  Aristotle, 40, 160 n., 161 ff., 240.

  Arrow, Zeno's argument of, 173.

  Assertion, 52.

  Atomism, logical, 4.

  Atomists, 160.


  Belief, 58.
    primitive and derivative, 69 ff.

  Bergson, 4, 11, 13, 20 ff., 137, 138, 150, 158, 165, 174, 178, 229 ff.

  Berkeley, 63, 64, 102.

  Bolzano, 165.

  Boole, 40.

  Bradley, 6, 39, 165.

  Broad, 172 n.

  Brochard, 169 n.

  Burnet, 19 n., 160 n., 161 n., 170 n., 171 ff.


  Calderon, 95.

  Cantor, vi, vii, 155, 165, 190, 194, 199.

  Categories, 38.

  Causal laws, 109, 212 ff.
    evidence for, 216 ff.
    in psychology, 219.

  Causation, 34 ff., 79, 212 ff.
    law of, 221.
    not _a priori_, 223, 232.

  Cause, 220, 223.

  Certainty, degrees of, 67, 68, 212.

  Change,
    demands analysis, 151.

  Cinematograph, 148, 174.

  Classes, 202.
    non-existence of, 205 ff.

  Classical tradition, 3 ff., 58.

  Complexity, 145, 157 ff.

  Compulsion, 229, 233 ff.

  Congruence, 195.

  Consecutiveness, 134.

  Conservation, 105.

  Constituents of facts, 51, 145.

  Construction _v._ inference, iv.

  Contemporaries, initial, 119, 120 n.

  Continuity, 64, 129 ff., 141 ff., 155 ff.
    of change, 106, 108, 130 ff.

  Correlation of mental and physical, 233.

  Counting, 164, 181, 187 ff., 203.

  Couturat, 40 n.


  Dante, 10.

  Darwin, 4, 11, 23, 30.

  Data, 65 ff., 211.
    "hard" and "soft," 70 ff.

  Dates, 117.

  Definition, 204.

  Descartes, 5, 73, 238.

  Descriptions, 201, 214.

  Desire, 227, 235.

  Determinism, 233.

  Doubt, 237.

  Dreams, 85, 93.

  Duration, 146, 149.


  Earlier and later, 116.

  Effect, 220.

  Eleatics, 19.

  Empiricism, 37, 222.

  Enclosure, 114 ff., 120.

  Enumeration, 202.

  Euclid, 160, 164.

  Evellin, 169.

  Evolutionism, 4, 11 ff.

  Extension, 146, 149.

  External world, knowledge of, 63 ff.


  Fact, 51.
    atomic, 52.

  Finalism, 13.

  Form, logical, 42 ff., 185, 208.

  Fractions, 132, 179.

  Free will, 213, 227 ff.

  Frege, 5, 40, 199 ff.


  Galileo, 4, 59, 192, 194, 239, 240.

  Gaye, 169 n., 175, 177.

  Geometry, 5.

  Giles, 206 n.

  Greater and less, 195.


  Harvard, 4.

  Hegel, 3, 37 ff., 46, 166.

  "Here," 73, 92.

  Hereditary properties, 195.

  Hippasos, 163, 237.

  Hui Tz, 206.

  Hume, 217, 221.

  Hypotheses in philosophy, 239.


  Illusions, 85.

  Incommensurables, 162 ff., 237.

  Independence, 73, 74.
    causal and logical, 74, 75.

  Indiscernibility, 141, 148.

  Indivisibles, 160.

  Induction, 34, 222.
    mathematical, 195 ff.

  Inductiveness, 190, 195 ff.

  Inference, 44, 54.

  Infinite, vi, 64, 133, 149.
    historically considered, 155 ff.
    "true," 179, 180.
    positive theory of, 185 ff.

  Infinitesimals, 135.

  Instants, 116 ff., 129, 151, 216.
    defined, 118.

  Instinct _v._ Reason, 20 ff.

  Intellect, 22 ff.

  Intelligence, how displayed by friends, 93.
    inadequacy of display, 96.

  Interpretation, 144.


  James, 4, 10, 13.

  Jourdain, 165 n.

  Jowett, 167.

  Judgment, 58.


  Kant, 3, 112, 116, 155 ff., 200.

  Knowledge about, 144.


  Language, bad, 82, 135.

  Laplace, 12.

  Laws of nature, 218 ff.

  Leibniz, 13, 40, 87, 186, 191.

  Logic, 201.
    analytic not constructive, 8.
    Aristotelian, 5.
    and fact, 53.
    inductive, 34, 222.
    mathematical, vi, 40 ff.
    mystical, 46.
    and philosophy, 8, 33 ff., 239.

  Logical constants, 208, 213.


  Mach, 123, 224.

  Macran, 39 n.

  Mathematics, 40, 57.

  Matter, 75, 101 ff.
    permanence of, 102 ff.

  Measurement, 164.

  Memory, 230, 234, 236.

  Method, deductive, 5.
    logical-analytic, v, 65, 211, 236 ff.

  Milhaud, 168 n., 169 n.

  Mill, 34, 200.

  Montaigne, 28.

  Motion, 130, 216.
    continuous, 133, 136.
    mathematical theory of, 133.
    perception of, 137 ff.
    Zeno's arguments on, 168 ff.

  Mysticism, 19, 46, 63, 95.


  Newton, 30, 146.

  Nietzsche, 10, 11.

  Nol, 169.

  Number, cardinal, 131, 186 ff.
    defined, 199 ff.
    finite, 160, 190 ff.
    inductive, 197.
    infinite, 178, 180, 188 ff., 197.
    reflexive, 190 ff.


  Occam, 107, 146.

  One and many, 167, 170.

  Order, 131.


  Parmenides, 63, 165 ff., 178.

  Past and future, 224, 234 ff.

  Peano, 40.

  Perspectives, 88 ff., 111.

  Philoponus, 171 n.

  Philosophy and ethics, 26 ff.
    and mathematics, 185 ff.
    province of, 17, 26, 185, 236.
    scientific, 11, 16, 18, 29, 236 ff.

  Physics, 101 ff., 147, 239, 242.
    descriptive, 224.
    verifiability of, 81, 110.

  Place, 86, 90.
    _at_ and _from_, 92.

  Plato, 4, 19, 27, 46, 63, 165 n., 166, 167.

  Poincar, 123, 141.

  Points, 113 ff., 129, 158.
    definition of, vi, 115.

  Pragmatism, 11.

  Prantl, 174.

  Predictability, 229 ff.

  Premisses, 211.

  Probability, 36.

  Propositions, 52.
    atomic, 52.
    general, 55.
    molecular, 54.

  Pythagoras, 19, 160 ff., 237.


  Race-course, Zeno's argument of, 171 ff.

  Realism, new, 6.

  Reflexiveness, 190 ff.

  Relations, 45.
    asymmetrical, 47.
    Bradley's reasons against, 6.
    external, 150.
    intransitive, 48.
    multiple, 50.
    one-one, 203.
    reality of, 49.
    symmetrical, 47, 124.
    transitive, 48, 124.

  Relativity, 103, 242.

  Repetitions, 230 ff.

  Rest, 136.

  Ritter and Preller, 161 n.

  Robertson, D. S., 160 n.

  Rousseau, 20.

  Royce, 50.


  Santayana, 46.

  Scepticism, 66, 67.

  Seeing double, 86.

  Self, 73.

  Sensation, 25, 75, 123.
    and stimulus, 139.

  Sense-data, 56, 63, 67, 75, 110, 141, 143, 213.
    and physics, v, 64, 81, 97, 101 ff., 140.
    infinitely numerous? 149, 159.

  Sense-perception, 53.

  Series, 49.
    compact, 132, 142, 178.
    continuous, 131, 132.

  Sigwart, 187.

  Simplicius, 170 n.

  Simultaneity, 116.

  Space, 73, 88, 103, 112 ff., 130.
    absolute and relative, 146, 159.
    antinomies of, 155 ff.
    perception of, 68.
    of perspectives, 88 ff.
    private, 89, 90.
    of touch and sight, 78, 113.

  Spencer, 4, 12, 236.

  Spinoza, 46, 166.

  Stadium, Zeno's argument of, 134 n., 175 ff.

  Subject-predicate, 45.

  Synthesis, 157, 185.


  Tannery, Paul, 169 n.

  Teleology, 223.

  Testimony, 67, 72, 82, 87, 96, 212.

  Thales, 3.

  Thing-in-itself, 75, 84.

  Things, 89 ff., 104 ff., 213.

  Time, 103, 116 ff., 130, 155 ff., 166, 215.
    absolute or relative, 146.
    local, 103.
    private, 121.


  Uniformities, 217.

  Unity, organic, 9.

  Universal and particular, 39 n.


  Volition, 223 ff.


  Whitehead, vi, 207.

  Wittgenstein, vii, 208 n.

  Worlds, actual and ideal, 111.
    possible, 186.
    private, 88.


  Zeller, 173.

  Zeno, 129, 134, 136, 165 ff.


    PRINTED BY NEILL AND CO., LTD., EDINBURGH.




  [ Transcriber's Note:

    The following is a list of corrections made to the original.
    The first line is the original line, the second the corrected one.

    Second Impression
    Second Impression.

  more often than the impossibility of alternatives which seemed _prima
  more often than the impossibility of alternatives which seemed _prim

  with it. We will call these the "initial contemporaries of the given
  with it. We will call these the "initial contemporaries" of the given

  the next are liable to fail when we come to infinite number. The first
  the next are liable to fail when we come to infinite numbers. The first

  of psychology or an outcome of pscyhical processes as the North Sea....
  of psychology or an outcome of psychical processes as the North Sea....

  according to the length and direction of the interval. "A quarter of a
  according to the length and direction of the interval. "A quarter of an

    Intelligence, how displayed by friends, 93
    Intelligence, how displayed by friends, 93.

    Number, cardinal, 131 186 ff.
    Number, cardinal, 131, 186 ff.

  ]








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OUR KNOWLEDGE OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD AS A FIELD FOR SCIENTIFIC METHOD IN PHILOSOPHY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given awayyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

     You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.
    
     You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
        works.
    
     You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
     You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenbergs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundations EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your states laws.

The Foundations business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundations website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of Philosophy
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Philosophy

Author: Bertrand Russell

Release date: February 18, 2024 [eBook #72981]

Language: English

Original publication: United States: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc, 1927

Credits: Aaron Adrignola and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PHILOSOPHY ***





Transcribers Note: Italics are enclosed in _underscores_. Additional
notes will be found near the end of this ebook.




PHILOSOPHY




                               PHILOSOPHY

                                  _By_
                            Bertrand Russell


                             [Illustration]


                                NEW YORK
                     W  W  NORTON & COMPANY, INC.
                              _Publishers_




                            Copyright, 1927,
                            BERTRAND RUSSELL

 Published in Great Britain under the title An Outline of Philosophy


                PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
                FOR THE PUBLISHERS BY THE VAN REES PRESS




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                                           PAGE
      I.  PHILOSOPHIC DOUBTS                                           1


  PART I

  MAN FROM WITHOUT

     II.  MAN AND HIS ENVIRONMENT                                     16

    III.  THE PROCESS OF LEARNING IN ANIMALS AND INFANTS              29

     IV.  LANGUAGE                                                    43

      V.  PERCEPTION OBJECTIVELY REGARDED                             58

     VI.  MEMORY OBJECTIVELY REGARDED                                 70

    VII.  INFERENCE AS A HABIT                                        79

   VIII.  KNOWLEDGE BEHAVIOURISTICALLY CONSIDERED                     88


  PART II

  THE PHYSICAL WORLD

     IX.  THE STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM                                   97

      X.  RELATIVITY                                                 107

     XI.  CAUSAL LAWS IN PHYSICS                                     114

    XII.  PHYSICS AND PERCEPTION                                     123

   XIII.  PHYSICAL AND PERCEPTUAL SPACE                              137

    XIV.  PERCEPTION AND PHYSICAL CAUSAL LAWS                        144

     XV.  THE NATURE OF OUR KNOWLEDGE OF PHYSICS                     151


  PART III

  MAN FROM WITHIN

    XVI.  SELF-OBSERVATION                                           161

   XVII.  IMAGES                                                     176

  XVIII.  IMAGINATION AND MEMORY                                     187

    XIX.  THE INTROSPECTIVE ANALYSIS OF PERCEPTION                   201

     XX.  CONSCIOUSNESS?                                             210

    XXI.  EMOTION, DESIRE, AND WILL                                  218

   XXII.  ETHICS                                                     225


  PART IV

  THE UNIVERSE

  XXIII.  SOME GREAT PHILOSOPHIES OF THE PAST                        236

   XXIV.  TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD                                        254

    XXV.  THE VALIDITY OF INFERENCE                                  266

   XXVI.  EVENTS, MATTER, AND MIND                                   276

  XXVII.  MANS PLACE IN THE UNIVERSE                                292




PHILOSOPHY




CHAPTER I

PHILOSOPHIC DOUBTS


Perhaps it might be expected that I should begin with a definition
of philosophy, but, rightly or wrongly, I do not propose to do so.
The definition of philosophy will vary according to the philosophy
we adopt; all that we can say to begin with is that there are certain
problems, which certain people find interesting, and which do not, at
least at present, belong to any of the special sciences. These problems
are all such as to raise doubts concerning what commonly passes for
knowledge; and if the doubts are to be answered, it can only be by
means of a special study, to which we give the name philosophy.
Therefore the first step in defining philosophy is the indication of
these problems and doubts, which is also the first step in the actual
study of philosophy. There are some among the traditional problems of
philosophy that do not seem to me to lend themselves to intellectual
treatment, because they transcend our cognitive powers; such problems I
shall not deal with. There are others, however, as to which, even if a
final solution is not possible at present, yet much can be done to show
the direction in which a solution is to be sought, and the _kind_ of
solution that may in time prove possible.

Philosophy arises from an unusually obstinate attempt to arrive at real
knowledge. What passes for knowledge in ordinary life suffers from
three defects: it is cocksure, vague, and self-contradictory. The first
step towards philosophy consists in becoming aware of these defects,
not in order to rest content with a lazy scepticism, but in order to
substitute an amended kind of knowledge which shall be tentative,
precise, and self-consistent. There is of course another quality
which we wish our knowledge to possess, namely comprehensiveness: we
wish the area of our knowledge to be as wide as possible. But this
is the business of science rather than of philosophy. A man does
not necessarily become a better philosopher through knowing more
scientific facts; it is principles and methods and general conceptions
that he should learn from science if philosophy is what interests
him. The philosophers work is, so to speak, at the second remove
from crude fact. Science tries to collect facts into bundles by means
of scientific laws; these laws, rather than the original facts, are
the raw material of philosophy. Philosophy involves a criticism of
scientific knowledge, not from a point of view ultimately different
from that of science, but from a point of view less concerned with
details and more concerned with the harmony of the whole body of
special sciences.

The special sciences have all grown up by the use of notions derived
from common sense, such as things and their qualities, space, time, and
causation. Science itself has shown that none of these common-sense
notions will quite serve for the explanation of the world; but it
is hardly the province of any special science to undertake the
necessary reconstruction of fundamentals. This must be the business
of philosophy. I want to say, to begin with, that I believe it to be
a business of very great importance. I believe that the philosophical
errors in common-sense beliefs not only produce confusion in science,
but also do harm in ethics and politics, in social institutions, and
in the conduct of everyday life. It will be no part of my business, in
this volume, to point out these practical effects of a bad philosophy:
my business will be purely intellectual. But if I am right, the
intellectual adventures which lie before us have effects in many
directions which seem, at first sight, quite remote from our theme. The
effect of our passions upon our beliefs forms a favourite subject of
modern psychologists; but the converse effect, that of our beliefs upon
our passions, also exists, though it is not such as an old-fashioned
intellectualist psychology would have supposed. Although I shall not
discuss it, we shall do well to bear it in mind, in order to realise
that our discussions may have bearings upon matters lying outside the
sphere of pure intellect.

I mentioned a moment ago three defects in common beliefs, namely, that
they are cocksure, vague, and self-contradictory. It is the business of
philosophy to correct these defects so far as it can, without throwing
over knowledge altogether. To be a good philosopher, a man must have a
strong desire to know, combined with great caution in believing that
he knows; he must also have logical acumen and the habit of exact
thinking. All these, of course, are a matter of degree. Vagueness,
in particular, belongs, in some degree, to all human thinking; we
can diminish it indefinitely, but we can never abolish it wholly.
Philosophy, accordingly, is a continuing activity, not something
in which we can achieve final perfection once for all. In this
respect, philosophy has suffered from its association with theology.
Theological dogmas are fixed, and are regarded by the orthodox as
incapable of improvement. Philosophers have too often tried to produce
similarly final systems: they have not been content with the gradual
approximations that satisfied men of science. In this they seem to me
to have been mistaken. Philosophy should be piecemeal and provisional
like science; final truth belongs to heaven, not to this world.

The three defects which I have mentioned are interconnected, and by
becoming aware of any one we may be led to recognise the other two. I
will illustrate all three by a few examples.

Let us take first the belief in common objects, such as tables and
chairs and trees. We all feel quite sure about these in ordinary
life, and yet our reasons for confidence are really very inadequate.
Naive common sense supposes that they are what they appear to be, but
that is impossible, since they do not appear exactly alike to any two
simultaneous observers; at least, it is impossible if the object is
a single thing, the same for all observers. If we are going to admit
that the object is not what we see, we can no longer feel the same
assurance that there is an object; this is the first intrusion of
doubt. However, we shall speedily recover from this set-back, and say
that of course the object is really what physics says it is.[1] Now
physics says that a table or a chair is really an incredibly vast
system of electrons and protons in rapid motion, with empty space in
between. This is all very well. But the physicist, like the ordinary
man, is dependent upon his senses for the existence of the physical
world. If you go up to him solemnly and say, would you be so kind as
to tell me, as a physicist, what a chair really is, you will get a
learned answer. But if you say, without preamble: Is there a chair
there? he will say: Of course there is; cant you see it? To this
you ought to reply in the negative. You ought to say, No, I see
certain patches of colour, but I dont see any electrons or protons,
and you tell me that they are what a chair consists of. He may reply:
Yes, but a large number of electrons and protons close together look
like a patch of colour. What do you mean by look like? you will
then ask. He is ready with an answer. He means that light-waves start
from the electrons and protons (or, more probably, are reflected by
them from a source of light), reach the eye, have a series of effects
upon the rods and cones, the optic nerve, and the brain, and finally
produce a sensation. But he has never seen an eye or an optic nerve or
a brain, any more than he has seen a chair; he has only seen patches of
colour which, he says, are what eyes look like. That is to say, he
thinks that the sensation you have when (as you think) you see a chair,
has a series of causes, physical and psychological, but all of them,
on his own showing, lie essentially and forever outside experience.
Nevertheless, he pretends to base his science upon observation.
Obviously there is here a problem for the logician, a problem belonging
not to physics, but to quite another kind of study. This is a first
example of the way in which the pursuit of precision destroys certainty.

      [1] I am not thinking here of the elementary physics to be
          found in a school text-book; I am thinking of modern
          theoretical physics, more particularly as regards the
          structure of atoms, as to which I shall have more to say
          in later chapters.

The physicist believes that he infers his electrons and protons from
what he perceives. But the inference is never clearly set forth in
a logical chain, and, if it were, it might not look sufficiently
plausible to warrant much confidence. In actual fact, the whole
development from common-sense objects to electrons and protons has
been governed by certain beliefs, seldom conscious, but existing in
every natural man. These beliefs are not unalterable, but they grow
and develop like a tree. We start by thinking that a chair is as it
appears to be, and is still there when we are not looking. But we find,
by a little reflection, that these two beliefs are incompatible. If
the chair is to persist independently of being seen by us, it must
be something other than the patch of colour we see, because this is
found to depend upon conditions extraneous to the chair, such as how
the light falls, whether we are wearing blue spectacles, and so on.
This forces the man of science to regard the real chair as the cause
(or an indispensable part of the cause) of our sensations when we see
the chair. Thus we are committed to causation as an _a priori_ belief
without which we should have no reason for supposing that there is a
real chair at all. Also, for the sake of permanence we bring in the
notion of substance: the real chair is a substance, or collection of
substances, possessed of permanence and the power to cause sensations.
This metaphysical belief has operated, more or less unconsciously, in
the inference from sensations to electrons and protons. The philosopher
must drag such beliefs into the light of day, and see whether they
still survive. Often it will be found that they die on exposure.

Let us now take up another point. The evidence for a physical law, or
for any scientific law, always involves both memory and testimony. We
have to rely both upon what we remember to have observed on former
occasions, and on what others say they have observed. In the very
beginnings of science, it may have been possible sometimes to dispense
with testimony; but very soon every scientific investigation began
to be built upon previously ascertained results, and thus to depend
upon what others had recorded. In fact, without the corroboration of
testimony we should hardly have had much confidence in the existence
of physical objects. Sometimes people suffer from hallucinations, that
is to say, they think they perceive physical objects, but are not
confirmed in this belief by the testimony of others. In such cases,
we decide that they are mistaken. It is the similarity between the
perceptions of different people in similar situations that makes us
feel confident of the external causation of our perceptions; but for
this, whatever naive beliefs we might have had in physical objects
would have been dissipated long ago. Thus memory and testimony are
essential to science. Nevertheless, each of these is open to criticism
by the sceptic. Even if we succeed, more or less, in meeting his
criticism, we shall, if we are rational, be left with a less complete
confidence in our original beliefs than we had before. Once more, we
shall become less cocksure as we become more accurate.

Both memory and testimony lead us into the sphere of psychology. I
shall not at this stage discuss either beyond the point at which it is
clear that there are genuine philosophical problems to be solved. I
shall begin with memory.

Memory is a word which has a variety of meanings. The kind that I am
concerned with at the moment is the recollection of past occurrences.
This is so notoriously fallible that every experimenter makes a record
of the result of his experiment at the earliest possible moment: he
considers the inference from written words to past events less likely
to be mistaken than the direct beliefs which constitute memory. But
some time, though perhaps only a few seconds, must elapse between
the observation and the making of the record, unless the record is
so fragmentary that memory is needed to interpret it. Thus we do not
escape from the need of trusting memory to some degree. Moreover,
without memory we should not think of interpreting records as applying
to the past, because we should not know that there was any past. Now,
apart from arguments as to the proved fallibility of memory, there is
one awkward consideration which the sceptic may urge. Remembering,
which occurs now, cannot possibly--he may say--prove that what is
remembered occurred at some other time, because the world might have
sprung into being five minutes ago, exactly as it then was, full of
acts of remembering which were entirely misleading. Opponents of
Darwin, such as Edmund Gosses father, urged a very similar argument
against evolution. The world, they said, was created in 4004 B.C.,
complete with fossils, which were inserted to try our faith. The world
was created suddenly, but was made such as it would have been if it
had evolved. There is no logical impossibility about this view. And
similarly there is no logical impossibility in the view that the world
was created five minutes ago, complete with memories and records. This
may seem an improbable hypothesis, but it is not logically refutable.

Apart from this argument, which may be thought fantastic, there are
reasons of detail for being more or less distrustful of memory. It
is obvious that no _direct_ confirmation of a belief about a past
occurrence is possible, because we cannot make the past recur. We can
find confirmation of an indirect kind in the revelations of others and
in contemporary records. The latter, as we have seen, involve some
degree of memory, but they may involve very little, for instance when
a shorthand report of a conversation or speech has been made at the
time. But even then, we do not escape wholly from the need of memory
extending over a longer stretch of time. Suppose a wholly imaginary
conversation were produced for some criminal purpose, we should depend
upon the memories of witnesses to establish its fictitious character in
a law-court. And all memory which extends over a long period of time is
very apt to be mistaken; this is shown by the errors invariably found
in autobiographies. Any man who comes across letters which he wrote
many years ago can verify the manner in which his memory has falsified
past events. For these reasons, the fact that we cannot free ourselves
from dependence upon memory in building up knowledge is, _prima facie_,
a reason for regarding what passes for knowledge as not quite certain.
The whole of this subject of memory will be considered more carefully
in later chapters.

Testimony raises even more awkward problems. What makes them so awkward
is the fact that testimony is involved in building up our knowledge
of physics, and that, conversely, physics is required in establishing
the trustworthiness of testimony. Moreover, testimony raises all the
problems connected with the relation of mind and matter. Some eminent
philosophers, _e.g._ Leibniz, have constructed systems according to
which there would be no such thing as testimony, and yet have accepted
as true many things which cannot be known without it. I do not think
philosophy has quite done justice to this problem, but a few words
will, I think, show its gravity.

For our purposes, we may define testimony as noises heard, or shapes
seen, analogous to those which we should make if we wished to convey
an assertion, and believed by the hearer or seer to be due to someone
elses desire to convey an assertion. Let us take a concrete instance:
I ask a policeman the way, and he says, Fourth turn to the right,
third to the left. That is to say, I hear these sounds, and perhaps I
see what I interpret as his lips moving. I assume that he has a mind
more or less like my own, and has uttered these sounds with the same
intention as I should have had if I had uttered them, namely to convey
information. In ordinary life, all this is not, in any proper sense,
an inference; it is a belief which arises in us on the appropriate
occasion. But if we are challenged, we have to substitute inference for
spontaneous belief, and the more the inference is examined the more
shaky it looks.

The inference that has to be made has two steps, one physical and one
psychological. The physical inference is of the sort we considered a
moment ago, in which we pass from a sensation to a physical occurrence.
We hear noises, and think they proceed from the policemans body. We
see moving shapes, and interpret them as physical motions of his
lips. This inference, as we saw earlier, is in part justified by
testimony; yet now we find that it has to be made before we can have
reason to believe that there is any such thing as testimony. And this
inference is certainly sometimes mistaken. Lunatics hear voices which
other people do not hear; instead of crediting them with abnormally
acute hearing, we lock them up. But if we sometimes hear sentences
which have not proceeded from a body, why should this not always be
the case? Perhaps our imagination has conjured up all the things that
we think others have said to us. But this is part of the general
problem of inferring physical objects from sensations, which, difficult
as it is, is not the most difficult part of the logical puzzles
concerning testimony. The most difficult part is the inference from
the policemans body to his mind. I do not mean any special insult to
policemen; I would say the same of politicians and even of philosophers.

The inference to the policemans mind certainly _may_ be wrong. It is
clear that a maker of wax-works could make a life-like policeman and
put a gramophone inside him, which would cause him periodically to
tell visitors the way to the most interesting part of the exhibition
at the entrance to which he would stand. They would have just the sort
of evidence of his being alive that is found convincing in the case of
other policemen. Descartes believed that animals have no minds, but are
merely complicated automata. Eighteenth-century materialists extended
this doctrine to men. But I am not now concerned with materialism; my
problem is a different one. Even a materialist must admit that, when he
talks, he means to convey something, that is to say, he uses words as
signs, not as mere noises. It may be difficult to decide exactly what
is meant by this statement, but it is clear that it means something,
and that it is true of ones own remarks. The question is: Are we sure
that it is true of the remarks we hear, as well as of those we make?
Or are the remarks we hear perhaps just like other noises, merely
meaningless disturbances of the air? The chief argument against this
is analogy: the remarks we hear are so like those we make that we think
they must have similar causes. But although we cannot dispense with
analogy as a form of inference, it is by no means demonstrative, and
not infrequently leads us astray. We are therefore left, once more,
with a _prima facie_ reason for uncertainty and doubt.

This question of what we mean ourselves when we speak brings me to
another problem, that of introspection. Many philosophers have held
that introspection gave the most indubitable of all knowledge; others
have held that there is no such thing as introspection. Descartes,
after trying to doubt everything, arrived at I think, therefore I
am, as a basis for the rest of knowledge. Dr. John B. Watson the
behaviourist holds, on the contrary, that we do not think, but only
talk. Dr. Watson, in real life, gives as much evidence of thinking as
anyone does, so if _he_ is not convinced that he thinks, we are all
in a bad way. At any rate, the mere existence of such an opinion as
his, on the part of a competent philosopher, must suffice to show that
introspection is not so certain as some people have thought. But let us
examine this question a little more closely.

The difference between introspection and what we call perception of
external objects seems to me to be connected, not with what is primary
in our knowledge, but with what is inferred. We think, at one time,
that we are seeing a chair; at another, that we are thinking about
philosophy. The first we call perception of an external object; the
second we call introspection. Now we have already found reason to doubt
external perception, in the full-blooded sense in which common-sense
accepts it. I shall consider later what there is that is indubitable
and primitive in perception; for the moment, I shall anticipate by
saying that what is indubitable in seeing a chair is the occurrence
of a certain pattern of colours. But this occurrence, we shall find,
is connected with me just as much as with the chair; no one except
myself can see exactly the pattern that I see. There is thus something
subjective and private about what we take to be external perception,
but this is concealed by precarious extensions into the physical world.
I think introspection, on the contrary, involves precarious extensions
into the mental world: shorn of these, it is not very different from
external perception shorn of its extensions. To make this clear, I
shall try to show what we know to be occurring when, as we say, we
think about philosophy.

Suppose, as the result of introspection, you arrive at a belief which
you express in the words: I am now believing that mind is different
from matter. What do you know, apart from inferences, in such a case?
First of all, you must cut out the word I: the person who believes
is an inference, not part of what you know immediately. In the second
place, you must be careful about the word believing: I am not now
concerned with what this word should mean in logic or theory of
knowledge; I am concerned with what it can mean when used to describe
a direct experience. In such a case, it would seem that it can only
describe a certain kind of feeling. And as for the proposition you
think you are believing, namely, mind is different from matter,
it is very difficult to say what is really occurring when you think
you believe it. It may be mere words, pronounced, visualised, or in
auditory or motor images. It may be images of what the words mean,
but in that case it will not be at all an accurate representation of
the logical content of the proposition. You may have an image of a
statue of Newton voyaging through strange seas of thought alone, and
another image of a stone rolling downhill, combined with the words how
different! Or you may think of the difference between composing a
lecture and eating your dinner. It is only when you come to expressing
your thought in words that you approach logical precision.

Both in introspection and in external perception, we try to express
what we know in WORDS.

We come here, as in the question of testimony, upon the social aspect
of knowledge. The purpose of words is to give the same kind of
publicity to thought as is claimed for physical objects. A number of
people can hear a spoken word or see a written word, because each is a
physical occurrence. If I say to you, mind is different from matter,
there may be only a very slight resemblance between the thought that I
am trying to express and the thought which is aroused in you, but these
two thoughts have just this in common, that they can be expressed by
the same words. Similarly, there may be great differences between what
you and I see when, as we say, we look at the same chair; nevertheless
we can both express our perceptions by the same words.

A thought and a perception are thus not so very different in their own
nature. If physics is true, they are different in their correlations:
when I see a chair, others have more or less similar perceptions, and
it is thought that these are all connected with light-waves coming from
the chair, whereas, when I think a thought, others may not be thinking
anything similar. But this applies also to feeling a toothache, which
would not usually be regarded as a case of introspection. On the whole,
therefore, there seems no reason to regard introspection as a different
_kind_ of knowledge from external perception. But this whole question
will concern us again at a later stage.

As for the _trustworthiness_ of introspection, there is again a
complete parallelism with the case of external perception. The actual
datum, in each case, is unimpeachable, but the extensions which we make
instinctively are questionable. Instead of saying, I am believing
that mind is different from matter, you ought to say, certain images
are occurring in a certain relation to each other, accompanied by a
certain feeling. No words exist for describing the actual occurrence
in all its particularity; all words, even proper names, are general,
with the possible exception of this, which is ambiguous. When you
translate the occurrence into words, you are making generalisations and
inferences, just as you are when you say there is a chair. There is
really no vital difference between the two cases. In each case, what is
really a datum is unutterable, and what can be put into words involves
inferences which may be mistaken.

When I say that inferences are involved, I am saying something not
quite accurate unless carefully interpreted. In seeing a chair,
for instance, we do not first apprehend a coloured pattern, and then
proceed to infer a chair: belief in the chair arises spontaneously
when we see the coloured pattern. But this belief has causes not only
in the present physical stimulus, but also partly in past experience,
partly in reflexes. In animals, reflexes play a very large part; in
human beings, experience is more important. The infant learns slowly to
correlate touch and sight, and to expect others to see what he sees.
The habits which are thus formed are essential to our adult notion
of an object such as a chair. The perception of a chair by means of
sight has a physical stimulus which affects only sight directly, but
stimulates ideas of solidity and so on through early experience. The
inference might be called physiological. An inference of this sort is
evidence of past correlations, for instance between touch and sight,
but may be mistaken in the present instance; you may, for instance,
mistake a reflection in a large mirror for another room. Similarly in
dreams we make mistaken physiological inferences. We cannot therefore
feel certainty in regard to things which are in this sense inferred,
because, when we try to accept as many of them as possible, we are
nevertheless compelled to reject some for the sake of self-consistency.

We arrived a moment ago at what we called physiological inference
as an essential ingredient in the common-sense notion of a physical
object. Physiological inference, in its simplest form, means this:
given a stimulus S, to which, by a reflex, we react by a bodily
movement R, and a stimulus S with a reaction R, if the two stimuli
are frequently experienced together, S will in time produce R.[2]
That is to say, the body will act as if S were present. Physiological
inference is important in theory of knowledge, and I shall have much
to say about it at a later stage. For the present, I have mentioned it
partly to prevent it from being confused with logical inference, and
partly in order to introduce the problem of _induction_, about which we
must say a few preliminary words at this stage.

      [2] _E.g._ if you hear a sharp noise and see a bright light
          simultaneously often, in time the noise without the light
          will cause your pupils to contract.

Induction raises perhaps the most difficult problem in the whole theory
of knowledge. Every scientific law is established by its means, and yet
it is difficult to see why we should believe it to be a valid logical
process. Induction, in its bare essence, consists of the argument that,
because A and B have been often found together and never found apart,
therefore, when A is found again, B will probably also be found. This
exists first as a physiological inference, and as such is practised
by animals. When we first begin to reflect, we find ourselves making
inductions in the physiological sense, for instance, expecting the
food we see to have a certain kind of taste. Often we only become
aware of this expectation through having it disappointed, for instance
if we take salt thinking it is sugar. When mankind took to science,
they tried to formulate logical principles justifying this kind of
inference. I shall discuss these attempts in later chapters; for the
present, I will only say that they seem to me very unsuccessful. I
am convinced that induction must have validity of some kind in some
degree, but the problem of showing how or why it can be valid remains
unsolved. Until it is solved, the rational man will doubt whether his
food will nourish him, and whether the sun will rise tomorrow. I am not
a rational man in this sense, but for the moment I shall pretend to be.
And even if we cannot be completely rational, we should probably all
be the better for becoming somewhat more rational than we are. At the
lowest estimate, it will be an interesting adventure to see whither
reason will lead us.

The problems we have been raising are none of them new, but they
suffice to show that our everyday views of the world and of our
relations to it are unsatisfactory. We have been asking whether we
know this or that, but we have not yet asked what knowing is. Perhaps
we shall find that we have had wrong ideas as to knowing, and that our
difficulties grow less when we have more correct ideas on this point. I
think we shall do well to begin our philosophical journey by an attempt
to understand knowing considered as part of the relation of man to his
environment, forgetting, for the moment, the fundamental doubts with
which we have been concerned. Perhaps modern science may enable us to
see philosophical problems in a new light. In that hope, let us examine
the relation of man to his environment with a view to arriving at a
scientific view as to what constitutes knowledge.




PART I

MAN FROM WITHOUT




CHAPTER II

MAN AND HIS ENVIRONMENT


If our scientific knowledge were full and complete, we should
understand ourselves and the world and our relation to the world. As
it is, our understanding of all three is fragmentary. For the present,
it is the third question, that of our relation to the world, that I
wish to consider, because this brings us nearest to the problems of
philosophy. We shall find that it will lead us back to the other two
questions, as to the world and as to ourselves, but that we shall
understand both these better if we have considered first how the world
acts upon us and how we act upon the world.

There are a number of sciences which deal with Man. We may deal with
him in natural history, as one among the animals, having a certain
place in evolution, and related to other animals in ascertainable
ways. We may deal with him in physiology, as a structure capable of
performing certain functions, and reacting to the environment in ways
of which some, at least, can be explained by chemistry. We may study
him in sociology, as a unit in various organisms, such as the family
and the state. And we may study him, in psychology, as he appears to
himself. This last gives what we may call an internal view of man, as
opposed to the other three, which give an external view. That is to
say, in psychology we use data which can only be obtained when the
observer and the observed are the same person, whereas in the other
ways of studying Man all our data can be obtained by observing other
people. There are different ways of interpreting this distinction,
and different views of its importance, but there can be no doubt
that there is such a distinction. We can remember our own dreams,
whereas we cannot know the dreams of others unless they tell us about
them. We know when we have toothache, when our food tastes too salty,
when we are remembering some past occurrence, and so on. All these
events in our lives other people cannot know in the same direct way.
In this sense, we all have an inner life, open to our own inspection
but to no one elses. This is no doubt the source of the traditional
distinction of mind and body: the body was supposed to be that part of
us which others could observe, and the mind that part which was private
to ourselves. The importance of the distinction has been called in
question in recent times, and I do not myself believe that it has any
fundamental philosophical significance. But historically it has played
a dominant part in determining the conceptions from which men set out
when they began to philosophise, and on this account, if on no other,
it deserves to be borne in mind.

Knowledge, traditionally, has been viewed from within, as something
which we observe in ourselves rather than as something which we can see
others displaying. When I say that it has been so viewed, I mean that
this has been the practice of philosophers; in ordinary life, people
have been more objective. In ordinary life, knowledge is something
which can be tested by examinations, that is to say, it consists in a
certain kind of response to a certain kind of stimulus. This objective
way of viewing knowledge is, to my mind, much more fruitful than the
way which has been customary in philosophy. I mean that, if we wish
to give a definition of knowing, we ought to define it as a manner
of reacting to the environment, not as involving something (a state
of mind) which only the person who has the knowledge can observe.
It is because I hold this view that I think it best to begin with
Man and his environment, rather than with those matters in which the
observer and the observed must be the same person. Knowing, as I view
it, is a characteristic which may be displayed in our reactions to our
environment; it is therefore necessary first of all to consider the
nature of these reactions as they appear in science.

Let us take some everyday situation. Suppose you are watching a race,
and at the appropriate moment you say, theyre off. This exclamation
is a reaction to the environment, and is taken to show knowledge if it
is made at the same time as others make it. Now let us consider what
has been really happening, according to science. The complication of
what has happened is almost incredible. It may conveniently be divided
into four stages: first, what happened in the outside world between the
runners and your eyes; secondly, what happened in your body from your
eyes to your brain; thirdly, what happened in your brain; fourthly,
what happened in your body from your brain to the movements of your
throat and tongue which constituted your exclamation. Of these four
stages, the first belongs to physics, and is dealt with in the main
by the theory of light; the second and fourth belong to physiology;
the third, though it should theoretically also belong to physiology,
belongs in fact rather to psychology, owing to our lack of knowledge
as to the brain. The third stage embodies the results of experience
and learning. It is responsible for the fact that you speak, which an
animal would not do, and that you speak English, which a Frenchman
would not do. This immensely complicated occurrence is, nevertheless,
about the simplest example of knowledge that could possibly be given.

For the moment, let us leave on one side the part of this process which
happens in the outside world and belongs to physics. I shall have much
to say about it later, but what has to be said is not altogether easy,
and we will take less abstruse matters first. I will merely observe
that the event which we are said to perceive, namely the runners
starting, is separated by a longer or shorter chain of events from the
event which happens at the surface of our eyes. It is this last that
is what is called the stimulus. Thus the event that we are said to
perceive when we see is not the stimulus, but an anterior event related
to it in a way that requires investigation. The same applies to hearing
and smell, but not to touch or to perception of states of our own
body. In these cases, the first of the above four stages is absent.
It is clear that, in the case of sight, hearing and smell, there must
be a certain relation between the stimulus and the event said to be
perceived, but we will not now consider what this relation must be. We
will consider, rather, the second, third, and fourth stages in an act
of perceptive knowledge. This is the more legitimate as these stages
always exist, whereas the first is confined to certain senses.

The second stage is that which proceeds from the sense-organ to the
brain. It is not necessary for our purposes to consider exactly
what goes on during this journey. A purely physical event--the
stimulus--happens at the boundary of the body, and has a series
of effects which travel along the afferent nerves to the brain.
If the stimulus is light, it must fall on the eye to produce the
characteristic effects; no doubt light falling on other parts of the
body has effects, but they are not those that distinguish vision.
Similarly, if the stimulus is sound, it must fall on the ear. A
sense-organ, like a photographic plate, is responsive to stimuli
of a certain sort: light falling on the eye has effects which are
different for different wave-lengths, intensities, and directions. When
the events in the eye due to incident light have taken place, they
are followed by events in the optic nerve, leading at last to some
occurrence in the brain--an occurrence which varies with the stimulus.
The occurrence in the brain must be different for different stimuli
in all cases where we can _perceive_ differences. Red and yellow, for
instance, are distinguishable in perception; therefore the occurrences
along the optic nerve and in the brain must have a different character
when caused by red light from what they have when caused by yellow
light. But when two shades of colour are so similar that they can only
be distinguished by delicate instruments, not by perception, we cannot
be sure that they cause occurrences of different characters in the
optic nerve and brain.

When the disturbance has reached the brain, it may or may not cause a
characteristic set of events in the brain. If it does not, we shall
not be what is called conscious of it. For to be conscious of
seeing yellow, whatever else it may be, must certainly involve some
kind of cerebral reaction to the message brought by the optic nerve.
It may be assumed that the great majority of messages brought to the
brain by the afferent nerves never secure any attention at all--they
are like letters to a government office which remain unanswered. The
things in the margin of the field of vision, unless they are in some
way interesting, are usually unnoticed; if they are noticed, they
are brought into the centre of the field of vision unless we make a
deliberate effort to prevent this from occurring. These things are
visible, in the sense that we could be aware of them if we chose,
without any change in our physical environment or in our sense-organs;
that is to say, only a cerebral change is required to enable them to
cause a reaction. But usually they do not provoke any reaction; life
would be altogether too wearing if we had to be always reacting to
everything in the field of vision. Where there is no reaction, the
second stage completes the process, and the third and fourth stages do
not arise. In that case, there has been nothing that could be called
perception connected with the stimulus in question.

To us, however, the interesting case is that in which the process
continues. In this case there is first a process in the brain, of
which the nature is as yet conjectural, which travels from the centre
appropriate to the sense in question to a motor centre. From these
there is a process which travels along an efferent nerve, and finally
results in a muscular event causing some bodily movement. In our
illustration of the man watching the beginning of a race, a process
travels from the part of the brain concerned with sight to the part
concerned with speech; this is what we called the third stage. Then
a process travels along the efferent nerves and brings about the
movements which constitute saying theyre off; this is what we called
the fourth stage.

Unless all four stages exist, there is nothing that can be called
knowledge. And even when they are all present, various further
conditions must be satisfied if there is to be knowledge. But these
observations are premature, and we must return to the analysis of our
third and fourth stages.

The third stage is of two sorts, according as we are concerned with
a reflex or with a learned reaction, as Dr. Watson calls it. In
the case of a reflex, if it is complete at birth, a new-born infant
or animal has a brain so constituted that, without the need of any
previous experience, there is a connection between a certain process in
the afferent nerves and a certain other process in the efferent nerves.
A good example of a reflex is sneezing. A certain kind of tickling in
the nose produces a fairly violent movement having a very definite
character, and this connection exists already in the youngest infants.
Learned reactions, on the other hand, are such as only occur because of
the effect of previous occurrences in the brain. One might illustrate
by an analogy which, however, would be misleading if pressed. Imagine
a desert in which no rain has ever fallen, and suppose that at last
a thunderstorm occurs in it; then the course taken by the water will
correspond to a reflex. But if rain continues to fall frequently, it
will form watercourses and river valleys; when this has occurred, the
water runs away along pre-formed channels, which are attributable to
the past experience of the region. This corresponds to learned
reactions. One of the most notable examples of learned reactions
is speech: we speak because we have learned a certain language, not
because our brain had originally any tendency to react in just that
way. Perhaps all knowledge, certainly nearly all, is dependent upon
learned reactions, _i.e._, upon connections in the brain which are not
part of mans congenital equipment but are the result of events which
have happened to him.

To distinguish between learned and unlearned responses is not always an
easy task. It cannot be assumed that responses which are absent during
the first weeks of life are all learned. To take the most obvious
instance; sexual responses change their character to a greater or less
extent at puberty, as a result of changes in the ductless glands, not
as a result of experience. But this instance does not stand alone:
as the body grows and develops, new modes of response come into play,
modified, no doubt, by experience, but not wholly due to it. For
example: a new-born baby cannot run, and therefore does not run away
from what is terrifying, as an older child does. The older child has
learned to run, but has not necessarily learned to run _away_; the
stimulus in learning to run may have never been a terrifying object. It
would therefore be a fallacy to suppose that we can distinguish between
learned and unlearned responses by observing what a new-born infant
does, since reflexes may come into play at a later stage. Conversely,
some things which a child does at birth may have been learned, when
they are such as it could have done in the womb--for example, a certain
amount of kicking and stretching. The whole distinction between learned
and unlearned responses, therefore, is not so definite as we could
wish. At the two extremes we get clear cases, such as sneezing on the
one hand and speaking on the other; but there are intermediate forms of
behaviour which are more difficult to classify.

This is not denied even by those who attach most importance to the
distinction between learned and unlearned responses. In Dr. Watsons
_Behaviorism_ (p. 103) there is a Summary of Unlearned Equipment,
which ends with the following paragraph:

Other activities appear at a later stage--such as blinking, reaching,
handling, handedness, crawling, standing, sitting-up, walking, running,
jumping. _In the great majority of these later activities it is
difficult to say how much of the act as a whole is due to training
or conditioning. A considerable part is unquestionably due to the
growth changes in structure, and the remainder is due to training and
conditioning._ (Watsons italics.)

It is not possible to make a logically sharp distinction in this
matter; in certain cases we have to be satisfied with something less
exact. For example, we might say that those developments which are
merely due to normal growth are to count as unlearned, while those
which depend upon special circumstances in the individual biography are
to count as learned. But take, say, muscular development: this will
not take place normally unless the muscles are used, and if they are
used they are bound to learn some of the skill which is appropriate to
them. And some things which must certainly count as learned, such as
focussing with the eyes, depend upon circumstances which are normal
and must be present in the case of every child who is not blind. The
whole distinction, therefore, is one of degree rather than of kind;
nevertheless it is valuable.

The value of the distinction between learned and unlearned reactions
is connected with the laws of learning, to which we shall come in the
next chapter. Experience modifies behaviour according to certain laws,
and we may say that a learned reaction is one in the formation of which
these laws have played a part. For example: children are frightened of
loud noises from birth, but are not at first frightened of dogs; after
they have heard a dog barking loudly, they may become frightened of
dogs, which is a learned reaction. If we knew enough about the brain,
we could make the distinction precise, by saying that learned reactions
are those depending upon modifications of the brain other than mere
growth. But as it is, we have to judge by observations of bodily
behaviour, and the accompanying modifications in the brain are assumed
on a basis of theory rather than actually observed.

The essential points, for our purposes, are comparatively simple.
Man or any other animal, at birth, is such as to respond to certain
stimuli in certain specific ways, _i.e._ by certain kinds of bodily
movements; as he grows, these ways of responding change, partly as the
mere result of developing structure, partly in consequence of events in
his biography. The latter influence proceeds according to certain laws,
which we shall consider, since they have much to do with the genesis of
knowledge.

But--the indignant reader may be exclaiming--knowing something is not
a bodily movement, but a state of mind, and yet you talk to us about
sneezing and such matters. I must ask the indignant readers patience.
He knows that he has states of mind, and that his knowing is itself
a state of mind. I do not deny that he has states of mind, but I ask
two questions: First, what sort of thing are they? Secondly, what
evidence can he give me that he knows about them? The first question
he may find very difficult; and if he wants, in his answer, to show
that states of mind are something of a sort totally different from
bodily movements, he will have to tell me also what bodily movements
are, which will plunge him into the most abstruse part of physics. All
this I propose to consider later on, and then I hope the indignant
reader will be appeased. As to the second question, namely, what
evidence of his knowledge another man can give me, it is clear that he
must depend upon speech or writing, _i.e._ in either case upon bodily
movements. Therefore whatever knowledge may be to the knower, as a
social phenomenon it is something displayed in bodily movements. For
the present I am deliberately postponing the question of what knowledge
is to the knower, and confining myself to what it is for the external
observer. And for him, necessarily, it is something shown by bodily
movements made in answer to stimuli--more specifically, to examination
questions. What else it may be I shall consider at a later stage.

However we may subsequently add to our present account by considering
how knowledge appears to the knower, that will not invalidate anything
that we may arrive at by considering how knowledge appears to the
external observer. And there is something which it is important
to realise, namely, that we are concerned with a process in which
the environment first acts upon a man, and then he reacts upon the
environment. This process has to be considered as a whole if we are
to discuss what knowledge is. The older view would have been that the
effect of the environment upon us might constitute a certain kind
of knowledge (perception), while our reaction to the environment
constituted volition. These were, in each case, mental occurrences,
and their connection with nerves and brain remained entirely
mysterious. I think the mystery can be eliminated, and the subject
removed from the realm of guesswork, by starting with the whole
cycle from stimulus to bodily movement. In this way, knowing becomes
something active, not something contemplative. Knowing and willing, in
fact, are merely aspects of the one cycle, which must be considered in
its entirety if it is to be rightly understood.

A few words must be said about the human body as a mechanism. It is
an inconceivably complicated mechanism, and some men of science think
that it is not explicable in terms of physics and chemistry, but is
regulated by some vital principle which makes its laws different
from those of dead matter. These men are called vitalists. I do not
myself see any reason to accept their view, but at the same time our
knowledge is not sufficient to enable us to reject it definitely. What
we can say is that their case is not proved, and that the opposite view
is, scientifically, a more fruitful working hypothesis. It is better
to look for physical and chemical explanations where we can, since
we know of many processes in the human body which can be accounted
for in this way, and of none which _certainly_ cannot. To invoke a
vital principle is to give an excuse for laziness, when perhaps more
diligent research would have enabled us to do without it. I shall
therefore assume, as a working hypothesis, that the human body acts
according to the same laws of physics and chemistry as those which
govern dead matter, and that it differs from dead matter, not by its
laws, but by the extraordinary complexity of its structure.

The movements of the human body may, none the less, be divided into two
classes, which we may call respectively mechanical and vital. As
an example of the former, I should give the movement of a man falling
from a cliff into the sea. To explain this, in its broad features, it
is not necessary to take account of the fact that the man is alive; his
centre of gravity moves exactly as that of a stone would move. But when
a man climbs up a cliff, he does something that dead matter of the
same shape and weight would never do; this is a vital movement. There
is in the human body a lot of stored chemical energy in more or less
unstable equilibrium; a very small stimulus can release this energy,
and cause a considerable amount of bodily movement. The situation is
analogous to that of a large rock delicately balanced on the top of a
conical mountain; a tiny shove may send it thundering down into the
valley, in one direction or another according to the direction of the
shove. So if you say to a man your house is on fire, he will start
running; although the stimulus contained very little energy, his
expenditure of energy may be tremendous. He increases the available
energy by panting, which makes his body burn up faster and increases
the energy due to combustion; this is just like opening the draft in a
furnace. Vital movements are those that use up this energy which is
in unstable equilibrium. It is they alone that concern the bio-chemist,
the physiologist, and the psychologist. The others, being just like
the movements of dead matter, may be ignored when we are specially
concerned with the study of Man.

Vital movements have a stimulus which may be inside or outside the
body, or both at once. Hunger is a stimulus inside the body, but
hunger combined with the sight of good food is a double stimulus, both
internal and external. The effect of a stimulus may be, in theory,
according to the laws of physics and chemistry, but in most cases
this is, at present, no more than a pious opinion. What we know from
observation is that behaviour is modified by experience, that is to
say, that if similar stimuli are repeated at intervals they produce
gradually changing reactions. When a bus conductor says, Fares,
please, a very young child has no reaction, an older child gradually
learns to look for pennies, and, if a male, ultimately acquires the
power of producing the requisite sum on demand without conscious
effort. The way in which our reactions change with experience is a
distinctive characteristic of animals; moreover it is more marked in
the higher than in the lower animals, and most marked of all in Man.
It is a matter intimately connected with intelligence, and must be
investigated before we can understand what constitutes knowledge from
the standpoint of the external observer; we shall be concerned with it
at length in the next chapter.

Speaking broadly, the actions of all living things are such as tend to
biological survival, _i.e._ to the leaving of a numerous progeny. But
when we descend to the lowest organisms, which have hardly anything
that can be called individuality, and reproduce themselves by fission,
it is possible to take a simpler view. Living matter, within limits,
has the chemical peculiarity of being self-perpetuating, and of
conferring its own chemical composition upon other matter composed of
the right elements. One spore falling into a stagnant pond may produce
millions of minute vegetable organisms; these, in turn, enable one
small animal to have myriads of descendants living on the small plants;
these, in turn, provide life for larger animals, newts, tadpoles,
fishes, etc. In the end there is enormously more protoplasm in that
region than there was to begin with. This is no doubt explicable as a
result of the chemical constitution of living matter. But this purely
chemical self-preservation and collective growth is at the bottom of
everything else that characterises the behaviour of living things.
Every living thing is a sort of imperialist, seeking to transform as
much as possible of its environment into itself and its seed. The
distinction between self and posterity is one which does not exist in
a developed form in asexual unicellular organisms; many things, even
in human life, can only be completely understood by forgetting it.
We may regard the whole of evolution as flowing from this chemical
imperialism of living matter. Of this, Man is only the last example
(so far). He transforms the surface of the globe by irrigation,
cultivation, mining, quarrying, making canals and railways, breeding
certain animals, and destroying others; and when we ask ourselves,
from the standpoint of an outside observer, what is the end achieved
by all these activities, we find that it can be summed up in one
very simple formula: to transform as much as possible of the matter
on the earths surface into human bodies. Domestication of animals,
agriculture, commerce, industrialism have been stages in this process.
When we compare the human population of the globe with that of
other large animals and also with that of former times, we see that
chemical imperialism has been, in fact, the main end to which human
intelligence has been devoted. Perhaps intelligence is reaching the
point where it can conceive worthier ends, concerned with the quality
rather than the quantity of human life. But as yet such intelligence
is confined to minorities, and does not control the great movements of
human affairs. Whether this will ever be changed I do not venture to
predict. And in pursuing the simple purpose of maximising the amount of
human life, we have at any rate the consolation of feeling at one with
the whole movement of living things from their earliest origin on this
planet.




CHAPTER III

THE PROCESS OF LEARNING IN ANIMALS AND INFANTS


In the present chapter I wish to consider the processes by which,
and the laws according to which, an animals original repertoire of
reflexes is changed into a quite different set of habits as a result
of events that happen to it. A dog learns to follow his master in
preference to anyone else; a horse learns to know his own stall in
the stable; a cow learns to come to the cow-shed at milking time.
All these are acquired habits, not reflexes; they depend upon the
circumstances of the animals concerned, not merely upon the congenital
characteristics of the species. When I speak of an animal learning
something, I shall include all cases of acquired habits, whether or not
they are useful to the animal. I have known horses in Italy learn to
drink wine, which I cannot believe to have been a desirable habit. A
dog may learn to fly at a man who has ill-treated it, and may do so
with such regularity and ferocity as to lead to its being killed. I do
not use learning in any sense involving praise, but merely to denote
modification of behaviour as the result of experience.

The manner in which animals learn has been much studied in recent
years, with a great deal of patient observation and experiment. Certain
results have been obtained as regards the kinds of problems that have
been investigated, but on general principles there is still much
controversy. One may say broadly that all the animals that have been
carefully observed have behaved so as to confirm the philosophy in
which the observer believed before his observations began. Nay, more,
they have all displayed the national characteristics of the observer.
Animals studied by Americans rush about frantically, with an incredible
display of hustle and pep, and at last achieve the desired result by
chance. Animals observed by Germans sit still and think, and at last
evolve the solution out of their inner consciousness. To the plain
man, such as the present writer, this situation is discouraging. I
observe, however, that the type of problem which a man naturally sets
to an animal depends upon his own philosophy, and that this probably
accounts for the differences in the results. The animal responds to
one type of problem in one way and to another in another; therefore
the results obtained by different investigators, though different, are
not incompatible. But it remains necessary to remember that no one
investigator is to be trusted to give a survey of the whole field.

The matters with which we shall be concerned in this chapter belong to
behaviourist psychology, and in part to pure physiology. Nevertheless,
they seem to me vital to a proper understanding of philosophy, since
they are necessary for an objective study of knowledge and inference. I
mean by an objective study one in which the observer and the observed
need not be the same person; when they must be identical, I call the
study subjective. For the present we are concerned with what is
required for understanding knowledge as an objective phenomenon. We
shall take up the question of the subjective study of knowledge at a
later stage.

The scientific study of learning in animals is a very recent growth;
it may almost be regarded as beginning with Thorndikes _Animal
Intelligence_, which was published in 1911. Thorndike invented the
method which has been adopted by practically all subsequent American
investigators. In this method an animal is separated from food, which
he can see or smell, by an obstacle which he may overcome by chance. A
cat, say, is put in a cage having a door with a handle which he may by
chance push open with his nose. At first the cat makes entirely random
movements, until he gets his result by a mere fluke. On the second
occasion, in the same cage, he still makes some random movements, but
not so many as on the first occasion. On the third occasion he does
still better, and before long he makes no useless movements. Nowadays
it has become customary to employ rats instead of cats, and to put them
in a model of the Hampton Court maze rather than in a cage. They take
all sorts of wrong turnings at first, but after a time they learn to
run straight out without making any mistake. Dr. Watson gives averages
for nineteen rats, each of which was put into the maze repeatedly,
with food outside where the rat could smell it. In all the experiments
care was taken to make sure that the animal was very hungry. Dr.
Watson says: The first trial required on the average over seventeen
minutes. During this time the rat was running around the maze, into
blind alleys, running back to the starting point, starting for the food
again, biting at the wires around him, scratching himself, smelling
this spot and that on the floor. Finally he got to the food. He was
allowed only a bite. Again he was put back into the maze. The taste of
the food made him almost frantic in his activity. He dashed about more
rapidly. The average time for the group on the second trial is only a
little over seven minutes; on the fourth trial not quite three minutes;
from this point to the twenty-third trial the improvement is very
gradual. On the thirtieth trial the time required, on the average,
was about thirty seconds.[3] This set of experiments may be taken as
typical of the whole group of studies to which it belongs.

      [3] Watson, _Behaviorism_, pp. 16970.

Thorndike, as a result of experiments with cages and mazes, formulated
two provisional laws, which are as follows:

The Law of Effect is that: of several responses made to the same
situation, those which are accompanied or closely followed by
satisfaction to the animal will, other things being equal, be more
firmly connected with the situation, so that, when it recurs, they
will be more likely to recur; those which are accompanied or closely
followed by dissatisfaction to the animal will, other things being
equal, have their connections with that situation weakened, so that,
when it recurs, they will be less likely to recur. The greater the
satisfaction or discomfort, the greater the strengthening or weakening
of the bond.

The Law of Exercise is that: Any response to a situation will, other
things being equal, be more strongly connected with the situation in
proportion to the number of times it has been connected with that
situation and to the average vigour and duration of the connections.

We may sum up these two laws, roughly, in the two statements: First, an
animal tends to repeat what has brought it pleasure; second, an animal
tends to repeat what it has often done before. Neither of these laws is
at all surprising, but, as we shall see, there are difficulties in the
theory that they are adequate to account for the process of learning in
animals.

Before going further there is a theoretical point to be cleared up.
Thorndike, in his first law, speaks of satisfaction and discomfort,
which are terms belonging to subjective psychology. We cannot observe
whether an animal _feels_ satisfaction or _feels_ discomfort; we can
only observe that it behaves in ways that we have become accustomed to
interpret as signs of these feelings. Thorndikes law, as it stands,
does not belong to objective psychology, and is not capable of being
experimentally tested. This, however, is not so serious an objection
as it looks. Instead of speaking of a result that brings satisfaction,
we can merely enumerate the results which, in fact, have the character
which Thorndike mentions, namely, that the animal tends to behave so
as to make them recur. The rat in the maze behaves so as to get the
cheese, and when an act has led him to the cheese once, he tends to
repeat it. We may say that this is what we mean when we say that the
cheese gives satisfaction, or that the rat desires the cheese.
That is to say, we may use Thorndikes Law of Effect to give us an
objective definition of desire, satisfaction, and discomfort. The law
should then say: there are situations such that animals tend to repeat
acts which have led to them; these are the situations which the animal
is said to desire and in which it is said to find satisfaction.
This objection to Thorndikes first law is, therefore, not very
serious, and need not further trouble us.

Dr. Watson considers one principle alone sufficient to account for
all animal and human learning, namely, the principle of learned
reactions. This principle may be stated as follows:

_When the body of an animal or human being has been exposed
sufficiently often to two roughly simultaneous stimuli, the earlier of
them alone tends to call out the response previously called out by the
other._

Although I do not agree with Dr. Watson in thinking this principle
alone sufficient, I do agree that it is a principle of very great
importance. It is the modern form of the principle of association.
The association of ideas has played a great part in philosophy,
particularly in British philosophy. But it now appears that this is
a consequence of a wider and more primitive principle, namely, the
association of bodily processes. It is this wider principle that is
asserted above. Let us see what is the nature of the evidence in its
favour.

Our principle becomes verifiable over a much larger field than the
older principle owing to the fact that it is movements, not ideas,
that are to be associated. Where animals are concerned, ideas are
hypothetical, but movements can be observed; even with men, many
movements are involuntary and unconscious. Yet animal movements and
unconscious involuntary human movements are just as much subject to
the law of association as the most conscious ideas. Take, _e.g._ the
following example (Watson, p. 33). The pupil of the eye expands in
darkness and contracts in bright light; this is an involuntary and
unconscious action of which we only become aware by observing others.
Now take some person and repeatedly expose him to bright light at
the same moment that you ring an electric bell. After a time the
electric bell alone will cause his pupils to contract. As far as can be
discovered, all muscles behave in this way. So do glands where they can
be tested. It is said that a brass band can be reduced to silence by
sucking a lemon in front of it, owing to the effect upon the salivary
glands of its members; I confess that I have never verified this
statement. But you will find the exact scientific analogue for dogs in
Watson, p. 26. You arrange a tube in a dogs mouth so that saliva drops
out at a measurable rate. When you give the dog food it stimulates the
flow of saliva. At the same moment you touch his left thigh. After a
certain length of time the touch on the left thigh will produce just
as much saliva without the food as with it. The same sort of thing
applies to emotions, which depend upon the ductless glands. Children
at birth are afraid of loud noises, but not of animals. Watson took a
child eleven months old, who was fond of a certain white rat; twice at
the moment when the child touched the rat, a sudden noise was made just
behind the childs head. This was enough to cause fear of the rat on
subsequent occasions, no doubt owing to the fact that the adrenal gland
was now stimulated by the substitute stimulus, just like the salivary
glands in the dog or the trumpet player. The above illustrations show
that ideas are not the essential units in association. It seems that
not merely is mind irrelevant, but even the brain is less important
than was formerly supposed. At any rate, what is known experimentally
is that the glands and muscles (both striped and unstriped) of the
higher animals exhibit the law of transfer of response, _i.e._ when
two stimuli have often been applied together, one will ultimately call
out the response which formerly the other called out. This law is one
of the chief bases of habit. It is also obviously essential to our
understanding of language: the sight of a dog calls up the word dog,
and the word dog calls up some of the responses appropriate to a real
dog.

There is, however, another element in learning, besides mere habit.
This is the element dealt with by Thorndikes Law of Effect. Animals
tend to repeat acts which have pleasant consequences, and to avoid
such as have unpleasant consequences. But, as we saw a moment ago,
pleasant and unpleasant are words which we cannot verify by
objective observation. What we can verify by observation is that
an animal seeks situations which in fact have had certain results,
and avoids situations which in fact have had certain other results.
Moreover, broadly speaking, the animal seeks results which tend to
survival of itself or its offspring, and avoids results which tend in
the opposite direction. This, however, is not invariable. Moths seek
flames and men seek drink, though neither is biologically useful. It
is only approximately, in situations long common, that animals are so
adjusted to their environment as to act in a way which is advantageous
from a biological standpoint. In fact, biological utility must
never be employed as an explanation, but only noticed as a frequent
characteristic, of the ways in which animals behave.

Dr. Watson is of the opinion that Thorndikes Law of Effect is
unnecessary. He first suggests that only two factors are called for in
the explanation of habit, namely, _frequency_ and _recency_. Frequency
is covered by Thorndikes Law of Exercise, but recency, which is
almost certainly a genuine factor, is not covered by Thorndikes two
laws. That is to say, when a number of random movements have finally
resulted in success, the more recent of these movements are likely to
be repeated earlier, on a second trial, than the earlier ones. But Dr.
Watson finally abandons this method of dealing with habit-formation in
favour of the one law of conditioned reflexes or learned reactions.
He says (_Behaviorism_, p. 166):

Only a few psychologists have been interested in the problem. Most
of the psychologists, it is to be regretted, have even failed to see
that there is a problem. They believe habit formation is implanted by
kind fairies. For example, Thorndike speaks of pleasure stamping in
the successful movement and displeasure stamping out the unsuccessful
movements. Most of the psychologists talk, too, quite volubly about the
formation of new pathways in the brain, as though there were a group
of tiny servants of Vulcan there who run through the nervous system
with hammer and chisel digging new trenches and deepening old ones.
I am not sure that the problem when phrased in this way is a soluble
one. I feel that there must come some simpler way of envisaging the
whole process of habit formation or else it may remain insoluble.
Since the advent of the conditioned reflex hypothesis in psychology
with all of the simplifications (and I am often fearful that it may be
an oversimplification!) I have had my own laryngeal processes [_i.e._
what others call thoughts] stimulated to work upon this problem from
another angle.

I agree with Dr. Watson that the explanations of habit-formation which
are usually given are very inadequate, and that few psychologists have
realised either the importance or the difficulty of the problem. I
agree also that a great many cases are covered by his formula of the
conditioned reflex. He relates a case of a child who once touched a
hot radiator, and afterward avoided it for two years. He adds: If we
should keep our old habit terminology, we should have in this example
a habit formed by a single trial. There can be then in this case no
stamping in of the successful movement and no stamping out of the
unsuccessful movement. On the basis of such examples, he believes
that the whole of habit-formation can be derived from the principle of
the conditioned reflex, which he formulates as follows (p. 168):

_Stimulus X will not now call out reaction R; stimulus Y will call out
reaction R (unconditioned reflex); but when stimulus X is presented
first and then Y (which does call out R) shortly thereafter, X will
thereafter call out R. In other words, stimulus X becomes ever
thereafter substituted for Y._

This law is so simple, so important, and so widely true that there
is a danger lest its scope should be exaggerated, just as, in the
eighteenth century, physicists tried to explain everything by means of
gravitation. But when considered as covering all the ground, it seems
to me to suffer from two opposite defects. In the first place, there
are cases where no habit is set up, although by the law it should be.
In the second place, there are habits which, so far as we can see at
present, have a different genesis.

To take the first point first: the word pepper does not make people
sneeze, though according to the law it should.[4] Words which describe
succulent foods will make the mouth water; voluptuous words will have
some of the effect that would be produced by the situations they
suggest; but no words will produce sneezes or the reactions appropriate
to tickling. In the diagram given by Dr. Watson (p. 106), there are
four reflexes which appear to be not sources of conditioned reflexes,
namely sneezing, hiccoughing, blinking, and the Babinski reflex;
of these, however, blinking, it is suggested (p. 99) may be really
itself a conditioned reflex. There may be some quite straightforward
explanation of the fact that some reactions can be produced by
substitute stimuli while others cannot, but none is offered. Therefore
the law of the conditioned reflex, as formulated, is too wide, and it
is not clear what is the principle according to which its scope should
be restricted.

      [4] Dr. Watson apparently entertains hopes of teaching babies
          to sneeze when they see the pepper box, but he has not
          yet done so. See _Behaviorism_, p. 90.

The second objection to Dr. Watsons law of habit, if valid, is more
important than the first; but its validity is more open to question. It
is contended that the acts by which solutions of problems are obtained
are, in cases of a certain kind, not random acts leading to success by
mere chance, but acts proceeding from insight, involving a mental
solution of the problem as a preliminary to the physical solution.
This is especially the view of those who advocate _Gestaltpsychologie_
or the psychology of configuration. We may take, as typical of their
attitude on the subject of learning, Khlers _Mentality of Apes_.
Khler went to Tenerife with certain chimpanzees in the year 1913;
owing to the war he was compelled to remain with them until 1917, so
that his opportunities for study were extensive. He complains of the
maze and cage problems set by American investigators that they are such
as _cannot_ be solved by intelligence. Sir Isaac Newton himself could
not have got out of the Hampton Court maze by any method except trial
and error. Khler, on the other hand, set his apes problems which could
be solved by what he calls insight. He would hang up a banana[5] out
of reach, and leave boxes in the neighbourhood so that by standing
on the boxes the chimpanzees could reach the fruit. Sometimes they
had to pile three or even four boxes on top of each other before they
could achieve success. Then he would put the banana outside the bars
of the cage, leaving a stick inside, and the ape would get the banana
by reaching for it with the stick. On one occasion, one of them, named
Sultan, had two bamboo sticks, each too short to reach the banana;
after vain efforts followed by a period of silent thought, he fitted
the smaller into the hollow of the other, and so manufactured one stick
which was long enough. It seems, however, from the account, that he
first fitted the two together more or less accidentally, and only then
realised that he had found a solution. Nevertheless, his behaviour when
he had once realised that one stick could be made by joining the two
was scarcely Watsonian: there was no longer anything tentative, but a
definite triumph, first in anticipation and then in action. He was so
pleased with his new trick that he drew a number of bananas into his
cage before eating any of them. He behaved, in fact, as capitalists
have behaved with machinery.

      [5] Called by Khler the objective, because the word
          banana is too humble for a learned work. The pictures
          disclose the fact that the objective was a mere banana.

Khler says: We can, from our own experience, distinguish sharply
between the kind of conduct which, from the very beginning, arises out
of a consideration of the characteristics of a situation, and one that
does not. Only in the former case do we speak of insight, and only
that behaviour of animals definitely appears to us intelligent which
takes account from the beginning of the lie of the land, and proceeds
to deal with it in a smooth continuous course. Hence follows this
characteristic: _to set up as the criterion of insight, the appearance
of a complete solution with reference to the whole lay-out of the
field_.

Genuine solutions of problems, Khler says, do not improve by
repetition; they are perfect on the first occasion, and, if anything,
grow worse by repetition, when the excitement of discovery has worn
off. The whole account that Khler gives of the efforts of his
chimpanzees makes a totally different impression from that of the
rats in mazes, and one is forced to conclude that the American work
is somewhat vitiated by confining itself to one type of problem,
and drawing from that one type conclusions which it believes to be
applicable to all problems of animal learning. It seems that there
are two ways of learning, one by experience, and the other by what
Khler calls insight. Learning by experience is possible to most
vertebrates, though rarely, so far as is known, to invertebrates.
Learning by insight, on the contrary, is not known to exist in any
animals lower than the anthropoid apes, though it would be extremely
rash to assert that it will not be revealed by further observations on
dogs or rats. Unfortunately, some animals--for instance, elephants--may
be extremely intelligent, but the practical difficulty and expense of
experimentation with them is so great that we are not likely to know
much about them for some time to come. However, the real problem is
already sufficiently definite in Khlers book: it is the analysis of
insight as opposed to the method of the conditioned reflex.

Let us first be clear as to the nature of the problem, when described
solely in terms of behaviour. A hungry monkey, if sufficiently near
to a banana, will perform acts such as, in circumstances to which it
has been accustomed, have previously enabled it to obtain bananas.
This fits well with either Watson or Thorndike, so far. But if these
familiar acts fail, the animal will, if it has been long without food,
is in good health, and is not too tired, proceed to other acts which
have never hitherto produced bananas. One may suppose, if one wishes to
follow Watson, that these new acts are composed of a number of parts,
each of which, on some former occasion, has occurred in a series which
ended with the obtaining of the banana. Or one may suppose--as I think
Thorndike does--that the acts of the baffled animal are random acts,
so that the solution emerges by pure chance. But even in the first
hypothesis, the element of chance is considerable. Let us suppose that
the acts A, B, C, D, E, have each, on a former occasion, been part of
a series ending with success, but that now for the first time it is
necessary to perform them all, and in the right order. It is obvious
that, if they are only combined by chance, the animal will be lucky if
it performs them all in the right order before dying of hunger.

But Khler maintains that to anyone watching his chimpanzees it was
obvious they did not obtain a composition of the solution out of
chance parts. He says (pp. 199200):

It is certainly not a characteristic of the chimpanzee, when he is
brought into an experimental situation, to make any chance movements,
out of which, among other things, a non-genuine solution could arise.
He is very seldom seen to attempt anything which would have to be
considered accidental in relation to the situation (excepting, of
course, if his interest is turned away from the objective to other
things). As long as his efforts are directed to the objective, all
distinguishable stages of his behaviour (as with human beings in
similar situations) tend to appear as complete attempts at solutions,
_none_ of which appears as the product of accidentally arrayed
parts. This is true, most of all, of the solution which is finally
successful. Certainly it often follows upon a period of perplexity or
quiet (often a period of survey), but in real and convincing cases,
the solution never appears in a disorder of blind impulses. It is
one continuous smooth action, which can be resolved into its parts
_only by the imagination_ of the onlooker; in reality they do _not_
appear independently. But that in so many genuine cases as have been
described, these solutions as wholes should have arisen from mere
chance, is an entirely inadmissible supposition.

Thus we may take it as an observed fact that, so far as overt behaviour
is concerned, there are two objections to the type of theory with
which we began, when considered as covering the whole field. The first
objection is that in cases of a certain kind, the solution appears
sooner than it should according to the doctrine of chances; the second
is that it appears as a whole, _i.e._ that the animal, after a period
of quiescence, suddenly goes through the right series of actions
smoothly, and without hesitation.

Where human beings are concerned, it is difficult to obtain such
good data as in the case of animals. Human mothers will not allow
their children to be starved, and then shut up in a room containing
a banana which can only be reached by putting a chair on the table
and a footstool on the chair, and then climbing up without breaking
any bones. Nor will they permit them to be put into the middle of a
Hampton Court maze, with their dinner getting cold outside. Perhaps
in time the State will perform these experiments with the children of
political prisoners, but as yet, perhaps fortunately, the authorities
are not sufficiently interested in science. One can observe, however,
that human learning seems to be of both sorts, namely that described
by Watson and that described by Khler. I am persuaded that speech is
learnt by the Watsonian method, so long as it is confined to single
words: often the trial and error, in later stages, proceeds _sotto
voce_, but it takes place overtly at first, and in some children until
their speech is quite correct. The speaking of sentences, however, is
already more difficult to explain without bringing in the apprehension
of wholes which is the thing upon which _Gestaltpsychologie_
lays stress. In the later stages of learning, the sort of sudden
illumination which came to Khlers chimpanzees is a phenomenon with
which every serious student must be familiar. One day, after a period
of groping bewilderment, the schoolboy knows what algebra is all
about. In writing a book, my own experience--which I know is fairly
common, though by no means universal--is that for a time I fumble and
hesitate, and then suddenly I see the book as a whole, and have only
to write it down as if I were copying a completed manuscript.

If these phenomena are to be brought within the scope of behaviourist
psychology, it must be by means of implicit behaviour. Watson makes
much use of this in the form of talking to oneself, but in apes it
cannot take quite this form. And it is necessary to have some theory
to explain the success of implicit behaviour, whether we call it
thought or not. Perhaps such a theory can be constructed on Watsons
lines, but it has certainly not yet been constructed. Until the
behaviourists have satisfactorily explained the kind of discovery which
appears in Khlers observations, we cannot say that their thesis is
proved. This is a matter which will occupy us again at a later stage;
for the present let us preserve an open mind.




CHAPTER IV

LANGUAGE


The subject of language is one which has not been studied with
sufficient care in traditional philosophy. It was taken for granted
that words exist to express thoughts, and generally also that
thoughts have objects which are what the words mean. It was
thought that, by means of language, we could deal directly with what
it means, and that we need not analyse with any care either of the
two supposed properties of words, namely that of expressing thoughts
and that of meaning things. Often when philosophers intended to be
considering the objects meant by words they were in fact considering
only the words, and when they were considering words they made the
mistake of supposing, more or less unconsciously, that a word is a
single entity, not, as it really is, a set of more or less similar
events. The failure to consider language explicitly has been a cause
of much that was bad in traditional philosophy. I think myself that
meaning can only be understood if we treat language as a bodily
habit, which is learnt just as we learn football or bicycling. The only
satisfactory way to treat language, to my mind, is to treat it in this
way, as Dr. Watson does. Indeed, I should regard the theory of language
as one of the strongest points in favour of behaviourism.

Man has various advantages over the beasts, for example, fire,
clothing, agriculture, and tools--not the possession of domestic
animals, for ants have them. But more important than any of these
is language. It is not known how or when language arose, nor why
chimpanzees do not speak. I doubt if it is even known whether writing
or speech is the older form of language. The pictures made in caves by
the Cro-Magnon men may have been intended to convey a meaning, and may
have been a form of writing. It is known that writing developed out of
pictures, for that happened in historical times; but it is not known
to what extent pictures had been used in pre-historic times as a means
of giving information or commands. As for spoken language, it differs
from the cries of animals in being not merely an expression of emotion.
Animals have cries of fear, cries expressing pleasure in the discovery
of food, and so on, and by means of these cries they influence each
others actions. But they do not appear to have any means of expressing
anything except emotions, and then only emotions which they are
actually feeling. There is no evidence that they possess anything
analogous to narrative. We may say, therefore, without exaggeration,
that language is a human prerogative, and probably the chief habit in
which we are superior to the dumb animals.

There are three matters to be considered in beginning the study of
language. First: what words are, regarded as physical occurrences;
secondly, what are the circumstances that lead us to use a given word;
thirdly, what are the effects of our hearing or seeing a given word.
But as regards the second and third of these questions, we shall find
ourselves led on from words to sentences and thus confronted with fresh
problems perhaps demanding rather the methods of _Gestaltpsychologie_.

Ordinary words are of four kinds: spoken, heard, written, and read. It
is of course largely a matter of convention that we do not use words of
other kinds. There is the deaf-and-dumb language; a Frenchmans shrug
of the shoulders is a word; in fact, any kind of externally perceptible
bodily movement may become a word, if social usage so ordains. But the
convention which has given the supremacy to speaking is one which has
a good ground, since there is no other way of producing a number of
perceptibly different bodily movements so quickly or with so little
muscular effort. Public speaking would be very tedious if statesmen
had to use the deaf-and-dumb language, and very exhausting if all
words involved as much muscular effort as a shrug of the shoulders. I
shall ignore all forms of language except speaking, hearing, writing,
and reading, since the others are relatively unimportant and raise no
special psychological problems.

A spoken word consists of a series of movements in the larynx and
the mouth, combined with breath. Two closely similar series of such
movements may be instances of the same words, though they may also
not be, since two words with different meanings may sound alike; but
two such series which are not closely similar cannot be instances of
the same word. (I am confining myself to one language.) Thus a single
spoken word, say dog, is a certain set of closely similar series of
bodily movements, the set having as many members as there are occasions
when the word dog is pronounced. The degree of similarity required
in order that the occurrence should be an instance of the word dog
cannot be specified exactly. Some people say dawg, and this must
certainly be admitted. A German might say tok, and then we should
begin to be doubtful. In marginal cases, we cannot be sure whether a
word has been pronounced or not. A spoken word is a form of bodily
behaviour without sharp boundaries, like jumping or hopping or running.
Is a man running or walking? In a walking-race the umpire may have
great difficulty in deciding. Similarly there may be cases where it
cannot be decided whether a man has said dog or dock. A spoken word
is thus at once general and somewhat vague.

We usually take for granted the relation between a word spoken and a
word heard. Can you hear what I say? we ask, and the person addressed
says yes. This is of course a delusion, a part of the naive realism
of our unreflective outlook on the world. We never hear what is said;
we hear something having a complicated causal connection with what is
said. There is first the purely physical process of sound-waves from
the mouth of the speaker to the ear of the hearer, then a complicated
process in the ear and nerves, and then an event in the brain, which
is related to our hearing of the sound in a manner to be investigated
later, but is at any rate simultaneous with our hearing of the sound.
This gives the physical causal connection between the word spoken and
the word heard. There is, however, also another connection of a more
psychological sort. When a man utters a word, he also hears it himself,
and so that the word spoken and the word heard become intimately
associated for anyone who knows how to speak. And a man who knows how
to speak can also utter any word he hears in his own language, so that
the association works equally well both ways. It is because of the
intimacy of this association that the plain man identifies the word
spoken with the word heard, although in fact the two are separated by a
wide gulf.

In order that speech may serve its purpose, it is not necessary, as it
is not possible, that heard and spoken words should be identical, but
it is necessary that when a man utters different words the heard words
should be different, and when he utters the same word on two occasions
the heard word should be approximately the same on the two occasions.
The first of these depends upon the sensitiveness of the ear and its
distance from the speaker; we cannot distinguish between two rather
similar words if we are too far off from the man who utters them. The
second condition depends upon uniformity in the physical conditions,
and is realised in all ordinary circumstances. But if the speaker were
surrounded by instruments which were resonant to certain notes but not
to certain others, some tones of voice might carry and others might
be lost. In that case, if he uttered the same word with two different
intonations, the hearer might be quite unable to recognise the
sameness. Thus the efficacy of speech depends upon a number of physical
conditions. These, however, we will take for granted, in order to come
as soon as possible to the more psychological parts of our topic.

Written words differ from spoken words in being material structures. A
spoken word is a process in the physical world, having an essential
time-order; a written word is a series of pieces of matter, having
an essential space-order. As to what we mean by matter, that is a
question with which we shall have to deal at length at a later stage.
For the present it is enough to observe that the material structures
which constitute written words, unlike the processes that constitute
spoken words, are capable of enduring for a long time--sometimes
for thousands of years. Moreover, they are not confined to one
neighbourhood, but can be made to travel about the world. These are the
two great advantages of writing over speech. This, at least, has been
the case until recently. But with the coming of radio writing it has
begun to lose its pre-eminence: one man can now speak to multitudes
spread over a whole country. Even in the matter of permanence, speech
may become the equal of writing. Perhaps, instead of legal documents,
we shall have gramophone records, with voice signatures by the parties
to the contract. Perhaps, as in Wellss _When the Sleeper Awakes_,
books will no longer be printed but merely arranged for the gramophone.
In that case the need for writing may almost cease to exist. However,
let us return from these speculations to the world of the present day.

The word read, as opposed to the written or printed word, is just
as evanescent as the word spoken or heard. Whenever a written word,
exposed to light, is in a suitable spatial relation to a normal eye, it
produces a certain complicated effect upon the eye; the part of this
process which occurs outside the eye is investigated by the science of
light, whereas the part that occurs in the eye belongs to physiological
optics. There is then a further process, first in the optic nerve and
afterwards in the brain; the process in the brain is simultaneous
with vision. What further relation it has to vision is a question
as to which there has been much philosophical controversy; we shall
return to it at a later stage. The essence of the matter, as regards
the causal efficacy of writing, is that the act of writing produces
quasi-permanent material structures which, throughout the whole of
their duration, produce closely similar results upon all suitably
placed normal eyes; and as in the case of speaking, different written
words lead to different read words, and the same word written twice
leads to the same read word--again with obvious limitations.

So much for the physical side of language, which is often unduly
neglected. I come now to the psychological side, which is what really
concerns us in this chapter.

The two questions we have to answer, apart from the problems raised
by sentences as opposed to words, are: First, what sort of behaviour
is stimulated by hearing a word? And secondly, what sort of occasion
stimulates us to the behaviour that consists in pronouncing a word? I
put the questions in this order because children learn to react to the
words of others before they learn to use words themselves. It might be
objected that, in the history of the race, the first spoken word must
have preceded the first heard word, at least by a fraction of a second.
But this is not very relevant, nor is it certainly true. A noise may
have meaning to the hearer, but not to the utterer; in that case it
is a heard word but not a spoken word. (I shall explain what I mean
by meaning shortly.) Fridays footprint had meaning for Robinson
Crusoe but not for Friday. However that may be, we shall do better
to avoid the very hypothetical parts of anthropology that would be
involved, and take up the learning of language as it can be observed in
the human infant of the present day. And in the human infant as we know
him, definite reactions to the words of others come much earlier than
the power of uttering words himself.

A child learns to understand words exactly as he learns any other
process of bodily association. If you always say bottle when you give
a child his bottle, he presently reacts to the word bottle, within
limits, as he formerly reacted to the bottle. This is merely an example
of the law of association which we considered in the preceding chapter.
When the association has been established, parents say that the child
understands the word bottle, or knows what the word means. Of
course the word does not have _all_ the effects that the actual bottle
has. It does not exert gravitation, it does not nourish, it cannot
bump on to the childs head. The effects which are shared by the word
and the thing are those which depend upon the law of association or
conditional reflexes or learned reactions. These may be called
associative effects or mnemic effects--the latter name being
derived from Semons book _Mneme_,[6] in which he traces all phenomena
analogous to memory to a law which is, in effect, not very different
from the law of association or conditioned reflexes.

      [6] London: George Allen & Unwin, Ltd.

It is possible to be a little more precise as to the class of effects
concerned. A physical object is a centre from which a variety of
causal chains emanate. If the object is visible to John Smith, one
of the causal chains emanating from it consists first of light-waves
(or light-quanta) which travel from the object to John Smiths eye,
then of events in his eye and optic nerve, then of events in his
brain, and then (perhaps) of a reaction on his part. Now mnemic
effects belong only to events in living tissue; therefore only those
effects of the bottle which happen either inside John Smiths body,
or as a result of his reaction to the bottle, can become associated
with his hearing the word bottle. And even then only certain events
can be associated: nourishment happens in the body, yet the word
bottle cannot nourish. The law of conditioned reflexes is subject
to ascertainable limitations, but within its limits it supplies what
is wanted to explain the understanding of words. The child becomes
excited when he sees the bottle; this is already a conditioned reflex,
due to experience that this sight precedes a meal. One further stage
in conditioning makes the child grow excited when he hears the word
bottle. He is then said to understand the word.

We may say, then, that a person understands a word which he hears if,
so far as the law of conditioned reflexes is applicable, the effects of
the word are the same as those of what it is said to mean. This of
course only applies to words like bottle, which denote some concrete
object or some class of concrete objects. To understand a word such
as reciprocity or republicanism is a more complicated matter, and
cannot be considered until we have dealt with sentences. But before
considering sentences we have to examine the circumstances which make
us use a word, as opposed to the consequences of hearing it used.

Saying a word is more difficult than using it, except in the case of
a few simple sounds which infants make before they know that they are
words, such as ma-ma and da-da. These two are among the many random
sounds that all babies make. When a child says ma-ma in the presence
of his mother by chance she thinks he knows what this noise means, and
she shows pleasure in ways that are agreeable to the infant. Gradually,
in accordance with Thorndikes law of effect, he acquires the habit
of making this noise in the presence of his mother, because in these
circumstances the consequences are pleasant. But it is only a very
small number of words that are acquired in this way. The great majority
of words are acquired by imitation, combined with the association
between thing and word which the parents deliberately establish in the
early stages (after the very first stage). It is obvious that using
words oneself involves something over and above the association between
the _sound_ of the word and its meaning. Dogs understand many words,
and infants understand far more than they can say. The infant has to
discover that it is possible and profitable to make noises like those
which he hears. (This statement must not be taken quite literally, or
it would be too intellectualistic.) He would never discover this if
he did not make noises at random, without the intention of talking.
He then gradually finds that he can make noises like those which he
hears, and in general the consequences of doing so are pleasant.
Parents are pleased, desired objects can be obtained, and--perhaps most
important of all--there is a sense of power in making intended instead
of accidental noises. But in this whole process there is nothing
essentially different from the learning of mazes by rats. It resembles
this form of learning, rather than that of Khler apes, because no
amount of intelligence could enable the child to find out the names of
things--as in the case of the mazes, experience is the only possible
guide.

When a person knows how to speak, the conditioning proceeds in the
opposite direction to that which operates in understanding what others
say. The reaction of a person who knows how to speak, when he notices
a cat, is naturally to utter the word cat; he may not actually do
so, but he will have a reaction leading towards this act, even if for
some reason the overt act does not take place. It is true that he may
utter the word cat because he is thinking about a cat, not actually
seeing one. This, however, as we shall see in a moment, is merely one
further stage in the process of conditioning. The use of single words,
as opposed to sentences, is wholly explicable, so far as I can see, by
the principles which apply to animals in mazes.

Certain philosophers who have a prejudice against analysis contend that
the sentence comes first and the single word later. In this connection
they always allude to the language of the Patagonians, which their
opponents, of course, do not know. We are given to understand that a
Patagonian can understand you if you say I am going to fish in the
lake behind the western hill, but that he cannot understand the word
fish by itself. (This instance is imaginary, but it represents the
sort of thing that is asserted.) Now it may be that Patagonians are
peculiar--indeed they must be, or they would not choose to live in
Patagonia. But certainly infants in civilized countries do not behave
in this way, with the exception of Thomas Carlyle and Lord Macaulay.
The former never spoke before the age of three, when, hearing his
younger brother cry, he said, What ails wee Jock? Lord Macaulay
learned in suffering what he taught in song, for, having spilt a cup
of hot tea over himself at a party, he began his career as a talker
by saying to his hostess, after a time, Thank you, Madam, the agony
is abated. These, however, are facts about biographers, not about
the beginnings of speech in infancy. In all children that have been
carefully observed, sentences come much later than single words.

Children, at first, are limited as to their power of producing sounds,
and also by the paucity of their learned associations. I am sure the
reason why ma-ma and da-da have the meaning they have is that they
are sounds which infants make spontaneously at an early age, and are
therefore convenient as sounds to which the elders can attach meaning.
In the very beginning of speech there is not imitation of grownups, but
the discovery that sounds made spontaneously have agreeable results.
Imitation comes later, after the child has discovered that sounds
can have this quality of meaning. The type of skill involved is
throughout exactly similar to that involved in learning to play a game
or ride a bicycle.

We may sum up this theory of meaning in a simple formula. When through
the law of conditioned reflexes, A has come to be a cause of C, we will
call A an associative cause of C, and C an associative effect of
A. We shall say that, to a given person, the word A, when he hears it,
means C, if the associative effects of A are closely similar to those
of C; and we shall say that the word A, when he utters it, means C,
if the utterance of A is an associative effect of C, or of something
previously associated with C. To put the matter more concretely, the
word Peter means a certain person if the associated effects of
hearing the word Peter are closely similar to those of seeing Peter,
and the associative causes of uttering the word Peter are occurrences
previously associated with Peter. Of course as our experience increases
in complexity this simple schema becomes obscured and overlaid, but I
think it remains fundamentally true.

There is an interesting and valuable book by Messrs. C. K. Ogden and
I. A. Richards, called _The Meaning of Meaning_. This book, owing to
the fact that it concentrates on the causes of uttering words, not on
the effects of hearing them, gives only half the above theory, and that
in a somewhat incomplete form. It says that a word and its meaning have
the same causes. I should distinguish between _active_ meaning, that
of the man uttering the word, and _passive_ meaning, that of the man
hearing the word. In active meaning the word is associatively caused by
what it means or something associated with this; in passive meaning,
the associative effects of the word are approximately the same as those
of what it means.

On behaviourist lines, there is no important difference between proper
names and what are called abstract or generic words. A child learns
to use the word cat, which is general, just as he learns to use
the word Peter, which is a proper name. But in actual fact Peter
really covers a number of different occurrences, and is in a sense
general. Peter may be near or far, walking or standing or sitting,
laughing or frowning. All these produce different stimuli, but the
stimuli have enough in common to produce the reaction consisting
of the word Peter. Thus there is no essential difference, from a
behaviourist point of view, between Peter and man. There are
more resemblances between the various stimuli to the word Peter
than between those to the word man, but this is only a difference
of degree. We have not names for the fleeting particular occurrences
which make up the several appearances of Peter, because they are not
of much practical importance; their importance, in fact, is purely
theoretic and philosophical. As such, we shall have a good deal to say
about them at a later stage. For the present, we notice that there are
many occurrences of Peter, and many occurrences of the word Peter;
each, to the man who sees Peter, is a set of events having certain
similarities. More exactly, the occurrences of Peter are _causally_
connected, whereas the occurrences of the word Peter are connected by
similarity. But this is a distinction which need not concern us yet.

General words such as man or cat or triangle are said to denote
universals, concerning which, from the time of Plato to the present
day, philosophers have never ceased to debate. Whether there are
universals, and, if so, in what sense, is a metaphysical question,
which need not be raised in connection with the use of language. The
only point about universals that needs to be raised at this point is
that the correct use of general words is no evidence that a man can
think about universals. It has often been supposed that, because we can
use a word like man correctly, we must be capable of a corresponding
abstract idea of man, but this is quite a mistake. Some reactions
are appropriate to one man, some to another, but all have certain
elements in common. If the word man produces in us the reactions
which are common but no others, we may be said to understand the
word man. In learning geometry, one acquires the habit of avoiding
special interpretations of such a word as triangle. We know that,
when we have a proposition about triangles in general, we must not
think specially of a right-angled triangle or any one kind of triangle.
This is essentially the process of learning to associate with the word
what is associated with _all_ triangles; when we have learnt this,
we understand the word triangle. Consequently there is no need to
suppose that we ever apprehend universals, although we use general
words correctly.

Hitherto we have spoken of single words, and among these we have
considered only those that can naturally be employed singly. A child
uses single words of a certain kind before constructing sentences; but
some words presuppose sentences. No one would use the word paternity
until after using such sentences as John is the father of James; no
one would use the word causality until after using such sentences as
the fire makes me warm. Sentences introduce new considerations, and
are not quite so easily explained on behaviourist lines. Philosophy,
however, imperatively demands an understanding of sentences, and we
must therefore consider them.

As we found earlier, all infants outside Patagonia begin with single
words, and only achieve sentences later. But they differ enormously in
the speed with which they advance from the one to the other. My own two
children adopted entirely different methods. My son first practised
single letters, then single words, and only achieved correct sentences
of more than three or four words at the age of two and three months.
My daughter, on the contrary, advanced very quickly to sentences, in
which there was hardly ever an error. At the age of eighteen months,
when supposed to be sleeping, she was overheard saying to herself:
Last year I used to dive off the diving-board, I _did_. Of course
last year was merely a phrase repeated without understanding. And
no doubt the first sentences used by children are always repetitions,
unchanged, of sentences they have heard used by others. Such cases
raise no new principle not involved in the learning of words. What does
raise a new principle is the power of putting together known words into
a sentence which has never been heard, but which expresses correctly
what the infant wishes to convey. This involves the power to manipulate
form and structure. It does not of course involve the apprehension
of form or structure in the abstract, any more than the use of the
word man involves apprehension of a universal. But it does involve
a causal connection between the form of the stimulus and the form of
the reaction. An infant very soon learns to be differently affected by
the statement cats eat mice from the way he would be affected by the
statement mice eat cats; and not much later he learns to make one of
these statements rather than the other. In such a case, the cause (in
hearing) or the effect (in speaking) is a whole sentence. It may be
that one part of the environment is sufficient to cause one word, while
another is sufficient to cause another, but it is only the two parts
in their relation that can cause the whole sentence. Thus wherever
sentences come in we have a causal relation between two complex facts,
namely the fact asserted and the sentence asserting it; the facts
as wholes enter into the cause-and-effect relation, which cannot be
explained wholly as compounded of relations between their parts.
Moreover, as soon as the child has learned to use correctly relational
words, such as eat, he has become capable of being causally affected
by a relational feature of the environment, which involves a new degree
of complexity not required for the use of ordinary nouns.

Thus the correct use of relational words, _i.e._ of sentences, involves
what may be correctly termed perception of form, _i.e._ it involves a
definite reaction to a stimulus which is a form. Suppose, for example,
that a child has learnt to say that one thing is above another when
this is in fact the case. The stimulus to the use of the word above
is a relational feature of the environment, and we may say that this
feature is perceived since it produces a definite reaction. It may
be said that the relation _above_ is not very like the word above.
That is true; but the same is true of ordinary physical objects. A
stone, according to the physicists, is not at all like what we see
when we look at it, and yet we may be correctly said to perceive it.
This, however, is to anticipate. The definite point which has emerged
is that, when a person can use sentences correctly, that is a proof of
sensitiveness to formal or relational stimuli.

The structure of a sentence asserting some relational fact, such as
this is above that, or Brutus killed Csar, differs in an important
respect from the structure of the fact which it asserts. _Above_ is
a relation which holds between the two terms this and that; but
the _word_ above is not a relation. In the sentence the relation is
the temporal order of the words (or the spatial order, if they are
written), but the word for the relation is itself as substantial as
the other words. In inflected languages, such as Latin, the order of
the words is not necessary to show the sense of the relation; but in
uninflected languages this is the only way of distinguishing between
Brutus killed Csar and Csar killed Brutus. Words are physical
phenomena, having spatial and temporal relations; we make use of these
relations in our verbal symbolisation of other relations, chiefly to
show the sense of the relation, _i.e._ whether it goes from A to B or
from B to A.

A great deal of the confusion about relations which has prevailed in
practically all philosophies comes from the fact, which we noticed
just now, that relations are indicated, not by other relations,
but by words which, in themselves, are just like other words.
Consequently, in thinking about relations, we constantly hover between
the unsubstantiality of the relation itself and the substantiality of
the word. Take, say, the fact that lightning precedes thunder. If we
were to express this by a language closely reproducing the structure
of the fact, we should have to say simply: lightning, thunder, where
the fact that the first word precedes the second means that what the
first word means precedes what the second word means. But even if we
adopted this method for temporal order, we should still need words
for all other relations, because we could not without intolerable
ambiguity symbolise them also by the order of our words. All this will
be important to remember when we come to consider the structure of the
world, since nothing but a preliminary study of language will preserve
us from being misled by language in our metaphysical speculations.

Throughout this chapter I have said nothing about the narrative and
imaginative uses of words; I have dealt with words in connection
with an immediate sensible stimulus closely connected with what they
mean. The other uses of words are difficult to discuss until we have
considered memory and imagination. In the present chapter I have
confined myself to a behaviouristic explanation of the effects of
words heard as stimuli, and the causes of words spoken when the words
apply to something sensibly present. I think we shall find that other
uses of words, such as the narrative and imaginative, involve only new
applications of the law of association. But we cannot develop this
theme until we have discussed several further psychological questions.




CHAPTER V

PERCEPTION OBJECTIVELY REGARDED


It will be remembered that the task upon which we are at present
engaged is the definition of knowledge as a phenomenon discoverable
by an outside observer. When we have said what we can from this
objective standpoint, we will ask ourselves whether anything further,
and if so what, is to be learnt from the subjective standpoint, in
which we take account of facts which can only be discovered when the
observer and the observed are the same person. But for the present we
will resolutely confine ourselves to those facts about a human being
which another human being can observe, together with such inferences as
can be drawn from these facts.

The word knowledge is very ambiguous. We say that Watsons rats
know how to get out of mazes, that a child of three knows how to
talk, that a man knows the people with whom he is acquainted, that
he knows what he had for breakfast this morning, and that he knows
when Columbus first crossed the ocean. French and German are less
ambiguous, since each has two words for different kinds of knowing,
which we tend to confuse in our thoughts because we confuse them in our
language. I shall not attempt as yet to deal with knowledge in general,
but rather with certain less general concepts which would ordinarily
be included under knowledge. And first of all I will deal with
perception--not as it appears to the perceiver, but as it can be tested
by an outside observer.

Let us try, first, to get a rough preliminary view of the sort of
thing we are going to mean by perception. One may say that a man
perceives anything that he notices through his senses. This is not
a question of the sense-organs alone, though they are a necessary
condition. No man can perceive by sight what is not in his field of
vision, but he may look straight at a thing without perceiving it. I
have frequently had the experience--supposed to be characteristic of
philosophers--of looking everywhere for my spectacles although they
were before my eyes when my search began. We cannot therefore tell
what a man is perceiving by observing his sense-organs alone, though
they may enable us to know that he is _not_ perceiving something.
The observer can only know that a man is perceiving something if the
man reacts in some appropriate manner. If I say to a man please
pass the mustard and he thereupon passes it, it is highly probable
that he perceived what I said, although it _may_ of course be a mere
coincidence that he passed it at that moment. But if I say to him the
telephone number you want is 2467 and he proceeds to call that number,
the odds against his doing so by mere chance are very great--roughly
10,000 to 1. And if a man reads aloud out of a book, and I look over
his shoulder and perceive the same words, it becomes quite fantastic to
suppose that he does not perceive the words he is uttering. We can thus
in many cases achieve practical certainty as to some of the things that
other people are perceiving.

Perception is a species of a wider genus, namely _sensitivity_.
Sensitivity is not confined to living things; in fact it is best
exemplified by scientific instruments. A material object is said to
be sensitive to such and such a stimulus, if, when the stimulus is
present, it behaves in a way noticeably different from that in which
it behaves in the absence of the stimulus. A photographic plate is
sensitive to light, a barometer is sensitive to pressure, a thermometer
to temperature, a galvanometer to electric current, and so on. In all
these cases, we might say, in a certain metaphorical sense, that an
instrument perceives the stimulus to which it is sensitive. We do not
in fact say so; we feel that perception involves something more than we
find in scientific instruments. What is this something more?

The traditional answer would be: consciousness. But this answer,
right or wrong, is not what we are seeking at the moment, because we
are considering the percipient as he appears to an outside observer,
to whom his consciousness is only an inference. Is there anything
in perception as viewed from without that distinguishes it from the
sensitivity of a scientific instrument?

There is, of course, the fact that human beings are sensitive to
a greater variety of stimuli than any instrument. Each separate
sense-organ can be surpassed by something made artificially sensitive
to its particular stimulus. Photographic plates can photograph stars
that we cannot see; clinical thermometers register differences of
temperature that we cannot feel; and so on. But there is no way of
combining a microscope, a microphone, a thermometer, a galvanometer,
and so on, into a single organism which will react in an integral
manner to the combination of all the different stimuli that affect its
different sense-organs. This, however, is perhaps only a proof that
our mechanical skill is not so great as it may in time become. It is
certainly not enough to define the difference between a dead instrument
and a living body.

The chief difference--perhaps the only one from our present point of
view--is that living bodies are subject to the law of association or
of the conditioned reflex. Consider, for instance, an automatic
machine. It has a reflex which makes it sensitive to pennies, in
response to which it gives up chocolate. But it never learns to give
up chocolate on merely seeing a penny, or hearing the word penny.
If you kept it in your house, and said Abracadabra to it every time
you inserted a penny, it would not in the end be moved to action by
the mere word Abracadabra. Its reflexes remain unconditioned, as
do some of ours, such as sneezing. But with us sneezing is peculiar
in this respect--hence its unimportance. Most of our reflexes can be
conditioned, and the conditioned reflex can in turn be conditioned
afresh, and so on without limit. This is what makes the reactions of
the higher animals, and especially of man, so much more interesting
and complicated than the reactions of machines. Let us see whether
this one law will suffice to distinguish perception from other forms of
sensitivity.

The variability in a human beings responses to a given stimulus
has given rise to the traditional distinction between cognition and
volition. When ones rich uncle comes for a visit, smiles are the
natural response; after he has lost his money, a colder demeanour
results from the new conditioning. Thus the reaction to the stimulus
has come to be divided into two parts, one purely receptive and
sensory, the other active and motor. Perception, as traditionally
conceived, is, so to speak, the end term of the receptive-sensory part
of the reaction, while volition (in its widest sense) is the first term
of the active-motor part of the reaction. It was possible to suppose
that the receptive part of the reaction would be always the same for
the same stimulus, and that the difference due to experience would
only arise in the motor part. The last term of the passive part, as it
appears to the person concerned, was called sensation. But in fact
the influence of the law of conditioned reflexes goes much deeper than
this theory supposed. As we saw, the contraction of the pupil, which is
normally due to bright light, can be conditioned so as to result from
a loud noise. What we see depends largely upon muscular adjustments
of the eyes, which we make quite unconsciously. But apart from the
contraction of the pupil only one of them is a true reflex, namely
turning the eyes towards a bright light. This is a movement which
children can perform on the day of their birth; I know this, not merely
from personal observation, but also, what is more, from the text-books.
But new-born infants cannot follow a moving light with their eyes, nor
can they focus or accommodate. As a consequence, the purely receptive
part of their reaction to visual objects, in so far as this reaction is
visual, is different from that of adults or older children, whose eye
muscles adjust themselves so as to see clearly.

But here again all sorts of factors enter in. Innumerable objects are
in our field of vision, but only some (at most) are interesting to us.
If some one says look, theres a snake, we adjust our eyes afresh
and obtain a new sensation. Then, when the purely visual part is
finished, there are stimulations, by association, of other centres
in the brain. There are pictures, in Khlers book, of apes watching
other apes on the top of insecure piles of boxes, and the spectators
have their arms raised in sympathetic balancing movements. Any one
who watches gymnastics or skilful dancing is liable to experience
sympathetic muscular contractions. Any visual object that we might be
touching will stimulate incipient touch reactions, but the sun, moon,
and stars do not.

Conversely, visual reactions may be stimulated through association with
other stimuli. When motor-cars were still uncommon, I was walking one
day with a friend when a tire punctured in our neighbourhood with a
loud report. He thought it was a revolver, and averred that he had seen
the flash. In dreams, this sort of mechanism operates uncontrolled.
Some stimulus--say the noise of the maid knocking at the door--becomes
interpreted in fantastic ways which are governed by association. I
remember once dreaming that I was in an inn in the country in Germany
and was wakened by a choir singing outside my window. Finally I
really woke, and found that a spring shower was making a very musical
noise on the roof. At least, I heard a very musical noise, and now
re-interpreted it as a shower on the roof. This hypothesis I confirmed
by looking out of the window. In waking life we are critical of the
interpretative hypotheses that occur to us, and therefore do not make
such wild mistakes as in dreams. But the creative, as opposed to the
critical, mechanism is the same in waking life as it is in dreams:
there is always far more richness in the experience than the sensory
stimulus alone would warrant. All adaptation to environment acquired
during the life of the individual might be regarded as learning to
dream dreams that succeed rather than dreams that fail. The dreams we
have when we are asleep usually end in a surprise: the dreams we have
in waking life are less apt to do so. Sometimes they do, as when pride
goes before a fall; but in that case they are regarded as showing
maladjustment, unless there is some large external cause, such as
an earthquake. One might say that a person properly adapted to his
environment is one whose dreams never end in the sort of surprise that
would wake him up. In that case, he will think that his dreams are
objective reality. But if modern physics is to be believed, the dreams
we call waking perceptions have only a very little more resemblance to
objective reality than the fantastic dreams of sleep. They have some
truth, but only just so much as is required to make them useful.

Until we begin to reflect, we unhesitatingly assume that what we
see is really there in the outside world, except in such cases as
reflections in mirrors. Physics and the theory of the way in which
perceptions are caused show that this naive belief cannot be quite
true. Perception may, and I think does, enable us to know something of
the outer world, but it is not the direct revelation that we naturally
suppose it to be. We cannot go into this question adequately until we
have considered what the philosopher has to learn from physics; I am
merely giving, by anticipation, the reasons for regarding perception
as a form of reaction to the environment, displayed in some bodily
movement, rather than as a form of knowledge. When we have considered
further what constitutes knowledge, we may find that perception is,
after all, a form of knowledge, but only because knowledge is not
quite what we naturally suppose it to be. For the present, let us
stick to the view of perception that can be obtained by the external
observer, _i.e._ as something displayed in the manner of reacting to
the environment.

From the point of view of the external observer, perception is
established just like any other causal correlation. We observe that,
whenever a certain object stands in a certain spatial relation to
a mans body, the mans body makes a certain movement or set of
movements; we shall then say that the man perceives the object. So
the new-born baby turns its eyes slowly towards a bright light which
is not in the centre of the field of vision; this entitles us to say
that the baby perceives the light. If he is blind, his eyes do not
move in this way. A bird flying about in a wood does not bump into the
branches, whereas in a room it will bump into the glass of the window.
This entitles us to say that the bird perceives the branches but not
the glass. Do we perceive the glass or do we merely know that it
is there? This question introduces us to the complications produced
by association. We know by experience, from the sense of touch, that
there is usually glass in window-frames; thus it makes us react to
the window-frames as if we could see the glass. But sometimes there
is no glass, and still we shall perhaps behave as if there were. If
this can happen, it shows that we do not perceive the glass, since our
reaction is the same whether there is glass or not. If, however, the
glass is coloured, or slightly distorting, or not perfectly clean,
a person accustomed to glass will be able to distinguish a frame
containing glass from one which has none. In that case it is more
difficult to decide whether we are to say that he perceives the
glass or not. It is certain that perception is affected by experience.
A person who can read perceives print where another would not. A
musician perceives differences between notes which to an untrained ear
are indistinguishable. People unaccustomed to the telephone cannot
understand what they hear in it; but this is perhaps not really a case
in point.

The difficulty we are considering arises from the fact that a human
body, unlike a scientific instrument, is perpetually changing its
reaction to a given stimulus, under the influence of the law of
association. Moreover, the human body is always doing something.
How, then, are we to know whether what it is doing is the result of
a given stimulus or not? In most cases, however, this difficulty is
not very serious, particularly when we are dealing with people old
enough to speak. When you go to the oculist he asks you to read a
number of letters growing gradually smaller; at some point you fail.
Where you have succeeded, he knows that you have perceived enough to
make out what letter it is. Or you take a pair of compasses and press
the points into a mans back, asking him if he feels two pricks or
only one. He may say one when the two points are near together; if he
is on his guard against this error he may say two when in fact there
is only one. But if the points are sufficiently far apart he will
never make a mistake. That is to say, the bodily movement consisting
in pronouncing the word two will invariably result from a certain
stimulus. (Invariably, I mean, for a given subject on a given day.)
This entitles us to say that the man can perceive that there are two
points provided they are not too near together. Or you say: What can
you see on the horizon? One man says, I see a ship. Another says, I
see a steamer with two funnels. A third says, I see a Cunarder going
from Southampton to New York. How much of what these three people say
is to count as perception? They may all three be perfectly right in
what they say, and yet we should not concede that a man can perceive
that the ship is going from Southampton to New York. This, we should
say, is inference. But it is by no means easy to draw a line; some
things which are, in an important sense, inferential, must be admitted
to be perceptions. The man who says I see a ship is using inference.
Apart from experience, he only sees a queerly shaped dark dot on a blue
background. Experience has taught him that that sort of dot means a
ship; that is to say, he has a conditioned reflex which causes him to
utter, aloud or to himself, the word ship when his eye is stimulated
in a certain way. To disentangle what is due to experience, and what
not, in the perceptions of an adult, is a hopeless task. Practically,
if a word comes without previous verbal intermediaries, the ordinary
man would include what the word means in the perception, while he would
not do so if the man arrives at the word after verbal preliminaries,
overt or internal. But this is itself a question of familiarity. Show
a child a pentagon, and he will have to count the sides to know how
many there are; but after a little experience of geometrical figures,
the word pentagon will arise without any previous words. And in any
case such a criterion is theoretically worthless. The whole affair is a
matter of degree, and we cannot draw any sharp line between perception
and inference. As soon as this is realised, our difficulties are seen
to be purely verbal and therefore unimportant.

It will be observed that we are not attempting at present to say what
constitutes perception, but only what kind of behaviour on the part
of a person whom we are observing will justify us in saying that he
has perceived this or that feature of his environment. I suggest that
we are justified in saying that a man perceives such a feature if,
throughout some such period as a day, there is some bodily act which
he performs whenever that feature is present, but not at any other
time. This condition is clearly sufficient, but not necessary--that
is to say, there may be perception even when it is not fulfilled. A
mans reaction may change through conditioning, even in so short a
period as a day. Again, there may be a reaction, but one which is too
slight to be observable; in this case the criterion of perception
is theoretically satisfied, but not practically, since no one can
know that it is. We often have evidence later on that something was
perceived, although at the moment there was no discoverable reaction.
I have frequently known children repeat afterwards some remark which,
at the time, they seemed not to have heard. This sort of case affords
another kind of evidence of perception, namely, the evidence afforded
by a delayed response. Some people will sit silent and impassive in a
company of talkers, giving no evidence that they are listening; yet
they may go home and write down the conversation verbatim in their
journals. These are the typical writers of memoirs. More remarkable
still, I know one man--a man of genius, it is true--who talks
incessantly, who yet, after meeting a total stranger, knows exactly
what the stranger would have said if he had been given the chance.
How this is managed, I do not know; but such a man is rightly called
perceptive.

Obviously, in dealing with human beings old enough to talk, words
afford the best evidence of perception. A mans verbal responses to
perceptive situations do not change much after the first few years of
life. If you see a kingfisher, and at the same moment your companion
says theres a kingfisher, that is pretty conclusive evidence that
he saw it. But, as this case illustrates, our evidence that some one
else has perceived something always depends upon our own perceptions.
And our own perceptions are known to us in a different way from that
in which the perceptions of others are known to us. This is one of
the weak spots in the attempt at a philosophy from the objective
standpoint. Such a philosophy really assumes knowledge as a going
concern, and takes for granted the world which a man derives from
his own perceptions. We cannot tackle all our philosophical problems
by the objective method, but it is worth while to proceed with it as
far as it will take us. This whole question of perception will have
to be attacked afresh from a different angle, and we shall then find
reason to regard the behaviouristic standpoint as inadequate, though
valid so far as it goes. We have still, however, a long road to go
before we shall be driven to consider the subjective standpoint;
more particularly, we have to define knowledge and inference
behaviouristically, and then, making a new start, to consider what
modern physics makes of matter. But for the moment there are still
some things to be said about perception from the objective standpoint.

It will be seen that, according to our criterion of perception, an
object perceived need not be in contact with the percipients body. The
sun, moon, and stars are perceived according to the above criterion.
In order, however, that an object not in contact with the body should
be perceived, there are physical as well as physiological conditions
to be fulfilled. There must be some physical process which takes place
at the surface of the body when the object in question is suitably
situated, but not otherwise; and there must be sense-organs capable of
being affected by such a process. There are, as we know from physics,
many processes which fulfil the necessary physical conditions, but
fail to affect us through the inadequacy of our sense-organs. Waves of
a certain sort make sound, but waves of exactly the same sort become
inaudible if they are too short. Waves of a certain sort make light,
but if they are too long or too short they are invisible. The waves
used in wireless are of the same sort as those that make light, but are
too long. There is no reason _a priori_ why we should not be aware of
wireless messages through our senses, without the need of instruments.
X-rays are also of the same sort as those that make light, but in this
case they are too short to be seen. They might render the objects from
which they come visible, if we had a different sort of eye. We are not
sensitive to magnetism, unless it is enormously powerful; but if we
had more iron in our bodies, we might have no need of the mariners
compass. Our senses are a haphazard selection of those that the nature
of physical processes renders possible; one may suppose that they have
resulted from chance variation and the struggle for existence.

It is important to observe that our perceptions are very largely
concerned with form or shape or structure. This is the point emphasised
by what is called _Gestaltpsychologie_, or psychology of form.
Reading is a case in point. Whether we read black letters on white
paper or white letters on a blackboard is a matter which we hardly
notice; it is the forms of the letters that affect us, not their colour
or their size (so long as they remain legible). In this matter, the
sense of sight is pre-eminent, although blind men (and others to a less
degree) can acquire a good knowledge of form by the sense of touch.

Another point of importance about our perceptions is that they give us,
within limits, a knowledge of temporal sequence. If you say to a man
Brutus killed Csar, and then Csar killed Brutus, the difference
between the two statements is likely to be perceived by him if he
is listening; in the one case he will say of course, in the other
nonsense, which is evidence of his having different perceptions in
the two cases, according to our definition. Further, if you ask him
what the difference is, he can tell you that it is a difference in the
order of the words. Thus time-order within a short period of time is
clearly perceptible.

The objective method, which we have been applying in this chapter, is
the only possible one in studying the perceptions of animals or of
infants before they can talk. Many animals too low in the scale of
evolution to have eyes are yet sensitive to light, in the sense that
they move towards it or move away from it. Such animals, according to
our criterion, perceive light, though there is no reason to suppose
that they perceive colour or visual form or anything beyond the bare
presence of light. We can perceive the bare presence of light when our
eyes are shut; perhaps one may imagine their sensitiveness to be more
or less analogous in its limitations.

It is not to be supposed, in any case, that perceiving an object
involves knowing what it is like. That is quite another matter.
We shall see later that certain inferences, of a highly abstract
character, can be drawn from our perceptions to the objects perceived;
but these inferences are at once difficult and not quite certain. The
idea that perception, in itself, reveals the character of objects,
is a fond delusion, and one, moreover, which it is very necessary to
overcome if our philosophy is to be anything more than a pleasant
fairy-tale.




CHAPTER VI

MEMORY OBJECTIVELY REGARDED


We are concerned in these chapters with what we can know about other
men by merely observing their behaviour. In this chapter, I propose
to consider everything that would commonly be called memory, in so
far as it can be made a matter of external observation. And perhaps it
may be as well, at this point, to state my own view of the question
of behaviourism. This philosophy, of which the chief protagonist is
Dr. John B. Watson, holds that everything that can be known about man
is discoverable by the method of external observation, _i.e._ that
none of our knowledge depends, essentially and necessarily, upon data
in which the observer and the observed are the same person. I do not
fundamentally agree with this view, but I think it contains much more
truth than most people suppose, and I regard it as desirable to develop
the behaviourist method to the fullest possible extent. I believe that
the knowledge to be obtained by this method, so long as we take physics
for granted, is self-contained, and need not, at any point, appeal
to data derived from introspection, _i.e._ from observations which a
man can make upon himself but not upon any one else. Nevertheless,
I hold that there are such observations and that there is knowledge
which depends upon introspection. What is more, I hold that data of
this kind are required for a critical exposition of physics, which
behaviourism takes for granted. I shall, therefore, after setting forth
the behaviourist view of man, proceed to a scrutiny of our knowledge of
physics, returning thence to man, but now as viewed from within. Then,
finally, I shall attempt to draw conclusions as to what we know of the
universe in general.

The word memory or remembering is commonly used in a number
of different senses, which it is important to distinguish. More
especially, there is a broad sense, in which the word applies to the
power of repeating any habitual act previously learnt, and a narrow
sense, in which it applies only to recollection of past events. It is
in the broad sense that people speak of a dog remembering his master or
his name, and that Sir Francis Darwin spoke of memory in plants. Samuel
Butler used to attribute the sort of behaviour that would usually be
called instinctive to memory of ancestral experience, and evidently he
was using the word memory in its widest possible sense. Bergson, on
the contrary, dismisses habit-memory as not true memory at all. True
memory, for him, is confined to the recollection of a past occurrence,
which, he maintains, cannot be a habit, since the event remembered
only occurred once. The behaviourist maintains that this contention is
mistaken, and that all memory consists in the retention of a habit. For
him, therefore, memory is not something requiring special study, but
is merged into the study of habit. Dr. Watson says: The behaviourist
never uses the term memory. He believes that it has no place in an
objective psychology. He proceeds to give instances, beginning with a
white rat in a maze. On the first occasion, he says, it took this rat
forty minutes to get out of the maze, but after thirty-five trials he
learnt to get out in six seconds, without taking any wrong turnings. He
was then kept away from the maze for six months, and on being put in it
again he got out in two minutes, with six mistakes. He was just as good
as he had been before at the twentieth trial. We have here a measure of
the extent to which the habit of the maze had been retained. A similar
experiment with a monkey showed even more retentiveness. He was put
into a problem box which at first took him twenty minutes to open, but
at the twentieth trial he opened it in two seconds. He was then kept
away from it for six months, and on being put back in it he opened it
in four seconds.

With human beings, we know that many of the habits we learn are
retained through long periods of disuse--skating, bicycling, swimming,
golf, etc., are familiar instances. Perhaps Dr. Watson goes a trifle
too far when he says: If a poor shot or an inexpert golfer tells you
that he was good five years ago but that lack of practice has made him
poor, dont believe him; he never was good! At any rate, this is not
the belief of violinists and pianists, who consider it essential to
practise every day. But even if it be somewhat of an exaggeration, it
is certainly true that we retain bodily habits pretty well. Some, such
as swimming, seem to be more completely retained than others. The power
of talking a foreign language, for example, is one which is greatly
impaired by disuse. The whole matter is quantitative, and easily tested
by experiment.

But memory in the sense of recollection of past events, if it can be
explained as a habit, will have, one might suppose, to be a _verbal_
habit. As to this, Dr. Watson says:

What the man on the street ordinarily means by an exhibition of memory
is what occurs in some such situation as this: An old friend comes to
see him, after many years absence. The moment he sees this friend,
he says: Upon my life! Addison Sims of Seattle! I havent seen you
since the Worlds Fair in Chicago. Do you remember the gay parties we
used to have in the Wilderness Hotel? Do you remember the Midway? Do
you remember ... etc., _ad infinitum_. The psychology of this process
is so simple that it seems almost an insult to your intelligence to
discuss it, and yet a good many of the behaviourists kindly critics
have said that behaviourism cannot adequately explain memory. Let us
see if this is a fact.

He goes on to say that during the period, long ago, when the man on
the street was seeing Mr. Sims, they formed verbal and manual habits
towards one another, so that finally, just the sight of man, even
after months of absence, would call out not only the old verbal
habits, but many other types of bodily and visceral responses.

He sums up: By memory, then, we mean nothing except the
fact that when we meet a stimulus again after an absence, we
do the old habitual thing (say the old words and show the old
visceral--emotional--behaviour) that we learned to do when we were in
the presence of that stimulus in the first place.

This theory is preferable to ordinary psychological theories in many
ways. In the first place, it is not an attempt to treat memory as
some sort of mystical faculty, and does not suppose that we are
always remembering everything that we should remember if a suitable
stimulus were applied. It is concerned with the causation of specific
acts of remembering, these acts being all externally observable. I do
not see any good reason to question it. Bergsons contention that the
recollection of a unique occurrence cannot be explained by habit is
clearly fallacious. There are many instances, both with animals and
with human beings, of a habit becoming firmly established through one
experience. It is, therefore, quite possible that a stimulus associated
with a previous occurrence should set going a train of bodily events
which, in turn, produce words describing that occurrence. There is
here, however, a difficulty. The memory of a past occurrence cannot
be a _verbal_ habit, except when the occurrence has been frequently
related. When Watsons man on the street says Do you remember the
Midway, he is not using words that have become habitual; very likely
he never used these words before. He is using words which a verbal
habit associates with an event that is now happening in him, and the
event is called up by a habit associated with Mr. Sims. So at least
we must suppose, if we accept Watsons view. But this diminishes the
plausibility and the verifiability of his view. It is not our actual
language that can be regarded as habitual, but only what our words
express. In repeating a poem we have learned by heart, the language is
habitual, but not so when we recount a past incident in words we never
used before. In this case, it is not the actual words that we repeat,
but only their meaning. The habitual element, therefore, if it really
accounts for the recollection, must not be sought in words.

This is something of a difficulty in the Watsonian theory of language.
When a rat learns a maze, it learns certain definite bodily movements;
so do we when we learn by heart. But I may say to one person, I met
Mr. Jones in the train to-day, and to another Joseph was in the
9.35 this morning. With the exception of the words in the, these
two sentences have nothing verbally in common, yet they may relate
the same fact, and I may use either indifferently when I recall the
fact. Thus my recollection is certainly _not_ a definite verbal
habit. Yet words are the only overt bodily movements by which I make
known my recollections to other people. If the behaviourist tells me
that my recollection is bodily habit, and begins by telling me that
it is a _verbal_ habit, he can be driven by such instances to the
admission that it must be some other kind of habit. If he says this,
he is abandoning the region of observable fact, and taking refuge in
hypothetical bodily movements invoked to save a theory. But these are
hardly any better than thoughts.

This question is more general than the problem of memory. Many
different forms of words may be used to express the same meaning, and
there seems no reason in mere habit to account for the fact that we
sometimes use one form of words and sometimes another when we think
of that which all the various forms of words express. The association
seems to go, not direct from stimulus to words, but from stimulus to
meaning and thence to words expressing the meaning. You may, for
instance, be quite unable to recollect whether you were told Jacob is
older than Joseph, or Joseph is younger than Jacob, though you may
remember quite definitely that you were told the fact which both these
forms of words express. Again, if you are learning, say, a proof of a
mathematical theorem, you do not learn by heart what the book says,
unless you are a very bad mathematician; you learn, as people say, to
understand the proof, and then you can reproduce it in symbols quite
different from those in the book. It is such facts, among others, that
make it difficult to explain the mechanism of association, whether in
memory or in thought in general, if we assume that words, or even
sentences, are the terms associated.

Perhaps, however, the theory as to the meaning of words which we
developed in an earlier chapter may help us out of the difficulty.
We defined the meaning of a word by means of its associations;
therefore, if two words are synonyms, they have the same associations;
and any stimulus which calls up one may also call up the other. The
question which of two synonyms we use will then depend upon some
extraneous circumstance.

This is all very well so far as single words are concerned; it would
account satisfactorily, for instance, for the fact that I call a man
sometimes by his surname and sometimes by his Christian name. But it
is hardly so adequate when we come to the question of sentences. To
revert to the illustration of a moment ago, in response to the stimulus
Did anything happen on your journey? you may say either I met Mr.
Jones in the train to-day, or Joseph was in the 9.35 this morning,
or any one of an indefinite number of other sentences expressive of the
same occurrence. Are we to suppose that, while you were in the train,
you were rehearsing all these different sentences to yourself, so that
each of them became firmly associated with the words journey to-day?
Clearly such a supposition would be absurd. Yet all the separate words
of your sentence have many other associations; it is only the sentence
as a whole that is associated with your journey. You have met other
people besides Mr. Jones; you have had other contacts with Mr. Jones
besides meeting him this morning; train and to-day equally are
appropriate to other occurrences that you might relate. Thus it has
to be the whole sentence that is the associative unit, and yet the
sentence may never have been in your head before. It seems clear that
it is possible to state in words something that you remember, although
you never put it into words before. Suppose I say What did you have
for breakfast to-day? Probably you will be able to tell me, though
it is very likely that you have not given names to the things you ate
until this moment.

This whole matter is connected with the distinction between sentences
and single words, which we found important when we were discussing
language. But even when we confine ourselves to single words, there
are difficulties in Dr. Watsons view. Cases are alleged in which
children, after learning to speak, can recall incidents which occurred
before they could speak, and describe them in correct words. This would
show that the memory had persisted in a non-verbal form throughout
the period before they learned to speak, and had only subsequently
found verbal expression. Such extreme incidents are rare and might be
questioned, but in a less extreme form it ought not to be difficult to
obtain examples of the same sort of thing. Suppose, for example, that a
young child hurt his wrist badly before he knew the word wrist, and
that some time afterwards he learnt it; I should not be surprised if he
could relate that he had hurt his wrist. Such instances, however, would
not refute the essence of Watsons theory. He would allow visceral
memory, for example, and the association with the word wrist might
be grafted on to this. The real difficulty in Dr. Watsons view, to my
mind, is the fact that our sentence may vary verbally as much as it
likes so long as it retains the same meaning, and that we clearly do
not rehearse to ourselves beforehand all the possible sentences having
the meaning in question.

It should be realised that behaviourism loses much of its
attractiveness if it is compelled to postulate movements that no one
can observe and that there is no other reason to assume. Dr. Broad,
in his book on _The Mind and its Place in Nature_, distinguishes
between molar and molecular behaviourism: the former assumes only
such bodily movements as can be observed, while the latter allows
and utilises hypothetical minute movements, more especially in the
brain. Now here we must make a distinction. Physics believes in a large
number of phenomena which are too minute to be observed even with the
strongest microscope, and if physics is at all correct, there must be
minute movements in all parts of a human body, of a sort which we can
never hope to see. We cannot reasonably demand of the behaviourist that
he should abstain from an hypothesis which physics asserts for very
good reasons. And in the process which leads from stimulus to reaction
there are bound to be small occurrences in the brain, which, though
they cannot be observed, are essential to the physiological explanation
of what occurs. But when the behaviourist assumes small occurrences
for which there is no ground in physics, and which are needed solely
in order to safeguard his theory, he is in a less strong position.
Dr. Watson asserts, for instance, that whenever we think there are
small movements in the larynx which are beginnings of the movements we
should make as if we spoke words out loud. It may be that this is true;
certainly I am not prepared to deny it. But I am not prepared to say
that it _must_ be true merely because, if it were not, behaviourism
would be false. We do not know in advance that behaviourism is true;
we have to find out whether it will explain observed facts. Whenever
it has to postulate something unobserved merely in order to avoid a
refutation, it weakens its case. And if it maintains, as, from Dr.
Watsons language, it seems to do, that we only remember an occurrence
by forming a verbal habit in connection with it, then it is obliged to
postulate much implicit use of words of which we have no evidence.

To sum up this discussion. While it is quite possible, by behaviourist
methods, to ascertain whether a person remembers a past occurrence or
not, unless he is deliberately obstructing the observer, and while
much memory can be quite adequately explained as habit, there do seem
to be great difficulties in the view that memory consists _entirely_
of habit, at least in the case of the recollection of an event. These
difficulties seem insuperable if we suppose memory to be _essentially_
a verbal habit. They are not insuperable if we postulate sufficient
minute unobservable bodily movements. We have not considered whether
they can be overcome by introducing data derived from introspection,
since we wish, for the present, to maintain a strictly objective
attitude to human behaviour. The introspective discussion of memory
will be taken up at a later stage.




CHAPTER VII

INFERENCE AS A HABIT


In this chapter, we are concerned with inference as it can be observed
when practised by some one else. Inference is supposed to be a mark of
intelligence and to show the superiority of men to machines. At the
same time, the treatment of inference in traditional logic is so stupid
as to throw doubt on this claim, and syllogistic inference, which was
taken as the type from Aristotle to Bacon (exclusive), is just the sort
of thing that a calculating machine could do better than a professor.
In syllogistic inference, you are supposed to know already that all
men are mortal and that Socrates is a man; hence you deduce, what you
never suspected before, that Socrates is mortal. This form of inference
does actually occur, though very rarely. The only instance I have ever
heard of was supplied by Dr. F. C. S. Schiller. He once produced a
comic number of the philosophical periodical _Mind_, and sent copies to
various philosophers, among others to a certain German, who was much
puzzled by the advertisements. But at last he argued: Everything in
this book is a joke, therefore the advertisements are jokes. I have
never come across any other case of new knowledge obtained by means of
a syllogism. It must be admitted that, for a method which dominated
logic for two thousand years, this contribution to the worlds stock of
information cannot be considered very weighty.

The inferences that we actually make in daily life differ from those
of syllogistic logic in two respects, namely, that they are important
and precarious, instead of being trivial and safe. The syllogism may be
regarded as a monument to academic timidity: if an inference might be
wrong, it was dangerous to draw it. So the medival monks, in their
thinking as in their lives, sought safety at the expense of fertility.

With the Renaissance, a more adventurous spirit came into the world,
but at first in philosophy, it only took the form of following Greeks
other than Aristotle, and more especially Plato. It is only with Bacon
and Galileo that the inductive method arrived at due recognition:
with Bacon as a programme which was largely faulty, but with Galileo
as something which actually led to brilliant results, namely, the
foundation of modern mathematical physics. Unfortunately, when the
pedants got hold of induction, they set to work to make it as tame and
scholastic as deduction had been. They searched for a way of making
it _always_ lead to true results, and in so doing robbed it of its
adventurous character. Hume turned upon them with sceptical arguments,
proving quite conclusively that if an induction is worth making it may
be wrong. Thereupon Kant deluged the philosophic world with muddle and
mystery, from which it is only now beginning to emerge. Kant has the
reputation of being the greatest of modern philosophers, but to my mind
he was a mere misfortune.

Induction, as it appears in the text-books, consists, roughly
speaking, in the inference that, because A and B have been found often
together and never apart, therefore they are probably always together,
and either may be taken as a sign of the other. I do not wish, at
this stage, to examine the logical justification of this form of
argumentation; for the present, I am considering it as a _practice_,
which we can observe in the habits of men and animals.

As a practice, induction is nothing but our old friend, the law of
conditioned reflexes or of association. A child touches a knob that
gives him an electric shock; after that, he avoids touching the knob.
If he is old enough to speak he may state that the knob hurts when it
is touched; he has made an induction based on a single instance. But
the induction will exist as a bodily habit even if he is too young
to speak, and it occurs equally among animals, provided they are not
too low in the scale. The theories of induction in logic are what
Freudians call a rationalisation; that is to say, they consist of
reasons invented afterwards to prove that what we have been doing is
sensible. It does not follow that they are bad reasons; in view of the
fact that we and our ancestors have managed to exist since the origin
of life, our behaviour and theirs must have been fairly sensible, even
if we and they were unable to prove that it was. This, however, is not
the point that concerns us at present. What concerns us at present is
the fact that verbal induction is a late development of induction in
behaviour, which is nothing more or less than the principle of learned
reactions.

This principle, as the reader will remember, states that, if a
certain event calls out a certain response, and if another event is
experienced just before it, or at the same moment, in time that other
event will tend to call out the response which, originally, only
the first event would call out. This applies both to muscles and to
glands; it is because it applies to glands that words are capable of
causing emotions. Moreover, we cannot set limits to the length of the
chain of associations that may be established. If you hold an infants
limbs, you call out a rage reaction; this appears to be an unlearned
reaction. If you, and no one else, repeatedly hold an infants limbs,
the mere sight of you will call out a rage reaction after a time.
When the infant learns to talk your name may have the same effect.
If, later, he learns that you are an optician, he may come to hate
all opticians; this may lead him to hate Spinoza because he made
spectacles, and thence he may come to hate metaphysicians and Jews.
For doing so he will no doubt have the most admirable reasons, which
will seem to him to be his real ones; he will never suspect the process
of conditioning by which he has in fact arrived at his enthusiasm for
the Ku Klux Klan. This is an example of conditioning in the emotional
sphere; but it is rather in the muscular sphere that we must seek the
origin of the practice of induction.

Domestic animals which are habitually fed by a certain person will run
towards that person as soon as they see him. We say that they expect
food, and in fact their behaviour is very like what it would be if
they saw food. But really we have only an example of conditioning:
they have often seen first the farmer and then the food, so that in
time they react to the farmer as they originally reacted to the food.
Infants soon learn to react to the sight of the bottle, although at
first they only react to the touch of it. When they can speak, the same
law makes them say dinner when they hear the dinner-bell. It is quite
unnecessary to suppose that they first think that bell means dinner,
and then say dinner. The sight of dinner (by previous learned
reaction) causes the word dinner: the bell frequently precedes the
sight of dinner; therefore in time the bell produces the word dinner.
It is only subsequent reflection, probably at a much later age, that
makes the child say I knew dinner was ready because I heard the bell.
Long before he can say this, he is acting as if he knew it. And there
is no good reason for denying that he knows it, when he acts as if he
did. If knowledge is to be displayed by behaviour, there is no reason
to confine ourselves to _verbal_ behaviour as the sole kind by which
knowledge can manifest itself.

The situation, stated abstractly, is as follows. Originally, stimulus
A produced reaction C; now stimulus B produces it, as a result of
association. Thus B has become a sign of A, in the sense that it
causes the behaviour appropriate to A. All sorts of things may be signs
of other things, but with human beings words are the supreme example of
signs. All signs depend upon some practical induction. Whenever we read
or hear a statement, its effect upon us depends upon induction in this
sense, since the words are signs of what they mean, in the sense that
we react to them, in certain respects, as we should to what they stand
for. If some one says to you your house is on fire, the effect upon
you is practically the same as if you saw the conflagration. You may,
of course, be the victim of a hoax, and in that case your behaviour
will not be such as achieves any purpose you have in view. This risk
of error exists always, since the fact that two things have occurred
together in the past cannot prove conclusively that they will occur
together in the future.

Scientific induction is an attempt to regularise the above process,
which we may call physiological induction. It is obvious that, as
practised by animals, infants, and savages, physiological induction is
a frequent source of error. There is Dr. Watsons infant who induced,
from two examples, that whenever he saw a certain rat there would be
a loud noise. There is Edmund Burke, who induced from one example
(Cromwell) that revolutions lead to military tyrannies. There are
savages who argue, from one bad season, that the arrival of a white
man causes bad crops. The inhabitants of Siena, in 1348, thought
that the Black Death was a punishment for their pride in starting to
build too large a cathedral. Of such examples there is no end. It is
very necessary, therefore, if possible, to find some method by which
induction can be practised so as to lead, in general, to correct
results. But this is a problem of scientific method, with which we will
not yet concern ourselves.

What does concern us at present is the fact that all inference, of
the sort that really occurs, is a development of this one principle
of conditioning. In practice, inference is of two kinds, one typified
by induction, the other by mathematical reasoning. The former is by
far the more important, since, as we have seen, it covers all use of
signs and all empirical generalisations as well as the habits of which
they are the verbal expression. I know that, from the traditional
standpoint, it seems absurd to talk of inference in most cases of this
sort. For example, you find it stated in the paper that such and such a
horse has won the Derby. According to my own use of words, you practise
an induction when you arrive thence at the belief that that horse has
won. The stimulus consists of certain black marks on white paper--or
perhaps on pink paper. This stimulus is only connected with horses
and the Derby by association, yet your reaction is one appropriate
to the Derby. Traditionally, there was only inference where there
was a mental process, which, after dwelling upon the premisses,
was led to assert the conclusion by means of insight into their
logical connection. I am not saying that the process which such words
as the above are intended to describe never takes place; it certainly
does. What I am saying is that, genetically and causally, there is no
important difference between the most elaborate induction and the most
elementary learned reaction. The one is merely a developed form of
the other, not something radically different. And our determination to
believe in the results of inductions, even if, as logicians, we see
no reason to do so, is really due to the potency of the principle of
association; it is an example--perhaps the most important example--of
what Dr. Santayana calls animal faith.

The question of mathematical reasoning is more difficult. I think we
may lay it down that, in mathematics, the conclusion always asserts
merely the whole or part of the premisses, though usually in new
language. The difficulty of mathematics consists in seeing that
this is so in particular cases. In practice, the mathematician has
a set of rules according to which his symbols can be manipulated,
and he acquires technical skill in working according to the rules
in the same sort of way as a billiard-player does. But there is a
difference between mathematics and billiards: the rules of billiards
are arbitrary, whereas in mathematics some at least are in some sense
true. A man cannot be said to understand mathematics unless he
has seen that these rules are right. Now what does this consist
of? I think it is only a more complicated example of the process of
understanding that Napoleon and Bonaparte refer to the same person.
To explain this, however, we must revert to what was said, in the
chapter on Language, about the understanding of form.

Human beings possess the power of reacting to form. No doubt some of
the higher animals also possess it, though to nothing like the same
extent as men do; and all animals, except a few of the most intelligent
species, appear to be nearly devoid of it. Among human beings, it
differs greatly from one individual to another, and increases, as a
rule, up to adolescence. I should take it as what chiefly characterises
intellect. But let us see, first, in what the power consists.

When a child is being taught to read, he learns to recognise a given
letter, say H, whether it is large or small, black or white or red.
However it may vary in these respects his reaction is the same: he
says H. That is to say, the essential feature in the stimulus is its
_form_. When my boy, at the age of just under three, was about to eat a
three-cornered piece of bread and butter, I told him it was a triangle.
(His slices were generally rectangular.) Next day, unprompted, he
pointed to triangular bits in the pavement of the Albert Memorial, and
called them triangles. Thus the form of the bread and butter, as
opposed to its edibility, its softness, its colour, etc., was what had
impressed him. This sort of thing constitutes the most elementary kind
of reaction to form.

Now matter and form can be placed, as in the Aristotelian
philosophy, in a hierarchy. From a triangle we can advance to a
polygon, thence to a figure, thence to a manifold of points. Then we
can go on and turn point into a formal concept, meaning something
that has relations which resemble spatial relations in certain formal
respects. Each of these is a step away from matter and further into
the region of form. At each stage the difficulty increases. The
difficulty consists in having a uniform reaction (other than boredom)
to a stimulus of this kind. When we understand a mathematical
expression, that means that we can react to it in an appropriate
manner, in fact, that it has meaning for us. This is also what we
mean by understanding the word cat. But it is easier to understand
the word cat, because the resemblances between different cats are
of a sort which causes even animals to have a uniform reaction to all
cats. When we come to algebra, and have to operate with _x_ and _y_,
there is a natural desire to know what _x_ and _y_ really are. That,
at least, was my feeling: I always thought the teacher knew what they
really were, but would not tell me. To understand even the simplest
formula in algebra, say (x + y) = x + 2xy + y, is to be able to
react to two sets of symbols in virtue of the form which they express,
and to perceive that the form is the same in both cases. This is a
very elaborate business, and it is no wonder that boys and girls find
algebra a bugbear. But there is no novelty _in principle_ after the
first elementary perceptions of form. And perception of form consists
merely in reacting alike to two stimuli which are alike in form but
very different in other respects. For, when we can do that, we can say,
on the appropriate occasion, that is a triangle; and this is enough
to satisfy the examiner that we know what a triangle is, unless he is
so old-fashioned as to expect us to reproduce the verbal definition,
which is of course a far easier matter, in which, with patience, we
might teach even a parrot to succeed.

The meanings of complex mathematical symbols are always fixed by rules
in relation to the meaning of simpler symbols; thus their meanings are
analogous to those of sentences, not to those of single words. What was
said earlier about the understanding of sentences applies, therefore,
to any group of symbols which, in mathematics, will be declared to have
the same meaning as another group, or part of that meaning.

We may sum up this discussion by saying that mathematical inference
consists in attaching the same reactions to two different groups of
signs, whose meanings are fixed by convention in relation to their
constituent parts, whereas induction consists, first, in taking
something as a sign of something else, and later, when we have learned
to take A as a sign of B, in taking A as also a sign of C. Thus the
usual cases of induction and deduction are distinguished by the fact
that, in the former, the inference consists in taking one sign as
a sign of two different things, while in the latter the inference
consists in taking two different signs as signs of the same thing.
This statement is a little too antithetical to be taken as an exact
expression of the whole truth in the matter. What is true, however, is
that both kinds of inferences are concerned with the relation of a sign
to what it signifies, and therefore come within the scope of the law of
association.




CHAPTER VIII

KNOWLEDGE BEHAVIOURISTICALLY CONSIDERED


The word knowledge, like the word memory, is avoided by the
behaviourist. Nevertheless there is a phenomenon commonly called
knowledge, which is tested behaviouristically in examinations. I want
to consider this phenomenon in this chapter, with a view to deciding
whether there is anything in it that the behaviourist cannot deal with
adequately.

It will be remembered that, in Chapter II, we were led to the view that
knowledge is a characteristic of the complete process from stimulus to
reaction, or even, in the cases of sight and hearing, from an external
object to a reaction, the external object being connected with the
stimulus by a chain of physical causation in the outer world. Let us,
for the moment, leave on one side such cases as sight and hearing, and
confine ourselves, for the sake of definiteness, to knowledge derived
from touch.

We can observe touch producing reactions in quite humble animals, such
as worms and sea anemones. Are we to say that they have knowledge
of what they touch? In some sense, yes. Knowledge is a matter of
degree. When it is regarded in a purely behaviouristic manner, we
shall have to concede that it exists, in some degree, wherever there
is a characteristic reaction to a stimulus of a certain kind, and this
reaction does not occur in the absence of the right kind of stimulus.
In this sense, knowledge is indistinguishable from sensitivity,
which we considered in connection with perception. We might say that
a thermometer knows the temperature, and that a compass knows the
direction of the magnetic north. This is the only sense in which, on
grounds of observation, we can attribute knowledge to animals that
are low in the scale. Many animals, for example, hide themselves when
exposed to light, but as a rule not otherwise. In this, however, they
do not differ from a radiometer. No doubt the mechanism is different,
but the observed molar motion has similar characteristics. Wherever
there is a reflex, an animal may be said, in a sense, to know the
stimulus. This is, no doubt, not the usual sense of knowledge, but it
is the germ out of which knowledge in the usual sense has grown, and
without which no knowledge would be possible.

Knowledge in any more advanced sense is only possible as a result of
learning, in the sense considered in Chapter III. The rat that has
learned the maze knows the way out of it; the boy who has learned
certain verbal reactions knows the multiplication table. Between
these two cases there is no important difference. In both cases, we
say that the subject knows something because he reacts in a manner
advantageous to himself, in which he could not react before he had had
certain experiences. I do not think, however, that we ought to use such
a notion as advantageous in connection with knowledge. What we can
observe, for instance, with the rat in the maze, is violent activity
until the food is reached, followed by eating when it is reached; also
a gradual elimination of acts which do not lead to the food. Where this
sort of behaviour is observed, we may say that it is directed towards
the food, and that the animal knows the way to the food when he gets
to it by the shortest possible route.

But if this view is right, we cannot define any knowledge acquired
by learning except with reference to circumstances toward which an
animals activity is directed. We should say, popularly, that the
animal desires such circumstances. Desire, like knowledge,
is capable of a behaviouristic definition, and it would seem that
the two are correlative. Let us, then, spend a little time on the
behaviouristic treatment of desire.

The best example of desire, from this point of view, is hunger. The
stimulus to hunger is a certain well-ascertained bodily condition.
When in this condition, an animal moves restlessly; if he sees or
smells food, he moves in a manner which, in conditions to which he is
accustomed, would bring him to the food; if he reaches it, he eats it,
and if the quantity is sufficient he then becomes quiescent. This kind
of behaviour may be summarised by saying that a hungry animal desires
food. It is behaviour which is in various ways different from that of
inanimate matter, because restless movements persist until a certain
condition is realised. These movements may or may not be the best
adapted to realising the condition in question. Every one knows about
the pike that was put on one side of a glass partition, with minnows
on the other side. He continually bumped his nose on the glass, and
after six weeks gave up the attempt to catch them. When, after this,
the partition was removed, he still refrained from pursuing them. I do
not know whether the experiment was tried of leaving a possibility of
getting to the minnows by a roundabout route. To have learned to take a
roundabout route would perhaps have required a degree of intelligence
beyond the capacity of fishes; this is a matter, however, which offers
little difficulty to dogs or monkeys.

What applies to hunger applies equally to other forms of desire.
Every animal has a certain congenital apparatus of desires; that
is to say, in certain bodily conditions he is stimulated to restless
activities which tend towards the performance of some reflex, and
if a given situation is often repeated the animal arrives more and
more quickly at the performance of the reflex. This last, however, is
only true of the higher animals; in the lower, the whole process from
beginning to end is reflex, and can therefore only succeed in normal
circumstances. The higher animals, and more especially men, have a
larger proportion of learning and a smaller proportion of reflexes in
their behaviour, and are therefore better able to adapt themselves
to new circumstances. The helplessness of infants is a necessary
condition for the adaptability of adults; infants have fewer useful
reflexes than the young of animals, but have far more power of forming
useful habits, which can be adapted to circumstances and are not
fatally fixed from birth. This fact is intimately connected with the
superiority of the human intelligence above that of the brutes.

Desire is extremely subject to conditioning. If A is a primitive
desire and B has on many occasions been a means to A, B comes to be
desired in the same sense in which A was previously desired. It may
even happen, as in misers, that the desire for B completely displaces
the desire for A, so that B, when attained, is no longer used as a
means to A. This, however, is more or less exceptional. In general, the
desire for A persists, although the desire for B has a more or less
independent life.

The conditioning of primitive desires in human beings is the source
of much that distinguishes our life from that of animals. Most animals
only seek food when they are hungry; they may, then, die of starvation
before they find it. Men, on the contrary, must have early acquired
pleasure in hunting as an art, and must have set out on hunting
expeditions before they were actually hungry. A further stage in the
conditioning of hunger came with domestic animals; a still further
stage with agriculture. Nowadays, when a man sets to work to earn his
living, his activity is still connected, though not very directly,
with hunger and the other primitive desires that can be gratified by
means of money. These primitive desires are still, so to speak, the
power station, though their energy is widely distributed to all sorts
of undertakings that seem, at first sight, to have no connection with
them. Consider freedom and the political activities it inspires; this
is derivable, by conditioning, from the emotion of rage which Dr.
Watson observed in infants whose limbs are not free. Again we speak
of the fall of empires and of fallen women; this is connected with
the fear which infants display when left without support.

After this excursion into the realm of desire, we can now return to
knowledge, which, as we saw, is a term correlative to desire, and
applicable to another feature of the same kind of activity. We may say,
broadly, that a response to a stimulus of the kind involving desire
in the above sense shows knowledge if it leads by the quickest or
easiest route to the state of affairs which, in the above sense, is
behaviouristically the object of desire. Knowledge is thus a matter
of degree: the rat, during its progressive improvements in the maze,
is gradually acquiring more and more knowledge. Its intelligence
quotient, so far as that particular task is concerned, will be the
ratio of the time it took on the first trial to the time it takes now
to get out of the maze. Another point, if our definition of knowledge
is accepted, is, that there is no such thing as purely contemplative
knowledge: knowledge exists only in relation to the satisfaction of
desire, or, as we say, in the capacity to choose the right means to
achieve our ends.

But can such a definition as the above really stand? Does it represent
at all the sort of thing that would commonly be called knowledge? I
think it does in the main, but there is need of some discussion to make
this clear.

In some cases, the definition is obviously applicable. These are the
cases that are analogous to the rat in the maze, the consideration of
which led us to our definition. Do you know the way from Trafalgar
Square to St. Pancras? Yes, if you can walk it without taking any wrong
turnings. In practice, you can give verbal proof of such knowledge,
without actually having to walk the distance; but that depends upon
the correlation of names with streets, and is part of the process of
substituting words for things. There may, it is true, come doubtful
cases. I was once on a bus in Whitehall, and my neighbour asked What
street is this? I answered him, not without surprise at his ignorance.
He then said, What building is that? and I replied The Foreign
Office. To this he retorted, but I thought the Foreign Office was in
Downing Street. This time, it was his knowledge that surprised me.
Should we say that he knew where the Foreign Office is? The answer is
yes or no according to his purpose. From the point of view of sending a
letter to it, he knew; from the point of view of walking to it, he did
not know. He had, in fact, been a British Consul in South America, and
was in London for the first time.

But now let us come to cases less obviously within the scope of our
definition. The reader knows that Columbus crossed the ocean in
1492. What do we mean by saying that he knows this? We mean, no
doubt, primarily that writing down this statement is the way to pass
examinations, which is just as useful to us as getting out of the
maze is to the rat. But we do not mean only this. There is historical
evidence of the fact, at least I suppose there is. The historical
evidence consists of printed books and manuscripts. Certain rules have
been developed by historians as to the conditions in which statements
in books or manuscripts may be accepted as true, and the evidence in
our case is (I presume) in accordance with these rules. Historical
facts often have importance in the present; for example, wills, or
laws not yet repealed. The rules for weighing historical evidence
are such as will, in general bring out self-consistent results. Two
results are self-consistent when, in relation to a desire to which both
are relevant, they enjoin the same action, or actions which can form
part of the one movement towards the goal. At Coton, near Cambridge,
there is (or was in my time) a signpost with two arms pointing in
diametrically opposite directions, and each arm said To Cambridge.
This was a perfect example of self-contradiction, since the two arms
made statements representing exactly opposite actions. And this case
illustrates why self-contradiction is to be avoided. But the avoidance
of self-contradiction makes great demands upon us; Hegel and Bradley
imagined that we could know the nature of the universe by means of
this principle alone. In this they were pretty certainly mistaken,
but nevertheless a great deal of our knowledge depends upon this
principle to a greater or less extent.

Most of our knowledge is like that in a cookery book, maxims to be
followed when occasion arises, but not useful at every moment of every
day. Since knowledge may be useful at any time, we get gradually,
through conditioning, a general desire for knowledge. The learned man
who is helpless in practical affairs is analogous to the miser, in that
he has become absorbed in a means. It should be observed, also, that
knowledge is neutral as among different purposes. If you know that
arsenic is a poison, that enables you equally to avoid it if you wish
to remain in health, and to take it if you wish to commit suicide. You
cannot judge from a mans conduct in relation to arsenic whether he
knows that it is a poison or not, unless you know his desires. He may
be tired of life, but avoid arsenic because he has been told that it
is a good medicine; in this case, his avoidance of it is evidence of
_lack_ of knowledge.

But to return to Columbus: surely, the reader will say, Columbus really
did cross the Atlantic in 1492, and that is why we call this statement
knowledge. This is the definition of truth as correspondence with
fact. I think there is an important element of correctness in this
definition, but it is an element to be elicited at a later stage,
after we have discussed the physical world. And it has the defect--as
pragmatists have urged--that there seems no way of getting at facts
and comparing them with our beliefs: all that we ever reach consists of
other beliefs. I do not offer our present behaviouristic and pragmatic
definition of knowledge as the only possible one, but I offer it as
the one to which we are led if we wish to regard knowledge as something
causally important, to be exemplified in our reactions to stimuli. This
is the appropriate point of view when we are studying man from without,
as we have been doing hitherto.

There is, however, within the behaviourist philosophy, one important
addition to be made to our definition. We began this chapter with
sensitivity, but we went on to the consideration of learned reactions,
where the learning depended upon association. But there is another
sort of learning--at least it is _prima facie_ another sort--which
consists of increase of sensitivity. All sensitivity in animals and
human beings must count as a sort of knowledge; that is to say, if an
animal behaves, in the presence of a stimulus of a certain kind, as it
would not behave in the absence of that stimulus then, in an important
sense, it has knowledge as regards the stimulus. Now it appears that
practice--_e.g._ in music--very greatly increases sensitivity. We
learn to react differently to stimuli which only differ sightly; what
is more, we learn to react to differences. A violin-player can react
with great precision to an interval of a fifth; if the interval is very
slightly greater or less, his behaviour in tuning is influenced by the
difference from a fifth. And as we have already had occasion to notice,
we become, through practice, increasingly sensitive to form. All this
increased sensitivity must count as increase of knowledge.

But in saying this we are not saying anything inconsistent with our
earlier definition of knowledge. Sensitivity is essential to choosing
the right reaction in many cases. To take the cookery-book again; when
it says take a pinch of salt, a good cook knows how much to take,
which is an instance of sensitivity. Accurate scientific observation,
which is of great practical importance, depends upon sensitivity. And
so do many of our practical dealings with other people: if we cannot
feel their moods, we shall be always getting at cross purposes.

The extent to which sensitivity is improved by practice is astonishing.
Town-bred people do not know whether the weather is warm or cold until
they read the weather reports in the paper. An entomologist perceives
vastly more beetles in the course of a country walk than other people
do. The subtlety with which connoisseurs can distinguish among wines
and cigars is the despair of youths who wish to become men of the
world. Whether this increase of sensitivity can be accounted for by
the law of association, I do not know. In many cases, probably, it can,
but I think sensitiveness to form, which is the essential element in
the more difficult forms of abstract thought as well as in many other
matters, cannot be regarded as derivative from the law of association,
but is more analogous to the development of a new sense. I should
therefore include improvement in sensitivity as an independent element
in the advancement of knowledge. But I do so with some hesitation.

The above discussion does not pretend to cover the whole of the ground
that has to be covered in discussing the definition of knowledge.
There are other points of view, which are also necessary to a complete
consideration of the question. But these must wait until, after
considering the physical world, we come to the discussion of man as
viewed from within.




PART II

THE PHYSICAL WORLD




CHAPTER IX

THE STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM


In all that we have said hitherto on the subject of man from without,
we have taken a common-sense view of the material world. We have not
asked ourselves: what _is_ matter? Is there such a thing, or is the
outside world composed of stuff of a different kind? And what light
does a correct theory of the physical world throw upon the process of
perception? These are questions which we must attempt to answer in the
following chapters. And in doing so the science upon which we must
depend is physics. Modern physics, however, is very abstract, and by
no means easy to explain in simple language. I shall do my best, but
the reader must not blame me too severely if, here and there, he finds
some slight difficulty or obscurity. The physical world, both through
the theory of relativity and through the most recent doctrines as to
the structure of the atom, has become very different from the world
of everyday life, and also from that of scientific materialism of the
eighteenth-century variety. No philosophy can ignore the revolutionary
changes in our physical ideas that the men of science have found
necessary; indeed it may be said that all traditional philosophies have
to be discarded, and we have to start afresh with as little respect
as possible for the systems of the past. Our age has penetrated more
deeply into the nature of things than any earlier age, and it would be
a false modesty to over-estimate what can still be learned from the
metaphysicians of the seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.

What physics has to say about matter, and the physical world generally,
from the standpoint of the philosopher, comes under two main heads:
first, the structure of the atom; secondly, the theory of relativity.
The former was, until recently, the less revolutionary philosophically,
though the more revolutionary in physics. Until 1925, theories of the
structure of the atom were based upon the old conception of matter as
indestructible substance, although this was already regarded as no
more than a convenience. Now, owing chiefly to two German physicists,
Heisenberg and Schrdinger, the last vestiges of the old solid atom
have melted away, and matter has become as ghostly as anything in
a spiritualist seance. But before tackling these newer views, it
is necessary to understand the much simpler theory which they have
displaced. This theory does not, except here and there, take account
of the new doctrines on fundamentals that have been introduced by
Einstein, and it is much easier to understand than relativity. It
explains so much of the facts that, whatever may happen, it must remain
a stepping-stone to a complete theory of the structure of the atom;
indeed, the newer theories have grown directly out of it, and could
hardly have arisen in any other way. We must therefore spend a little
time in giving a bare outline, which is the less to be regretted as the
theory is in itself fascinating.

The theory that matter consists of atoms, _i.e._ of little bits
that cannot be divided, is due to the Greeks, but with them it was
only a speculation. The evidence for what is called the atomic
theory was derived from chemistry, and the theory itself, in its
nineteenth-century form, was mainly due to Dalton. It was found that
there were a number of elements, and that other substances were
compounds of these elements. Compound substances were found to be
composed of molecules, each molecule being composed of atoms of one
substance combined with atoms of another or of the same. A molecule
of water consists of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen; they
can be separated by electrolysis. It was supposed, until radio-activity
was discovered, that atoms were indestructible and unchangeable.
Substances which were not compounds were called elements. The
Russian chemist Mendeleev discovered that the elements can be arranged
in a series by means of progressive changes in their properties; in his
time, there were gaps in this series, but most of them have since been
filled by the discovery of new elements. If all the gaps were filled,
there would be 92 elements; actually the number known is 87, or,
including three about which there is still some doubt, 90. The place of
an element in this series is called its atomic number. Hydrogen is
the first, and has the atomic number 1; helium is the second, and has
the atomic number 2; uranium is the last, and has the atomic number 92.
Perhaps in the stars there are elements with higher atomic numbers, but
so far none has been actually observed.

The discovery of radio-activity necessitated new views as to atoms.
It was found that an atom of one radio-active element can break up into
an atom of another element and an atom of helium, and that there is
also another way in which it can change. It was found also that there
can be different elements having the same place in the series; these
are called isotopes. For example, when radium disintegrates it gives
rise, in the end, to a kind of lead, but this is somewhat different
from the lead found in lead-mines. A great many elements have been
shown by Dr. F. W. Aston to be really mixtures of isotopes, which can
be sorted out by ingenious methods. All this, but more especially the
transmutation of elements in radio-activity, led to the conclusion that
what had been called atoms were really complex structures, which
could change into atoms of a different sort by losing a part. After
various attempts to imagine the structure of an atom, physicists were
led to accept the view of Sir Ernest Rutherford, which was further
developed by Niels Bohr.

In this theory, which, in spite of recent developments, remains
substantially correct, all matter is composed of two sorts of units,
electrons and protons. All electrons are exactly alike, and all protons
are exactly alike. All protons carry a certain amount of positive
electricity, and all electrons carry an equal amount of negative
electricity. But the mass of a proton is about 1835 times that of an
electron: it takes 1835 electrons to weigh as much as one proton.
Protons repel each other, and electrons repel each other, but an
electron and a proton attract each other. Every atom is a structure
consisting of electrons and protons. The hydrogen atom, which is the
simplest, consists of one proton with one electron going round it as
a planet goes round the sun. The electron may be lost, and the proton
left alone; the atom is then positively electrified. But when it has
its electron, it is, as a whole, electrically neutral, since the
positive electricity of the proton is exactly balanced by the negative
electricity of the electron.

The second element, helium, has already a much more complicated
structure. It has a nucleus, consisting of four protons, and two
electrons very close together, and in its normal state it has two
planetary electrons going round the nucleus. But it may lose either or
both of these, and it is then positively electrified.

All the latter elements consist, like helium, of a nucleus composed of
protons and electrons, and a number of planetary electrons going round
the nucleus. There are more protons than electrons in the nucleus,
but the excess is balanced by the planetary electrons when the atom
is unelectrified. The number of protons in the nucleus gives the
atomic weight of the element: the excess of protons over electrons
in the nucleus gives the atomic number, which is also the number of
planetary electrons when the atom is unelectrified. Uranium, the last
element, has 238 protons and 146 electrons in the nucleus, and when
unelectrified it has 92 planetary electrons. The arrangement of the
planetary electrons in atoms other than hydrogen is not accurately
known, but it is clear that, in some sense, they form different rings,
those in the outer rings being more easily lost than those nearer the
nucleus.

I come now to what Bohr added to the theory of atoms as developed
by Rutherford. This was a most curious discovery, introducing, in a
new field, a certain type of discontinuity which was already known
to be exhibited by some other natural processes. No adage had seemed
more respectable in philosophy than natura non facit saltum, Nature
makes no jumps. But if there is one thing more than another that the
experience of a long life has taught me, it is that Latin tags always
express falsehoods; and so it has proved in this case. Apparently
Nature does make jumps, not only now and then, but whenever a body
emits light, as well as on certain other occasions. The German
physicist Planck was the first to demonstrate the necessity of jumps.
He was considering how bodies radiate heat when they are warmer
than their surroundings. Heat, as has long been known, consists of
vibrations, which are distinguished by their frequency, _i.e._ by the
number of vibrations per second. Planck showed that, for vibrations
having a given frequency, not all amounts of energy are possible, but
only those having to the frequency a ratio which is a certain quantity
_h_ multiplied by 1 or 2 or 3 or some other whole number, in practice
always a small whole number. The quantity _h_ is known as Plancks
constant; it has turned out to be involved practically everywhere
where measurement is delicate enough to know whether it is involved or
not. It is such a small quantity that, except where measurement can
reach a very high degree of accuracy, the departure from continuity is
not appreciable.[7]

      [7] The dimensions of _h_ are those of action, _i.e._
          energy multiplied by time, or moment of momentum, or
          mass multiplied by length multiplied by velocity. Its
          magnitude is about 6.55  10.27 erg secs.

Bohrs great discovery was that this same quantity _h_ is involved
in the orbits of the planetary electrons in atoms, and that it
limits the possible orbits in ways for which nothing in Newtonian
dynamics had prepared us, and for which so far, there is nothing in
relativity-dynamics to account. According to Newtonian principles, an
electron ought to be able to go round the nucleus in any circle with
the nucleus in the centre, or in any ellipse with the nucleus in a
focus; among possible orbits, it would select one or another according
to its direction and velocity. But in fact only certain out of all
these orbits occur. Those that occur are among those that are possible
on Newtonian principles, but are only an infinitesimal selection from
among these. It will simplify the explanation if we confine ourselves,
as Bohr did at first, to circular orbits; moreover we will consider
only the hydrogen atom, which has one planetary electron and a nucleus
consisting of one proton. To define the circular orbits that are
found to be possible, we proceed as follows: multiply the mass of the
electron by the circumference of its orbit, and this again by the
velocity of the electron; the result will always be _h_ or 2_h_, or
3_h_, or some other small exact multiple of _h_, where _h_, as before,
is Plancks constant. There is thus a smallest possible orbit, in
which the above product is _h_; the radius of the next orbit, in which
the above produce is 2_h_, will have a length four times this minimum;
the next, nine times; the next, sixteen times; and so on through the
square numbers (_i.e._ those got by multiplying a number by itself).
Apparently no other circular orbits than these are possible in the
hydrogen atom. Elliptic orbits are possible, and these again introduce
exact multiples of _h_: but we need not, for our purposes, concern
ourselves with them.

When a hydrogen atom is left to itself, if the electron is in the
minimum orbit it will continue to rotate in that orbit so long as
nothing from outside disturbs it; but if the electron is in any of
the larger possible orbits, it may sooner or later jump suddenly to a
smaller orbit, either the minimum or one of the intermediate possible
orbits. So long as the electron does not change its orbit, the atom
does not radiate energy, but when the electron jumps to a smaller
orbit, the atom loses energy, which is radiated out in the form of a
light-wave. This light-wave is always such that its energy divided by
its frequency is exactly _h_. The atom may absorb energy from without,
and it does so by the electron jumping to a larger orbit. It may then
afterwards, when the external source of energy is removed, jump back to
the smaller orbit; this is the cause of fluorescence, since, in doing
so, the atom gives out energy in the form of light.

The same principles, with greater mathematical complications, apply
to the other elements. There is, however, with some of the latest
elements, a phenomenon which cannot have any analogue in hydrogen, and
that is radio-activity. When an atom is radio-active, it emits rays of
three kinds, called respectively -rays, -rays, and -rays. Of these,
the -rays are analogous to light, but of much higher frequencies,
or shorter wave-lengths; we need not further concern ourselves with
them. The -rays and -rays, on the contrary, are important as our
chief source of knowledge concerning the nuclei of atoms. It is found
that the -rays consist of helium nuclei, while the -rays consist
of electrons. Both come out of the nucleus, since the atom after
radio-activity disruption is a different element from what it was
before. But no one knows just why the nucleus disintegrates when it
does, nor why, in a piece of radium, for example, some atoms break down
while others do not.

The three principal sources of our knowledge concerning atoms have been
the light they emit, X-rays and radio-activity. As everyone knows,
when the light emitted by a glowing gas is passed through a prism, it
is found to consist of well-defined lines of different colours, which
are characteristic for each element, and constitute what is called its
spectrum. The spectrum extends beyond the range of visible light,
both into the infra-red and into the ultra-violet. In the latter
direction, it extends right into the region of X-rays, which are only
ultra-ultra-violet light. By means of crystals, it has been found
possible to study X-ray spectra as exactly as those of ordinary light.
The great merit of Bohrs theory was that it explained why elements
have the spectra they do have, which had, before, been a complete
mystery. In the cases of hydrogen and positively electrified helium,
the explanation, particularly as extended by the German physicist
Sommerfeld, gave the most minute numerical agreement between theory
and observation; in other cases, mathematical difficulties made
this completeness impossible, but there was every reason to think
that the same principles were adequate. This was the main reason for
accepting Bohrs theory; and certainly it was a very strong one. It
was found that visible light enabled us to study the outer rings of
planetary electrons, X-rays enabled us to study the inner rings,
and radio-activity enabled us to study the nucleus. For the latter
purpose, there are also other methods, more particularly Rutherfords
bombardment, which aims at breaking up nuclei by firing projectiles
at them, and sometimes succeeds in making a hit in spite of the
smallness of the target.

The theory of atomic structure that has just been outlined, like
everything in theoretical physics, is capable of expression in
mathematical formul; but like many things in theoretical physics, it
is also capable of expression in the form of an imaginative picture.
But here, as always, it is necessary to distinguish sharply between
the mathematical symbols and the pictorial words. The symbols are
pretty sure to be right, or nearly so; the imaginative picture, on
the other hand, should not be taken too seriously. When we consider
the nature of the evidence upon which the above theory of the atom is
based, we can see that the attempt to make a picture of what goes on
has led us to be far more concrete than we have any right to be. If
we want to assert only what we have good reason to believe, we shall
have to abandon the attempt to be concrete about what goes on in the
atom, and say merely something like this: An atom with its electrons
is a system characterised by certain integers, all small, and all
capable of changing independently. These integers are the multiples of
_h_ involved. When any of them changes to a smaller integer, energy
of a definite amount is emitted, and its frequency will be obtained
by dividing the energy of _h_. When any of the integers concerned
changes to a larger integer, energy is absorbed, and again the amount
absorbed is definite. But we cannot know what goes on when the atom is
neither absorbing nor radiating energy, since then it has no effects in
surrounding regions; consequently all evidence as to atoms is as to
their changes, not as to their steady states.

The point is not that the facts do not fit with the hypothesis of
the atom as a planetary system. There are, it is true, certain
difficulties which afford empirical grounds for the newer theory which
has superseded Bohrs, and which we shall shortly consider. But even
if no such grounds existed, it would be obvious that Bohrs theory
states more than we have a right to infer from what we can observe. Of
theories that state so much, there must be an infinite number that are
compatible with what is known, and it is only what all of these have in
common that we are really entitled to assert. Suppose your knowledge
of Great Britain were entirely confined to observing the people and
goods that enter and leave the ports; you could, in that case, invent
many theories as to the interior of Great Britain, all of which would
agree with all known facts. This is an exact analogy. If you delimit
in the physical universe any region, large or small, not containing a
scientific observer, all scientific observers will have exactly the
same experiences whatever happens inside this region, provided it
does not affect the flow of energy across the boundary of the region.
And so, if the region contains one atom, any two theories which give
the same results as to the energy that the atom radiates or absorbs
are empirically indistinguishable, and there can be no reason except
simplicity for preferring one of them to the other. On this ground,
even if on no other, prudence compels us to seek a more abstract theory
of the atom than that which we owe to Rutherford and Bohr.

The newer theory has been put forward mainly by two physicists already
mentioned, Heisenberg and Schrdinger, in forms which look different,
but are in fact mathematically equivalent. It is as yet an impossible
task to describe this theory in simple language, but something can be
said to show its philosophical bearing. Broadly speaking, it describes
the atom by means of the radiations that come out of it. In Bohrs
theory, the planetary electrons are supposed to describe orbits over
and over again while the atom is not radiating; in the newer theory,
we say nothing at all as to what happens at these times. The aim
is to confine the theory to what is empirically verifiable, namely
radiations; as to what there is where the radiations come from, we
cannot tell, and it is scientifically unnecessary to speculate. The
theory requires modifications in our conception of space, of a sort not
yet quite clear. It also has the consequence that we cannot identify an
electron at one time with an electron at another, if in the interval,
the atom has radiated energy. The electron ceases altogether to have
the properties of a thing as conceived by common sense; it is merely
a region from which energy may radiate.

On the subject of discontinuity, there is disagreement between
Schrdinger and other physicists. Most of them maintain that quantum
changes--_i.e._ the changes that occur in an atom when it radiates or
absorbs energy--must be discontinuous. Schrdinger thinks otherwise.
This is a matter in debate among experts, as to which it would be rash
to venture an opinion. Probably it will be decided one way or other
before very long.

The main point for the philosopher in the modern theory is the
disappearance of matter as a thing. It has been replaced by
emanations from a locality--the sort of influences that characterise
haunted rooms in ghost stories. As we shall see in the next chapter,
the theory of relativity leads to a similar destruction of the solidity
of matter, by a different line of argument. All sorts of events happen
in the physical world, but tables and chairs, the sun and moon,
and even our daily bread, have become pale abstractions, mere laws
exhibited in the successions of events which radiate from certain
regions.




CHAPTER X

RELATIVITY


We have seen that the world of the atom is a world of revolution rather
than evolution: the electron which has been moving in one orbit hops
quite suddenly into another, so that the motion is what is called
discontinuous, that is to say, the electron is first in one place and
then in another, without having passed over any intermediate places.
This sounds like magic, and there may be some way of avoiding such a
disconcerting hypothesis. At any rate, nothing of the sort seems to
happen in the regions where there are no electrons and protons. In
these regions, so far as we can discover, there is continuity, that
is to say, everything goes by gradual transitions, not by jumps. The
regions in which there are no electrons and protons may be called
ther or empty space as you prefer: the difference is only verbal.
The theory of relativity is especially concerned with what goes on in
these regions, as opposed to what goes on where there are electrons
and protons. Apart from the theory of relativity, what we know about
these regions is that waves travel across them, and that these waves,
when they are waves of light or electromagnetism (which are identical),
behave in a certain fashion set forth by Maxwell in certain formul
called Maxwells equations. When I say we know this, I am saying
more than is strictly correct, because all we know is what happens
when the waves reach our bodies. It is as if we could not see the sea,
but could only see the people disembarking at Dover, and inferred the
waves from the fact that the people looked green. It is obvious, in any
case, that we can only know so much about the waves as is involved in
their having such-and-such causes at one end and such-and-such effects
at the other. What can be inferred in this way will be, at best,
something wholly expressible in terms of mathematical structure. We
must not think of the waves as being necessarily in the ther or in
anything else; they are to be thought of merely as progressive periodic
processes, whose laws are more or less known, but whose intrinsic
character is not known and never can be.

The theory of relativity has arisen from the study of what goes on in
the regions where there are no electrons and protons. While the study
of the atom has led us to discontinuities, relativity has produced
a completely continuous theory of the intervening medium--far more
continuous than any theory formerly imagined. At the moment, these
two points of view stand more or less opposed to each other, but no
doubt before long they will be reconciled. There is not, even now, any
logical contradiction between them; there is only a fairly complete
lack of connection.

For philosophy, far the most important thing about the theory of
relativity is the abolition of the one cosmic time and the one
persistent space, and the substitution of space-time in place of both.
This is a change of quite enormous importance, because it alters
fundamentally our notion of the structure of the physical world, and
has, I think, repercussions in psychology. It would be useless, in our
day, to talk about philosophy without explaining this matter. Therefore
I shall make the attempt, in spite of some difficulty.

Common-sense and pre-relativity physicists believed that, if two events
happen in different places, there must always be a definite answer, in
theory, to the question whether they were simultaneous. This is found
to be a mistake. Let us suppose two persons A and B a long way apart,
each provided with a mirror and means of sending out light-signals. The
events that happen to A still have a perfectly definite time-order, and
so have those that happen to B; the difficulty comes in connecting As
time with Bs. Suppose A sends a flash to B, Bs mirror reflects it,
and it returns to A after a certain time. If A is on the earth and B
on the sun, the time will be about sixteen minutes. We shall naturally
say that the time when B received the light-signal is half way between
the times when A sent it out and received it back. But this definition
turns out to be not unambiguous; it will depend upon how A and B are
moving relatively to each other. The more this difficulty is examined,
the more insuperable it is seen to be. Anything that happens to A after
he sends out the flash and before he gets it back is neither definitely
before nor definitely after nor definitely simultaneous with the
arrival of the flash at B. To this extent, there is no unambiguous way
of correlating times in different places.

The notion of a place is also quite vague. Is London a place? But
the earth is rotating. Is the earth a place? But it is going round
the sun. Is the sun a place? But it is moving relatively to the
stars. At best you could talk of a place at a given time; but then it
is ambiguous what is a given time, unless you confine yourself to one
place. So the notion of place evaporates.

We naturally think of the universe as being in one state at one time
and in another at another. This is a mistake. There is no cosmic time,
and so we cannot speak of the state of the universe at a given time.
And similarly we cannot speak unambiguously of the distance between
two bodies at a given time. If we take the time appropriate to one of
the two bodies, we shall get one estimate; if the time of the other,
another. This makes the Newtonian law of gravitation ambiguous, and
shows that it needs restatement, independently of empirical evidence.

Geometry also goes wrong. A straight line, for example, is supposed to
be a certain track in space whose parts all exist simultaneously. We
shall now find that what is a straight line for one observer is not a
straight line for another. Therefore geometry ceases to be separable
from physics.

The observer need not be a mind, but may be a photographic plate.
The peculiarities of the observer in this region belong to physics,
not to psychology.

So long as we continue to think in terms of bodies moving, and try to
adjust this way of thinking to the new ideas by successive corrections,
we shall only get more and more confused. The only way to get clear is
to make a fresh start, with _events_ instead of bodies. In physics, an
event is anything which, according to the old notions, would be said
to have both a date and a place. An explosion, a flash of lightning,
the starting of a light-wave from an atom, the arrival of the
light-wave at some other body, any of these would be an event. Some
strings of events make up what we regard as the history of one body;
some make up the course of one light-wave; and so on. The unity of a
body is a unity of history--it is like the unity of a tune, which takes
time to play, and does not exist whole in any one moment. What exists
at any one moment is only what we call an event. It may be that the
word event, as used in physics, cannot be quite identified with the
same word as used in psychology; for the present we are concerned
with events as the constituents of physical processes, and need not
trouble ourselves about events in psychology.

The events in the physical world have relations to each other which
are of the sort that have led to the notions of space and time. They
have relations of order, so that we can say that one event is nearer
to a second than to a third. In this way we can arrive at the notion
of the neighbourhood of an event: it will consist roughly speaking
of all the events that are very near the given event. When we say that
neighbouring events have a certain relation, we shall mean that the
nearer two events are to each other, the more nearly they have this
relation, and that they approximate to having it without limit as they
are taken nearer and nearer together.

Two neighbouring events have a measurable quantitative relation
called interval, which is sometimes analogous to distance in space,
sometimes to lapse of time. In the former case it is called space-like,
in the latter time-like. The interval between two events is time-like
when one body might be present at both--for example, when both are
parts of the history of your body. The interval is space-like in the
contrary case. In the marginal case between the two, the interval is
zero; this happens when both are parts of one light-ray.

The interval between two neighbouring events is something objective,
in the sense that any two careful observers will arrive at the same
estimate of it. They will not arrive at the same estimate for the
distance in space or the lapse of time between the two events, but the
interval is a genuine physical fact, the same for all. If a body can
travel freely from one event to the other, the interval between the two
events will be the same as the time between them as measured by a clock
travelling with the body. If such a journey is physically impossible,
the interval will be the same as the distance as estimated by an
observer to whom the two events are simultaneous. But the interval is
only definite when the two events are very near together; otherwise
the interval depends upon the route chosen for travelling from the one
event to the other.

Four numbers are needed to fix the position of an event in the world;
these correspond to the time and the three dimensions of space in the
old reckoning. These four numbers are called the co-ordinates of the
event. They may be assigned on any principle which gives neighbouring
co-ordinates to neighbouring events; subject to this condition, they
are merely conventional. For example, suppose an aeroplane has had an
accident. You can fix the position of the accident by four numbers:
latitude, longitude, altitude above sea-level, and Greenwich Mean Time.
But you cannot fix the position of the explosion in space-time by means
of less than four numbers.

Everything in relativity-theory goes (in a sense) from next to
next; there are no direct relations between distant events, such as
distance in time or space. And of course there are no forces acting
at a distance; in fact, except as a convenient fiction, there are
no forces at all. Bodies take the course which is easiest at each
moment, according to the character of space-time in the particular
region where they are; this course is called a _geodesic_.

Now it will be observed that I have been speaking freely of bodies and
motion, although I said that bodies were merely certain strings of
events. That being so, it is of course necessary to say what strings of
events constitute bodies, since not all continuous strings of events
do so, not even all geodesics. Until we have defined the sort of thing
that makes a body, we cannot legitimately speak of motion, since this
involves the presence of one body on different occasions. We must
therefore set to work to define what we mean by the persistence of a
body, and how a string of events constituting a body differs from one
which does not. This topic will occupy the next chapter.

But it may be useful, as a preliminary, to teach our imagination to
work in accordance with the new ideas. We must give up what Whitehead
admirably calls the pushiness of matter. We naturally think of an
atom as being like a billiard-ball; we should do better to think of it
as like a ghost, which has no pushiness and yet can make you fly. We
have to change our notions both of substance and of cause. To say that
an atom persists is like saying that a tune persists. If a tune takes
five minutes to play, we do not conceive of it as a single thing which
exists throughout that time, but as a series of notes, so related as
to form a unity. In the case of the tune, the unity is sthetic; in
the case of the atom, it is causal. But when I say causal I do not
mean exactly what the word naturally conveys. There must be no idea of
compulsion or force, neither the force of contact which we imagine
we see between billiard-balls nor the action at a distance which
was formerly supposed to constitute gravitation. There is merely an
observed law of succession from next to next. An event at one moment
is succeeded by an event at a neighbouring moment, which, to the first
order of small quantities, can be calculated from the earlier event.
This enables us to construct a string of events, each, approximately,
growing out of a slightly earlier event according to an intrinsic law.
Outside influences only affect the second order of small quantities. A
string of events connected, in this way, by an approximate intrinsic
law of development is called one piece of matter. This is what I mean
by saying that the unity of a piece of matter is causal. I shall
explain this notion more fully in later chapters.




CHAPTER XI

CAUSAL LAWS IN PHYSICS


In the last chapter we spoke about the substitution of space-time for
space and time, and the effect which this has had in substituting
strings of events for things conceived as substances. In this chapter
we will deal with cause and effect as they appear in the light of
modern science. It is at least as difficult to purge our imagination
of irrelevances in this matter as in regard to substance. The
old-fashioned notion of cause appeared in dynamics as force. We still
speak of forces just as we still speak of the sunrise, but we recognise
that this is nothing but a convenient way of speaking, in the one case
as in the other.

Causation is deeply embedded in language and common sense. We say that
people build houses or make roads: to build and to make are both
notions involving causality. We say that a man is powerful, meaning
that his volitions are causes over a wide range. Some examples of
causation seem to us quite natural, others less so. It seems natural
that our muscles should obey our will, and only reflection makes us
perceive the necessity of finding an explanation of this phenomenon. It
seems natural that when you hit a billiard-ball with a cue it moves.
When we see a horse pulling a cart, or a heavy object being dragged by
a rope, we _feel_ as if we understood all about it. It is events of
this sort that have given rise to the common-sense belief in causes and
forces.

But as a matter of fact the world is incredibly more complicated than
it seems to common sense. When we think we understand a process--I mean
by we the non-reflective part in each of us--what really happens
is that there is some sequence of events so familiar through past
experience that at each stage we expect the next stage. The whole
process seems to us peculiarly intelligible when human desires enter
in, for example, in watching a game: what the ball does and what the
players do seem natural, and we feel as if we quite understood how
the stages succeed each other. We thus arrive at the notion of what is
called necessary sequence. The text-books say that A is the cause of
B if A is necessarily followed by B. This notion of necessity seems
to be purely anthropomorphic, and not based upon anything that is a
discoverable feature of the world. Things happen according to certain
rules; the rules can be generalised, but in the end remain brute facts.
Unless the rules are concealed conventions or definitions, no reason
can be given why they should not be completely different.

To say that A is necessarily followed by B is thus to say no more
than that there is some general rule, exemplified in a very large
number of observed instances, and falsified in none, according to which
events such as A are followed by events such as B. We must not have any
notion of compulsion, as if the cause _forced_ the effect to happen.
A good test for the imagination in this respect is the reversibility
of causal laws. We can just as often infer backwards as forwards.
When you get a letter, you are justified in inferring that somebody
wrote it, but you do not feel that your receiving it _compelled_
the sender to write it. The notion of compulsion is just as little
applicable to effects as to causes. To say that causes compel effects
is as misleading as to say that effects compel causes. Compulsion is
anthropomorphic: a man is compelled to do something when he wishes to
do the opposite, but except where human or animal wishes come in the
notion of compulsion is inapplicable. Science is concerned merely with
what happens, not with what _must_ happen.

When we look for invariable rules of sequence in nature, we find that
they are not such as common sense sets up. Common sense says: thunder
follows lightning, waves at sea follow wind, and so on. Rules of
this sort are indispensable in practical life, but in science they
are all only approximate. If there is any finite interval of time,
however short, between the cause and the effect, something may happen
to prevent the effect from occurring. Scientific laws can only be
expressed in differential equations. This means that, although you
cannot tell what may happen after a finite time, you can say that, if
you make the time shorter and shorter, what will happen will be more
and more nearly according to such-and-such a rule. To take a very
simple case: I am now in this room; you cannot tell where I shall be
in another second, because a bomb may explode and blow me sky-high,
but if you take any two small fragments of my body which are now very
close together, you can be sure that, after _some_ very short finite
time, they will still be very close together. If a second is not short
enough, you must take a shorter time; you cannot tell in advance how
short a time you may have to take, but you may feel fairly certain that
there is a short enough time.

The laws of sequence in physics, apart from quantum phenomena, are of
two sorts, which appeared in traditional dynamics as laws of velocity
and laws of acceleration. In a very short time, the velocity of a
body alters very little, and if the time is taken short enough, the
change of velocity diminishes without limit. This is what, in the last
chapter, we called an intrinsic causal law. Then there is the effect
of the outer world, as it appeared in traditional dynamics, which
is shown in acceleration. The small change which does occur in the
velocity in a short time is attributed to surrounding bodies, because
it is found to vary as they vary, and to vary according to ascertained
laws. Thus we think of surrounding bodies as exerting an influence,
which we call force, though this remains as mysterious as the
influence of the stars in astrology.

Einsteins theory of gravitation has done away with this conception in
so far as gravitational forces are concerned. In this theory, a planet
moving round the sun is moving in the nearest approach to a straight
line that the neighbourhood permits. The neighbourhood is supposed to
be non-Euclidean, that is to say, to contain no straight lines such
as Euclid imagined. If a body is moving freely, as the planets do, it
observes a certain rule. Perhaps the simplest way to state this rule
is as follows: Suppose you take any two events which happen on the
earth, and you measure the time between them by ideally accurate clocks
which move with the earth. Suppose some traveller on a magic carpet had
meanwhile cruised about the universe, leaving the earth at the time of
the first event and returning at the time of the second. By his clocks
the period elapsed will be less than by the terrestial clocks. This is
what is meant by saying that the earth moves in a geodesic, which
is the nearest approach to a straight line to be found in the region
in which we live. All this is, so to speak, geometrical, and involves
no forces. It is not the sun that makes the earth go round, but the
nature of space-time where the earth is.

Even this is not quite correct. Space-time does not make the earth go
round the sun; it makes us _say_ the earth goes round the sun. That is
to say, it makes this the shortest way of describing what occurs. We
could describe it in other language, which would be equally correct,
but less convenient.

The abolition of force in astronomy is perhaps connected with the
fact that astronomy depends only upon the sense of sight. On the
earth, we push and pull, we touch things, and we experience muscular
strains. This all gives us a notion of force, but this notion is
anthropomorphic. To imagine the laws of motion of heavenly bodies,
think of the motions of objects in a mirror; they may move very fast,
although in the mirror world there are no forces.

What we really have to substitute for force is laws of correlation.
Events can be collected in groups by their correlations. This is
all that is true in the old notion of causality. And this is not a
postulate or category, but an observed fact--lucky, not necessary.

As we suggested before, it is these correlations of events that lead
to the definition of permanent things. There is no essential
difference, as regards substantiality, between an electron and a
light-ray. Each is really a string of events or of sets of events. In
the case of the light-ray, we have no temptation to think otherwise.
But in the case of the electron, we think of it as a single persistent
entity. There _may_ be such an entity, but we can have no evidence that
there is. What we can discover is (_a_) a group of events spreading
outwards from a centre--say, for definiteness, the events constituting
a wave of light--and attributed, hypothetically, to a cause in that
centre; (_b_) more or less similar groups of events at other times,
connected with the first group according to the laws of physics, and
therefore attributed to the same hypothetical cause at other times. But
all that we ought to assume is series of groups of events, connected by
discoverable laws. These series we may _define_ as matter. Whether
there is matter in any other sense, no one can tell.

What is true in the old notion of causality is the fact that events at
different times are connected by laws (differential equations). When
there is a law connecting an event A with an event B, the two have a
definite unambiguous time-order. But if the events are such that a ray
of light starting from A would arrive at any body which was present at
B after B had occurred, and _vice versa_, then there is no definite
true order, and no possible causal law connecting A and B. A and B must
then be regarded as separate facts of geography.

Perhaps the scope and purpose of this and the foregoing chapters may
be made clearer by showing their bearing upon certain popular beliefs
which may seem self-evident but are really in my opinion either false
or likely to lead to falsehood. I shall confine myself to objections
which have actually been made to me when trying to explain the
philosophical outcome of modern physics.[8]

      [8] These objections are quoted (with kind permission) from a
          letter written to me by a well-known engineer, Mr. Percy
          Griffith, who is also a writer on philosophical subjects.

We cannot conceive of movement apart from some _thing_ as moving.
This is, in a sense, a truism; but in the sense in which it is usually
meant, it is a falsehood. We speak of the movement of a drama or
piece of music, although we do not conceive either as a thing which
exists complete at every moment of the performance. This is the sort of
picture we must have in our minds when we try to conceive the physical
world. We must think of a string of events, connected together by
certain causal connections, and having enough unity to deserve a single
name. We then begin to imagine that the single name denotes a single
thing, and if the events concerned are not all in the same place, we
say the thing has moved. But this is only a convenient shorthand.
In the cinema, we seem to see a man falling off a skyscraper, catching
hold of the telegraph wires, and reaching the ground none the worse.
We know that, in fact, there are a number of different photographs,
and the appearance of a single thing moving is deceptive. In this
respect, the real world resembles the cinema.

In connection with motion one needs to emphasise the very difficult
distinction between _experience_ and _prejudice_. Experience, roughly,
is what you see, and prejudice is what you only think you see.
Prejudice tells you that you see the _same_ table on two different
occasions; you _think_ that experience tells you this. If it really
were experience, you could not be mistaken; yet a similar table may be
substituted without altering the experience. If you look at a table
on two different occasions, you have very similar sensations, and
memory tells you that they are similar; but there is nothing to show
that one identical entity causes the two sensations. If the table is
in a cinema, you know that there is not such an entity, even though
you can watch it changing with apparent continuity. The experience is
just like that with a real table; so in the case of a real table
also, there is nothing in the actual experience to show whether there
is a persistent entity or not. I say, therefore: I do not know whether
there is a persistent entity, but I do know that my experiences can be
explained without assuming that there is. Therefore it can be no part
of legitimate science to assert or deny the persistent entity; if it
does either, it goes beyond the warrant of experience.

The following is a verbally cited passage in the letter referred to
objecting to what was said above about force:

The concept of Force is not of physical but of psychological origin.
Rightly or wrongly it arises in the most impersonal contemplation of
the Stellar Universe, where we observe an infinite number of spherical
bodies revolving on their own axes and gyrating in orbits round each
other. Rightly or wrongly, we naturally conceive of these as having
been so constituted and so maintained by some Force or Forces.

We do not, in fact, observe what it is here said that we observe; all
this is _inferred_. What we observe, in astronomy, is a two-dimensional
pattern of points of light, with a few bright surfaces of measurable
size when seen through the telescope (the planets), and of course
the larger bright surfaces that we call the sun and moon. Most of
this pattern (the fixed stars) rotates round the earth once in every
twenty-three hours and fifty-six minutes. The sun rotates in varying
periods, which average twenty-four hours and never departs very far
from the average. The moon and planets have apparent motions which are
more irregular. These are the _observed_ facts. There is no logical
impossibility about the formul doctrine of spheres rotating round the
earth, one for each planet and one for the stars. The modern doctrines
are simpler, but not one whit more in accordance with observed facts;
it is our passion for _simple_ laws that has made us adopt them.

The last sentence of the above quotation raises some further points of
interest. Rightly or wrongly, the writer says, we naturally conceive
of these as having been so constituted and so maintained by some Force
or Forces. I do not deny this. It is natural, and it is right or
wrong--more specifically, it is wrong. Force is part of our love of
explanations. Everyone knows about the Hindu who thought that the world
does not fall because it is supported by an elephant, and the elephant
does not fall because it is supported by a tortoise. When his European
interlocutor said But how about the tortoise? he replied that he was
tired of metaphysics and wanted to change the subject. Force, as an
explanation, is no better than the elephant and the tortoise. It is
an attempt to get at the why of natural processes, not only at the
how. What we observe, to a limited extent, is what happens, and we
can arrive at laws according to which observable things happen, but
we cannot arrive at a reason for the laws. If we invent a reason, it
needs a reason in its turn, and so on. Force is a rationalising of
natural processes, but a fruitless one since force would have to be
rationalised also.

When it is said, as it often is, that force belongs to the world of
experience, we must be careful to understand what can be meant. In
the first place, it may be meant that calculations which employ the
notion of force work out right in practice. This, broadly speaking,
is admitted: no one would suggest that the engineer should alter his
methods, or should give up working out stresses and strains. But that
does not prove that there are stresses and strains. A British medical
man renders his accounts in guineas, although they have long since
ceased to exist except as a name; he obtains a real payment, though he
employs a fictitious coin. Similarly, the engineer is concerned with
the question whether his bridge will stand: the fact of experience is
that it stands (or does not stand), and the stresses and strains are
only a way of explaining what sort of bridge will stand. They are as
useful as guineas, but equally imaginary.

But when it is said that force is a fact of experience, there is
something quite different that may be meant. It may be meant that we
experience force when we experience such things as pressure or muscular
exertion. We cannot discuss this contention adequately without going
into the relation of physics to psychology, which is a topic we shall
consider at length at a later stage. But we may say this much: if
you press your finger-tip upon a hard object, you have an experience
which you attribute to your finger-tip, but there is a long chain of
intermediate causes in nerves and brain. If your finger were amputated
you could still have the same experience by a suitable operation on
the nerves that formerly connected the finger with the brain, so that
the force between the finger-tip and the hard object, as a fact of
experience, may exist when there is no finger-tip. This shows that
force, in this sense, cannot be what concerns physics.

As the above example illustrates, we do not, in fact, experience
many things that we think we experience. This makes it necessary to
ask, without too much assurance, in what sense physics can be based
upon experience, and what must be the nature of its entities and its
inferences if it is to make good its claim to be empirically grounded.
We shall begin this inquiry in the next chapter.




CHAPTER XII

PHYSICS AND PERCEPTION


It will be remembered that we regarded perception, in Chapter V, as
a species of sensitivity. Sensitivity to a given feature of the
environment we defined as consisting in some characteristic reaction
which is exhibited whenever that feature is present, but not otherwise;
this property is possessed more perfectly, in given directions, by
scientific instruments than by living bodies, though scientific
instruments are more selective as to the stimuli to which they will
respond. We decided that what, from the standpoint of an external
observer, distinguishes perception from other forms of sensitivity is
the law of association or conditioned reflexes. But we also found that
this purely external treatment of perception presupposes our knowledge
of the physical world as a going concern. We have now to investigate
this presupposition, and to consider how we come to know about physics,
and how much we really do know.

According to the theory of Chapter V, it is possible to perceive things
that are not in a spatial contact with the body. There must be a
reaction to a feature of the environment, but that feature may be at a
greater or less distance from the body of the percipient; we can even
perceive the sun and stars, within the limits of the definition. All
that is necessary is that our reaction should depend upon the spatial
relation between our body and the feature of the environment. When our
back is towards the sun, we do not see it; when our face is towards it,
we do.

When we consider perception--visual or auditory--of an external event,
there are three different matters to be examined. There is first the
process in the outside world, from the event to the percipients body;
there is next the process in his body, in so far as this can be known
by an outside observer; lastly, there is the question, which must be
faced sooner or later, whether the percipient can perceive something of
the process in his body which no other observer could perceive. We will
take these points in order.

If it is to be possible to perceive an event not in the percipients
body, there must be a physical process in the outer world such that,
when a certain event occurs, it produces a stimulus of a certain kind
at the surface of the percipients body. Suppose, for example, that
pictures of different animals are exhibited on a magic lantern to a
class of children, and all the children are asked to say the name of
each animal in turn. We may assume that the children are sufficiently
familiar with animals to say cat, dog, giraffe, hippopotamus,
etc., at the right moments. We must then suppose--taking the physical
world for granted--that some process travels from each picture to the
eyes of the various children, retaining throughout these journeys such
peculiarities that, when the process reaches their eyes, it can in one
case stimulate the word cat and in another the word dog. All this
the physical theory of light provides for. But there is one interesting
point about language that should be noticed in this connection. If the
usual physical theory of light is correct, the various children will
receive stimuli which differ greatly according to their distance and
direction from the picture, and according to the way the light falls.
There are also differences in their reactions, for, though they all
utter the word cat, some say it loud, others soft, some in a soprano
voice, some in a contralto. But the differences in their reactions are
much less than the differences in the stimuli. This is still more the
case if we consider various different pictures of cats, to all of which
they respond with the word cat. Thus language is a means of producing
responses which differ less than the stimuli do, in cases where the
resemblances between the stimuli are more important to us than the
differences. This fact makes us apt to overlook the differences
between stimuli which produce nearly identical responses.

As appears from the above, when a number of people simultaneously
perceive a picture of a cat, there are differences between the stimuli
to their various perceptions, and these differences must obviously
involve differences in their reactions. The _verbal_ responses may
differ very little, but even the verbal responses could be made to
differ by putting more complicated questions than merely What animal
is that? One could ask: Can the picture be covered by your thumb-nail
held at arms length? Then the answer would be different according
as the percipient was near the picture or far off. But the normal
percipient, if left to himself, will not notice such differences,
that is to say, his verbal response will be the same in spite of the
differences in the stimuli.

The fact that it is possible for a number of people to perceive the
same noise or the same coloured pattern obviously depends upon the fact
that a physical process can travel outward from a centre and retain
certain of its characteristics unchanged, or very little changed. The
most notable of such characteristics is frequency in a wave-motion.
That, no doubt, affords a biological reason for the fact that our most
delicate senses, sight and hearing, are sensitive to frequencies, which
determine colour in what we see and pitch in what we hear. If there
were not, in the physical world, processes spreading out from centres
and retaining certain characters practically unchanged, it would be
impossible for different percipients to perceive the same object from
different points of view, and we should not have been able to discover
that we all live in a common world.

We come now to the process in the percipients body, in so far as
this can be perceived by an outside observer. This raises no new
philosophical problems, because we are still concerned, as before, with
the perception of events outside the observers body. The observer,
now, is supposed to be a physiologist, observing, say, what goes on
in the eye when light falls upon it. His means of knowing are, in
principle, exactly the same as in the observation of dead matter.
An event in an eye upon which light is falling causes light-waves
to travel in a certain manner until they reach the eye of the
physiologist. They there cause a process in the physiologists eye
and optic nerve and brain, which ends in what he calls seeing what
happens in the eye he is observing. But this event, which happens in
the physiologist, is not what happened in the eye he was observing;
it is only connected with this by a complicated causal chain. Thus
our knowledge of physiology is no more direct or intimate than our
knowledge of processes in dead matter; we do not know any more about
our eyes than about the trees and fields and clouds that we see by
means of them. The event which happens when a physiologist observes an
eye is an event in him, not on the eye that he is observing.

We come now at last to the question of self-observation, which we have
hitherto avoided. I say self-observation rather than introspection,
because the latter word has controversial associations that I wish to
avoid. I mean by self-observation anything that a man can perceive
about himself but that others, however situated, cannot perceive about
him. What follows is only preliminary, since the subject will be
discussed at length in Chapter XVI.

No one can deny that we know things about ourselves which others
cannot know unless we tell them. We know when we have toothache, when
we feel thirsty, what we were dreaming when we woke up, and so on.
Dr. Watson might say that the dentist can know we have toothache by
observing a cavity in a tooth. I will not reply that the dentist is
often mistaken; this may be merely because the art of dentistry has not
been sufficiently perfected. I will concede as possible, in the future,
a state of odontology in which the dentist could always know whether
I am feeling toothache. But even then his knowledge has a different
character from mine. His knowledge is an inference, based upon the
inducive law that people with such-and-such cavities suffer pain of
a certain kind. But this law cannot be established by observation of
cavities alone; it requires that, where these are observed, the people
who have them should tell us that they feel toothache. And, more than
that, they must be speaking the truth. Purely external observation can
discover that people with cavities _say_ they have toothache, but not
that they have it. Saying one has toothache is a different thing from
having it; if not we could cure toothache by not talking about it, and
so save our dentists bills. I am sure the expert opinion of dentists
will agree with me that this is impossible.

To this argument, however, it might be replied that having toothache is
a state of the body, and that knowing I have toothache is a response to
this bodily stimulus. It will be said that, theoretically, the state
of my body when I have toothache can be observed by an outsider, who
can then also know that I have toothache. This answer, however, does
not really meet the point. When the outside observer knows that I have
toothache, not only is his knowledge based upon an inductive inference,
as we have already seen, but his knowledge of the inferred term,
toothache, must be based upon personal experience. No knowledge of
dentistry could enable a man to know what toothache is if he had never
felt it. If, then, toothache is really a state of the body--which, at
the moment, I neither affirm nor deny--it is a state of the body which
only the man himself can perceive. In a word, whoever has experienced
toothache and can remember it has knowledge that cannot be possessed by
a man who has never experienced toothache.

Take next our knowledge of our own dreams. Dr. Watson has not, so far
as I know, ever discussed dreams, but I imagine he would say something
like this: In dreams, there are probably small laryngeal movements
such as, if they were greater, would lead to speech; indeed, people
do sometimes cry out in dreams. There may also be stimulations of the
sense-organs, which produce unusual reactions owing to the peculiar
physiological condition of the brain during sleep: but all these
reactions must consist of small movements, which could theoretically be
seen from outside, say by some elaboration of X-ray apparatus. This is
all very well, but meantime it is hypothetical, and the dreamer himself
knows his dreams without all this elaborate inference. Can we say that
he really knows these hypothetical small bodily movements, although
he thinks he knows something else? That would presumably be Dr.
Watsons position, and it must be admitted that, with a definition of
knowledge such as we considered in Chapter VIII, such a view is not
to be dismissed offhand as obviously impossible. Moreover, if we are to
say the perception gives knowledge of the physical world, we shall have
to admit that what we are perceiving may be quite different from what
it seems to be. A table does not look like a vast number of electrons
and protons, nor like trains of waves meeting and clashing. Yet this
is the sort of thing a table is said to be by modern physicists. If,
then, what seems to us to be just a table such as may be seen any day
is really this odd sort of thing, it is possible that what seems to us
to be a dream is really a number of movements in the brain.

This again is all very well, but there is one point which it fails to
explain, namely, what is meant by seeming. If a dream or a table
seems to be one sort of thing while it is really another, we shall
have to admit that it _really_ seems, and that what it seems to be has
a reality of its own. Nay more, we only arrive at what it really is
by an inference, valid or invalid, from what it seems to be. If we are
wrong about the seeming, we must be doubly wrong about the reality,
since the sole ground for asserting the table composed of electrons and
protons is the table that we see, _i.e._ the seeming table. We must
therefore treat seeming with respect.

Let us consider Dr. Watson watching a rat in a maze. He means to be
quite objective, and report only what really goes on. Can he succeed?
In one sense he can. He can use words about what he sees which are
the same as any other scientifically trained observer will use if he
watches the same rat at the same time. But Dr. Watsons objectivity
emphatically does not consist in using the same words as other people
use; his vocabulary is very different from that of most psychologists.
He cannot take as the sole test of truth the consensus of mankind.
Securus judicat orbis terrarum is another example of a Latin tag
which is false, and which certainly Dr. Watson would not consider
true. It has happened again and again in human history that a man who
said something that had never been said before turned out to be right,
while the people who repeated the wise saws of their forefathers were
talking nonsense. Therefore, when Dr. Watson endeavours to eliminate
subjectivity in observing rats, he does not mean that he says what
everybody else says. He means that he refrains from inferring anything
about the rat beyond its bodily movements. This is all to the good,
but I think he fails to realise that almost as long and difficult
an inference is required to give us knowledge of the rats bodily
movements as to give us knowledge of its mind. And what is more,
the data from which we must start in order to get to know the rats
bodily movements are data of just the sort that Dr. Watson wishes to
avoid, namely private data patent to self-observation but not patent to
anyone except the observer. This is the point at which, in my opinion,
behaviourism _as a final philosophy_ breaks down.

When several people simultaneously watch a rat in a maze, or any other
example of what we should naturally regard as matter in motion, there
is by no means complete identity between the physical events which
happen at the surface of their eyes and constitute the stimuli to
their perceptions. There are differences of perspective, of light and
shade, of apparent size, and so on, all of which will be reproduced
in photographs taken from the places where the eyes of the several
observers are. These differences produce differences in the reactions
of the observers--differences which a quite unthinking person may
overlook, but which are familiar to every artist. Now it is contrary
to all scientific canons to suppose that the object perceived, in
addition to affecting us in the way of stimulus and reaction, also
affects us directly by some mystical epiphany; certainly it is not what
any behaviourist would care to assert. Our knowledge of the physical
world, therefore, must be contained in our reaction to the stimulus
which reaches us across the intervening medium; and it seems hardly
possible that our reaction should have a more intimate relation to the
object than the stimulus has. Since the stimulus differs for different
observers, the reaction also differs; consequently, in all our
perceptions of physical processes there is an element of subjectivity.
If, therefore, physics is true in its broad outlines (as the above
argument supposes), what we call perceiving a physical process is
something private and subjective, at least in part, and is yet the only
possible starting-point for our knowledge of the physical world.

There is an objection to the above argument which might naturally be
made, but it would be in fact invalid. It may be said that we do not in
fact proceed to _infer_ the physical world from our perceptions, but
that we begin at once with a rough-and-ready knowledge of the physical
world, and only at a late stage of sophistication compel ourselves to
regard our knowledge of the physical world as an inference. What is
valid in this statement is the fact that our knowledge of the physical
world is not at first inferential, but that is only because we take our
percepts to _be_ the physical world. Sophistication and philosophy come
in at the stage at which we realise that the physical world cannot be
identified with our percepts. When my boy was three years old, I showed
him Jupiter, and told him that Jupiter was larger than the earth. He
insisted that I must be speaking of some other Jupiter, because, as he
patiently explained, the one he was seeing was obviously quite small.
After some efforts, I had to give it up and leave him unconvinced. In
the case of the heavenly bodies, adults have got used to the idea that
what is really there can only be _inferred_ from what they see; but
where rats in mazes are concerned, they still tend to think that they
are seeing what is happening in the physical world. The difference,
however, is only one of degree, and naive realism is as untenable in
the one case as in the other. There are differences in the perceptions
of two persons observing the same process; there are sometimes no
discoverable differences between two perceptions of the same persons
observing different processes, _e.g._ pure water and water full of
bacilli. The subjectivity of our perceptions is thus of practical as
well as theoretical importance.

I am not maintaining that what we primarily know is our own
perceptions. This is largely a verbal question; but with the definition
of knowledge given in Chapter VIII, it will be correct to say that
from the first we know external objects, the question is not as to
what are the objects we know, but rather as to how accurately we
know them. Our non-inferential knowledge of an object cannot be more
accurate than our reaction to it, since it is part of that reaction.
And our reaction cannot be more accurate than the stimulus. But what
on earth can you mean by the accuracy of a stimulus? I may be
asked. I mean just the same as by the accuracy of a map or a set of
statistics. I mean a certain kind of correspondence. One pattern is
an accurate representation of another if every element of the one can
be taken as the representative of just one element of the other, and
the relations that make the one set into a pattern correspond with
relations making the other set into a pattern. In this sense, writing
can represent speech with a certain degree of accuracy; to every spoken
word a written word corresponds, and to the time-order of the spoken
words the space-order of the written words corresponds. But there are
inflexions and tones of voice that cannot be represented in writing,
except, to some extent, by musical notation. A gramophone record is
a much more accurate representation of vocal sounds than any writing
can be; but even the best gramophone record fails to be completely
accurate. The impression made upon an observer is very analogous to
a gramophone record or a photograph, but usually less accurate owing
to the influence of the law of association, and the lack of delicacy
in our senses. And whatever limitations there are to the accuracy of
our impressions are limitations to the accuracy of our non-inferential
knowledge of the external world.

Another point: If we accept the definition of knowledge given
in Chapter VIII, which was framed so far as to be as favourable
as possible to behaviourism, a given reaction may be regarded as
knowledge of various different occurrences. When we see Jupiter, we
have, according to the definition, knowledge of Jupiter, but we also
have knowledge of the stimulus at the surface of the eye, and even
of the process in the optic nerve. For it is arbitrary at what point
we start in the process leading to a certain event in the brain:
this event, and the consequent bodily action, may be regarded as a
reaction to a process starting at any earlier point. And the nearer
our starting-point is to the brain, the more accurate becomes the
knowledge displayed in our reaction. A lamp at the top of a tall
building might produce the same visual stimulus as Jupiter, or at any
rate one practically indistinguishable from that produced by Jupiter.
A blow on the nose might make us see stars. Theoretically, it should
be possible to apply a stimulus direct to the optic nerve, which
should give us a visual sensation. Thus when we think we see Jupiter,
we may be mistaken. We are less likely to be mistaken if we say that
the surface of the eye is being stimulated in a certain way, and still
less likely to be mistaken if we say that the optic nerve is being
stimulated in a certain way. We do not eliminate the risk of error
completely unless we confine ourselves to saying that an event of a
certain sort is happening in the brain; this statement may still be
true if we see Jupiter in a dream.

But, I shall be asked, what do you know about what is happening in the
brain? Surely nothing. Not so, I reply. I know about what is happening
in the brain exactly what naive realism thinks it knows about what is
happening in the outside world. But this needs explaining, and there
are other matters that must be explained first.

When the light from a fixed star reaches me, I see the star if it is
night and I am looking in the right direction. The light started years
ago, probably many years ago, but my reaction is primarily to something
that is happening _now_. When my eyes are open, I see the star; when
they are shut, I do not. Children discover at a fairly early age
that they see nothing when their eyes are shut. They are aware of the
difference between seeing and not seeing, and also of the difference
between eyes open and eyes shut; gradually they discover that these
two differences are correlated--I mean that they have expectations of
which this is the intellectualist transcription. Again, children learn
to name the colours, and to state correctly whether a thing is blue
or red or yellow or what-not. They ought not to be sure that light of
the appropriate wave-length started from the object. The sun looks red
in a London fog, grass looks blue through blue spectacles, everything
looks yellow to a person suffering from jaundice. But suppose you ask:
What colour are you seeing? The person who answers, in these cases,
red for the sun, blue for the grass, and yellow for the sick-room of
the jaundiced patient, is answering quite truly. And in each of these
cases he is stating something that he _knows_. What he knows in such
cases is what I call a percept. I shall contend later that, from the
standpoint of physics, a percept is in the brain; for the present, I am
only concerned to say that a percept is what is most indubitable in our
knowledge of the world.

To behaviourism as a metaphysic one may put the following dilemma.
Either physics is valid in its main lines, or it is not. If it is
not, we know nothing about the movements of matter; for physics is
the result of the most serious and careful study of which the human
intelligence has hitherto been capable. If, on the other hand, physics
is valid in its main lines, any physical process starting either inside
or outside the body will, if it reaches the brain, be different if
the intervening medium is different; moreover two persons, initially
very different, may become indistinguishable as they spread and grow
fainter. On both grounds, what happens in the brain is not connected
quite accurately with what happens elsewhere, and our perceptions
are therefore infected with subjectivity on purely physical grounds.
Even, therefore, when we assume the truth of physics, what we know
most indubitably through perception is not the movements of matter,
but certain events in ourselves which are connected, in a manner not
quite invariable, with the movements of matter. To be specific, when
Dr. Watson watches rats in mazes, what he knows, apart from difficult
inferences, are certain events in himself. The behaviour of the rats
can only be inferred by the help of physics, and is by no means to be
accepted as something accurately knowable by direct observation.

I do not in fact entertain any doubts that physics is true in its main
lines. The interpretation of physical formul is a matter as to which
a considerable degree of uncertainty is possible; but we cannot well
doubt that there is an interpretation which is true roughly and in
the main. I shall come to the question of interpretation later; for
the present, I shall assume that we may accept physics in its broad
outlines, without troubling to consider how it is to be interpreted.
On this basis, the above remarks on perception seem undeniable. We
are often misled as to what is happening, either by peculiarities of
the medium between the object and our bodies, or by unusual states of
our bodies, or by a temporary or permanent abnormality in the brain.
But in all these cases _something_ is really happening, as to which,
if we turn our attention to it, we can obtain knowledge that is not
misleading. At one time when, owing to illness, I had been taking a
great deal of quinine, I became hypersensitive to noise, so that when
the nurse rustled the newspaper I thought she was spilling a scuttle
of coals on the floor. The interpretation was mistaken, but it was
quite true that I heard a loud noise. It is a commonplace that a man
whose leg has been amputated can still feel pains in it; here again,
he does really feel the pains, and is only mistaken in his belief that
they come from his leg. A percept is an observable event, but its
interpretation as knowledge of this or that event in the physical world
is liable to be mistaken, for reasons which physics and physiology can
make fairly clear.

The subjectivity of percepts is a matter of degree. They are more
subjective when people are drunk or asleep than when they are sober
and awake. They are more subjective in regard to distant objects than
in regard to such as are near. They may acquire various peculiar kinds
of subjectivity through injuries to the brain or to the nerves. When
I speak of a percept as subjective I mean that the physiological
inferences to which it gives rise are mistaken or vague. This is
always the case to some extent, but much more so in some circumstances
than in others. And the sort of defect that leads to mistakes must be
distinguished from the sort that leads to vagueness. If you see a man a
quarter of a mile away, you can see that it is a man if you have normal
eyesight, but you probably cannot tell who it is, even if in fact
it is some one you know well. This is vagueness in the percept: the
inferences you draw are correct so far as they go, but they do not go
very far. On the other hand, if you are seeing double and think there
are two men, you have a case of mistake. Vagueness, to a greater or
less extent, is universal and inevitable; mistakes, on the other hand,
can usually be avoided by taking trouble and by not always trusting
to physiological inference. Anybody can see double on purpose, by
focussing on a distant object and noticing a near one; but this will
not cause mistakes, since the man is aware of the subjective element in
his double vision. Similarly we are not deceived by after-images, and
only dogs are deceived by gramophones.

From what has been said in this chapter, it is clear that our knowledge
of the physical world, if it is to be made as reliable as possible,
must start from percepts, and must scrutinize the physiological
inferences by which percepts are accompanied. Physiological inference
is inference in the sense that it sometimes leads to error and physics
gives reason to expect that percepts will, in certain circumstances,
be more or less deceptive if taken as signs of something outside the
brain. It is these facts that give a subjective cast to the philosophy
of physics, at any rate in its beginnings. We cannot start cheerfully
with a world of matter in motion, as to which any two sane and sober
observers must agree. To some extent, each man dreams his own dream,
and the disentangling of the dream element in our percepts is no easy
matter. This is, indeed, the work that scientific physics undertakes to
do.




CHAPTER XIII

PHYSICAL AND PERCEPTUAL SPACE


Perhaps there is nothing so difficult for the imagination as to teach
it to feel about space as modern science compels us to think. This is
the task which must be attempted in the present chapter.

We said in Chapter XII that we know about what is happening in the
brain exactly what naive realism thinks it knows about what is
happening in the world. This remark may have seemed cryptic; it must
now be expanded and expounded.

The gist of the matter is that percepts, which we spoke about at the
end of last chapter, are in our heads; that percepts are what we can
know with most certainty; and that percepts contain what naive realism
thinks it knows about the world.

But when I say that my percepts are in my head, I am saying something
which is ambiguous until the different kinds of space have been
explained, for the statement is only true in connection with _physical_
space. There is also a space in our percepts, and of this space
the statement would not be true. When I say that there is space
in our percepts, I mean nothing at all difficult to understand. I
mean--to take the sense of sight, which is the most important in this
connection--that in what we see at one time there is up and down, right
and left, inside and outside. If we see, say, a circle on a blackboard,
all these relations exist within what we see. The circle has a top half
and a bottom half, a right-hand half and a left-hand half, an inside
and an outside. Those relations alone are enough to make up a space
of sorts. But the space of everyday life is filled out with what we
derive from touch and movement--how a thing feels when we touch it,
and what movements are necessary in order to grasp it. Other elements
also come into the genesis of the space in which everybody believes
who has not been troubled by philosophy; but it is unnecessary for
our purposes to go into this question any more deeply. The point that
concerns us is that a mans percepts are private to himself: what I
see, no one else sees; what I hear, no one else hears; what I touch,
no one else touches; and so on. True, others hear and see something
very like what I hear and see, if they are suitably placed; but there
are always differences. Sounds are less loud at a distance; objects
change their visual appearance according to the laws of perspective.
Therefore it is impossible for two persons at the same time to have
exactly identical percepts. It follows that the space of percepts, like
the percepts, must be private; there are as many perceptual spaces as
there are percipients. My percept of a table is outside my percept of
my head, in my perceptual space; but it does not follow that it is
outside my head as a physical object in physical space. Physical space
is neutral and public: in this space, all my percepts are in my head,
even the most distant star _as I see it_. Physical and perceptual space
have relations, but they are not identical, and failure to grasp the
difference between them is a potent source of confusion.

To say that you see a star when you see the light that has come from it
is no more correct than to say that you see New Zealand when you see
a New Zealander in London. Your perception when (as we say) you see a
star is causally connected, in the first instance, with what happens
in the brain, the optic nerve, and the eye, then with a light-wave
which, according to physics, can be traced back to the star as its
source. Your sensations will be closely similar if the light comes from
a lamp at the top of a mast. The physical space in which you believe
the real star to be is an elaborate inference; what is given is the
private space in which the speck of light you see is situated. It is
still an open question whether the space of sight has depth, or is
merely a surface, as Berkeley contended. This does not matter for
our purposes. Even if we admit that sight alone shows a difference
between an object a few inches from the eyes and an object several feet
distant, yet you certainly cannot, by sight alone, see that a cloud
is less distant than a fixed star, though you may _infer_ that it is,
because it can hide the star. The world of astronomy, from the point of
view of sight, is a surface. If you were put in a dark room with little
holes cut in the ceiling in the pattern of the stars letting light come
through, there would be nothing in your immediate visual data to show
that you were not seeing the stars. This illustrates what I mean by
saying that what you see is _not_ out there in the sense of physics.

We learn in infancy that we can sometimes touch objects we see, and
sometimes not. When we cannot touch them at once, we can sometimes do
so by walking to them. That is to say, we learn to correlate sensations
of sight with sensations of touch, and sometimes with sensations of
movement followed by sensations of touch. In this way we locate our
sensations in a three-dimensional world. Those which involve sight
alone we think of as external, but there is no justification for this
view. What you see when you see a star is just as internal as what you
feel when you feel a headache. That is to say, it is internal from the
standpoint of _physical_ space. It is distant in your private space,
because it is not associated with sensations of touch, and cannot be
associated with them by means of any journey you can perform.

Your own body, as known to you through direct experience, is quite
different from your own body as considered in physics. You know more
about your own body than about any other through direct experience,
because your own body can give you a number of sensations that no other
body can, for instance all kinds of bodily pains. But you still know
it only through sensations; apart from inference, it _is_ a bundle of
sensations, and therefore quite different, _prima facie_, from what
physics calls a body.

Most of the things you see are outside what you see when (as one says)
you see your own body. That is to say: you see certain other patches of
colour, differently situated in visual space, and say you are seeing
things outside your body. But from the point of view of physics, all
that you see must count as inside your body; what goes on elsewhere
can only be inferred. Thus the whole space of your sensible world with
all its percepts counts as one tiny region from the point of view of
physics.

There is no direct spatial relation between what one person sees and
what another sees, because no two ever see exactly the same object.
Each person carries about a private space of his own, which can be
located in physical space by indirect methods, but which contains no
place in common with another persons private space. This shows how
entirely physical space is a matter of inference and construction.

To make the matter definite, let us suppose that a physiologist is
observing a living brain--no longer an impossible supposition, as
it would have been formerly. It is natural to suppose that what the
physiologist sees is in the brain he is observing. But if we are
speaking of physical space, what the physiologist sees is in his
own brain. It is in no sense in the brain that he is observing,
though it is in the percept of that brain, which occupies part of
the physiologists perceptual space. Causal continuity makes the
matter perfectly evident: light-waves travel from the brain that is
being observed to the eye of the physiologist, at which they only
arrive after an interval of time, which is finite though short. The
physiologist sees what he is observing only after the light-waves have
reached his eye; therefore the event which constitutes his seeing comes
at the end of a series of events which travel from the observed brain
into the brain of the physiologist. We cannot, without a preposterous
kind of discontinuity, suppose that the physiologists percept,
which comes at the end of this series, is anywhere else but in the
physiologists head.

This question is very important, and must be understood if metaphysics
is ever to be got straight. The traditional dualism of mind and
matter, which I regard as mistaken, is intimately connected with
confusions on this point. So long as we adhere to the conventional
notions of mind and matter, we are condemned to a view of perception
which is miraculous. We suppose that a physical process starts from a
visible object, travels to the eye, there changes into another physical
process, causes yet another physical process in the optic nerve,
finally produces some effect in the brain, simultaneously with which
we see the object from which the process started, the seeing being
something mental, totally different in character from the physical
processes which precede and accompany it. This view is so queer
that metaphysicians have invented all sorts of theories designed to
substitute something less incredible. But nobody noticed an elementary
confusion.

To return to the physiologist observing another mans brain: what the
physiologist sees is by no means identical with what happens in the
brain he is observing, but is a somewhat remote effect. From what he
sees, therefore, he cannot judge whether what is happening in the brain
he is observing is, or is not, the sort of event that he would call
mental. When he says that certain physical events in the brain are
accompanied by mental events, he is thinking of physical events as if
they were what he sees. He does not see a mental event in the brain he
is observing, and therefore supposes there is in that brain a physical
process which he can observe and a mental process which he cannot.
This is a complete mistake. In the strict sense, he cannot observe
anything in the other brain, but only the percepts which he himself has
when he is suitably related to that brain (eye to microscope, etc.).
We first identify physical processes with our percepts, and then,
since our percepts are not other peoples thoughts, we argue that the
physical processes in their brains are something quite different from
their thoughts. In fact, everything that we can directly observe of
the physical world happens inside our heads, and consists of mental
events in at least one sense of the word mental. It also consists
of events which form part of the physical world. The development of
this point of view will lead us to the conclusion that the distinction
between mind and matter is illusory. The stuff of the world may be
called physical or mental or both or neither, as we please; in fact,
the words serve no purpose. There is only one definition of the words
that is unobjectionable: physical is what is dealt with by physics,
and mental is what is dealt with by psychology. When, accordingly, I
speak of physical space, I mean the space that occurs in physics.

It is extraordinarily difficult to divest ourselves of the belief that
the physical world is the world we perceive by sight and touch; even
if, in our philosophic moments, we are aware that this is an error,
we nevertheless fall into it again as soon as we are off our guard.
The notion that what we see is out there in physical space is one
which cannot survive while we are grasping the difference between what
physics supposes to be really happening, and what our senses show us
as happening; but it is sure to return and plague us when we begin to
forget the argument. Only long reflection can make a radically new
point of view familiar and easy.

Our illustrations hitherto have been taken from the sense of sight;
let us now take one from the sense of touch. Suppose that, with your
eyes shut, you let your finger-tip press against a hard table. What
is really happening? The physicist says that your finger-tip and the
table consist, roughly speaking, of vast numbers of electrons and
protons; more correctly, each electron and proton is to be thought of
as a collection of processes of radiation, but we can ignore this for
our present purposes. Although you think you are touching the table,
no electron or proton in your finger ever really touches an electron
or proton in the table, because this would develop an infinite force.
When you press, repulsions are set up between parts of your finger and
parts of the table. If you try to press upon a liquid or a gas, there
is room in it for the parts that are repelled to get away. But if you
press a hard solid, the electrons and protons that try to get away,
because electrical forces from your finger repel them, are unable to
do so, because they are crowded close to others which elbow them back
to more or less their original position, like people in a dense crowd.
Therefore the more you press the more they repel your finger. The
repulsion consists of electrical forces, which set up in the nerves a
current whose nature is not very definitely known. This current runs
into the brain, and there has effects which, so far as the physiologist
is concerned, are almost wholly conjectural. But there is one effect
which is not conjectural, and that is the sensation of touch. This
effect, owing to physiological inference or perhaps to a reflex, is
associated by us with the finger-tip. But the sensation is the same
if, by artificial means, the parts of the nerve nearer the brain are
suitably stimulated--_e.g._ if your hand has been amputated and the
right nerves are skilfully manipulated. Thus our confidence that touch
affords evidence of the existence of bodies at the place which we think
is being touched is quite misplaced. As a rule we are right, but we can
be wrong; there is nothing of the nature of an infallible revelation
about the matter. And even in the most favorable case, the perception
of touch is something very different from the mad dance of electrons
and protons trying to jazz out of each others way, which is what
physics maintains is really taking place at your finger-tip. Or, at
least, it _seems_ very different. But as we shall see, the knowledge
we derive from physics is so abstract that we are not warranted
in saying that what goes on in the physical world is, or is not,
intrinsically very different from the events that we know through our
own experiences.




CHAPTER XIV

PERCEPTION AND PHYSICAL CAUSAL LAWS


In an earlier chapter we saw the inadequacy of the traditional notion
of cause, without adequately explaining the causal laws which are a
substitute in the practice of science. The time has now come when it
is possible to remedy this defect, and, in so doing, to fit perception
into its place in the chain of physical causation and recapitulate the
main points of previous arguments.

The old view was that an event A will always be followed by a certain
event B, and that the problem of discovering causal laws is the
problem, given an event B, of finding that event A which is its
invariable antecedent or _vice versa_. At an early stage of a science
this point of view is useful; it gives laws which are true usually,
though probably not always, and it affords the basis for more exact
laws. But it has no philosophical validity, and is superseded in
science as soon as we arrive at genuine laws. Genuine laws, in advanced
sciences, are practically always quantitative laws of _tendency_. I
will try to illustrate by taking the simplest possible case in physics.

Imagine a hydrogen atom, in which the electron is revolving not in
the minimum orbit, but in the next, which has four times the minimum
radius. So long as this state continues, the atom has no external
effects, apart from its infinitesimal gravitational action; we cannot,
therefore, obtain any evidence of its existence except when it changes
its state. In fact, our knowledge of atoms is like that which a ticket
collector has of the population of his town: he knows nothing of those
who stay quietly at home. Now at some moment, according to laws of
which we have only statistical knowledge, the electron in our atom
jumps to a smaller orbit, and the energy lost to the atom travels
outward in a light-wave. We know no causal law as to when the electron
will jump, though we know how far it will jump and exactly what will
happen in the neighbourhood when it does. At least, when I say we
know exactly what will happen, I ought to say that we know exactly
the mathematical laws of what will happen. A series of events, having
quantitative characteristics which obey certain equations, will travel
outward in all directions from the electron, and will proceed quite
regularly, like ripples on a pool, until other matter is encountered.
We have here one important and apparently fundamental kind of causal
law, the kind regulating the propagation of light _in vacuo_. This is
summed up in Maxwells equations, which enable us to calculate the
diffusion of an electro-magnetic disturbance starting from a source. So
long as two such disturbances do not meet, the matter is exceedingly
simple; but the equations also tell us what happens when they do
meet. We then have, as always in traditional physics, two separate
tendencies, which have a resultant compounded according to mathematical
laws, of which the parallelogram law is the oldest and simplest. That
is to say, each previous circumstance in the space-time neighbourhood
contributes a tendency, and the resulting event is obtained by
compounding these tendencies according to a mathematical law.

So far, we have been considering only electro-magnetic phenomena in
empty space. We have another set of facts about empty space, namely
those upon which gravitation depends. These have to do with the
structure of space-time, and show that this structure has singularities
in the regions where there is matter, which spread with diminishing
intensity as we get away from these regions. You may conceive the
structure of space-time on the analogy of a pond with a fountain
playing in it, so that wherever a spray falls from the fountain there
is a little hill of water which flattens quickly as you get away from
the spot where the spray falls. Here again the same sort of thing
applies: to infer the structure in a small region of space-time from
that in the neighbourhood, it will be necessary to superpose a number
of tendencies according to mathematical rules. Thus philosophically
this introduces no novelty.

But now consider what happens when the wave of light which started
from our hydrogen atom comes in contact with matter. Various things
may happen. The matter may absorb all or some of the energy of the
light-ray; this is the interesting case from our point of view. The
absorption may take the form of causing the electrons to move in larger
orbits, in which case, later, when they return to their previous
orbits, we get the phenomenon of fluorescence. Or the body may become
heated; or it may visibly move, like a radiometer. The effects upon
bodies depend upon the bodies as well as the light. Some of them can be
individually predicted, others can only be calculated in statistical
averages; this depends upon whether quantum considerations come in
or not. Where they do, we can enumerate possibilities, and state the
relative frequencies with which they will be realised, but we cannot
tell which will be realised in any given case.

So far, we have considered the radiation of energy from matter into
empty space, its propagation in empty space and its impact on matter
from empty space. We have not considered the history of a given piece
of matter, or the distinction between matter and empty space.

The essence of matter appears to be this: We can distinguish series of
events in space-time which have a certain kind of close resemblance
to each other, such that common sense regards them as manifestations
of one thing. But when we look closely at the question, it turns
out that what physics offers is something more abstract than this.
Take, _e. g._ the continued existence of a certain electron. This
means to say that events in a certain neighbourhood will be such as
can be calculated on the assumption that there is an electric charge
of a certain standard magnitude in the middle of that neighbourhood;
and that the neighbourhoods of which this is true form a tube in
space-time.

So long as we stick to the standpoint of pure physics there is a
certain air of taking in each others washing about the whole business.
Events in empty space are only known as regards their abstract
mathematical characteristics; matter is only an abstract mathematical
characteristic of events in empty space. This seems rather a cold
world. But as a matter of fact we know some things that are a little
more concrete. We know, _e.g._ what it feels like when we see things.
From the point of view of physics, when our light-wave starts out
through empty space, if it presently reaches our eye we know one link
in the causal chain, namely the visual sensation, otherwise than as a
term in an abstract mathematical formula. And it is this one term which
forms the basis for our belief in all the rest. Seeing is believing.

At this point I propose to make a brief digression on the subject of
our evidence for causal laws. The laws for which we first get evidence
are such as do not hold always, but only as a general rule. As a
rule, when you decide to move your arm, it moves: but sometimes it is
paralysed and remains motionless. As a rule, when you say how-do-you-do
to an old friend, he says the same to you; but he may have grown blind
and deaf since you last saw him, and not notice your words or gesture.
As a rule, if you put a match to gunpowder, it explodes; but it may
have got damp. It is such common but not invariable rules of sequence
that we notice first. But science is always seeking to replace them by
laws that may have no exceptions. We notice first that heavy bodies
fall, then that some bodies do not fall. Then we generalise both sets
of facts into the law of gravitation and the laws of resistance of the
air. These more general laws do not state that anything will actually
happen: they state a tendency, and lead to the conclusion that what
actually happens is the resultant of a number of tendencies. We cannot
know what the resultant will be unless we know a great deal about
the neighbourhood concerned. For example, I might, within the next
few seconds be hit on the head by a meteorite; to know whether this
is going to happen, I must know what matter is to be found in the
neighbourhood of the earth. This illustrates that actual predictions
based upon laws which are perfectly valid may always be falsified by
some unknown fact of what we may call geography. Moreover, we can
never be _sure_ that our scientific laws are quite right; of this the
Einsteinian modification of the law of gravitation has afforded a
notable instance.

Let us now return to the relation between perception and the causal
laws of physics.

Having realised the abstractness of what physics has to say, we no
longer have any difficulty in fitting the visual sensation into the
causal series. It used to be thought mysterious that purely physical
phenomena should end in something mental. That was because people
thought they knew a lot about physical phenomena, and were sure they
differed in quality from mental phenomena. We now realise that we know
nothing of the intrinsic quality of physical phenomena except when
they happen to be sensations, and that therefore there is no reason to
be surprised that some are sensations, or to suppose that the others
are totally unlike sensations. The gap between mind and matter has
been filled in, partly by new views of mind, but much more by the
realisation that physics tells us nothing as to the intrinsic character
of matter.

I conceive what happens when we see an object more or less on the
following lines. For the sake of simplicity, let us take a small
self-luminous object. In this object, a certain number of atoms are
losing energy and radiating it according to the quantum principle.
The resulting light-waves become superposed according to the usual
mathematical principles; each part of each light-wave consists of
events in a certain region of space-time. On coming in contact with the
human body, the energy in the light-wave takes new forms, but there
is still causal continuity. At last it reaches the brain, and there
one of its constituent events is what we call a visual sensation. This
visual sensation is popularly called seeing the object from which the
light-waves started--or from which they were reflected if the object
was not self-luminous.

Thus what is called a perception is only connected with its object
through the laws of physics. Its relation to the object is causal and
mathematical; we cannot say whether or not it resembles the object in
any intrinsic respect, except that both it and the object are brief
events in space-time.

I think we may lay down the following universal characteristics of
causal laws in an advanced science. Given any event, there are other
events at neighbouring places in space-time which will occur slightly
later if no other factors intervene; but in practice other factors
almost always do intervene, and, in that case, the event which actually
occurs at any point of space-time is a mathematical resultant of those
which would have followed the various neighbouring events if they had
been alone concerned. The equations of physics give the rules according
to which events are connected, but all are of the above sort.

Formerly it was thought that the equations of physics sufficed,
theoretically, to determine the course of affairs in the physical
world, given all the facts about some finite stretch of time, however
short. Now it appears that this is not the case, so far as the known
equations are concerned. The known equations suffice to determine what
happens in empty space, and statistical averages as to what happens to
matter; but they do not tell us when an individual atom will absorb or
radiate energy. Whether there are laws, other than those of statistics,
governing the behaviour of an individual atom in this respect, we do
not know.

It should be observed that there are causal laws of a different sort
from those of pure physics; such are the laws that light-waves cause
visual sensations and sound-waves cause auditory sensations. All the
empirical evidence for physics rests upon such laws, therefore nothing
in physics can have a higher degree of certainty than such laws have.
Let us stop a moment to ask what we mean by cause in this connection.

The connection of light-waves and visual sensations looks a little
different according as we start with physics or with psychology,
though, of course, ultimately the result must be the same. Let us
first start with physics. I say, then, that when a light-wave travels
outwards from a body there are successive events at successive places,
and that the corresponding event in a brain behind a normal eye is a
visual sensation. This is the only event in the whole series about
which I can say anything not purely abstract and mathematical.

Now let us start from the sensation. I say, then, that this sensation
is one of a vast series of connected events, travelling out from a
centre according to certain mathematical laws, in virtue of which the
sensation enables me to know a good deal about events elsewhere. That
is why the sensation is a source of physical knowledge.

It will be seen that, according to the view I have been advocating,
there is no difficulty about interaction between mind and body. A
sensation is merely one link in a chain of physical causation; when we
regard the sensation as the end of such a chain, we have what would
be regarded as an effect of matter on mind; when as the beginning,
an effect of mind on matter. But mind is merely a cross-section in a
stream of physical causation, and there is nothing odd about its being
both an effect and a cause in the physical world. Thus physical causal
laws are those that are fundamental.

There seems no reason to regard causation as _a priori_, though this
question is not simple. Given certain very general assumptions as to
the structure of space-time, there are bound to be what we have called
causal laws. These general assumptions must really replace causality
as our basic principles. But, general as they are, they cannot be
taken as _a priori_; they are the generalisation and abstract epitome
of the fact that there are causal laws, and this must remain merely
an empirical fact, which is rendered probable, though not certain, by
inductive arguments.




CHAPTER XV

THE NATURE OF OUR KNOWLEDGE OF PHYSICS


In this chapter, we shall seek an answer to two questions: First, _how_
do we know about the world dealt with in physics? Secondly, _what_ do
we know about it, assuming the truth of modern physics?

First: How do we know about the physical world? We have already seen
that this question cannot have a simple answer, since the basis of
inference is something that happens in our own heads, and our knowledge
of anything outside our own heads must be more or less precarious. For
the present, I shall take it for granted that we may accept testimony,
with due precautions. In other words, I shall assume that what we hear
when, as we believe, others are speaking to us, does in fact have
meaning to the speaker, and not only to us; with a corresponding
assumption as regards writing. This assumption will be examined at a
later stage. For the present, I will merely emphasise that it _is_ an
assumption, and that it may possibly be false, since people seem to
speak to us in dreams, and yet, on waking, we become persuaded that
we invented the dream. It is impossible to prove, by a demonstrative
argument, that we are not always dreaming; the best we can hope is a
proof that this is improbable. But for the present let us leave this
discussion on one side, and assume that the words we hear and read
mean what they would if we spoke or wrote them.

On this basis, we have reason to know that the worlds of different
people are alike in certain respects and different in certain others.
Take, for example, the audience at a theatre: they all, we say, hear
the same words and see the same gestures, which, moreover, are those
that the actors wish them to hear and see. But those who are near the
stage hear the words more loudly than those further off; they also
hear them somewhat earlier. And those who sit on the right do not see
quite what is seen by those who sit on the left or in the centre. These
differences are of two sorts: on the one hand, some people can see
something invisible to others; on the other hand, when two people, as
we say, see the same thing, they see it differently owing to effects
of perspective and of the way the light is reflected. All this is a
question of physics, not of psychology; for if we place a camera in an
empty seat in the theatre, the perspective in the resultant photograph
is intermediate between the perspectives that are seen by persons
sitting on either side; indeed the whole matter of perspective is
determined by quite simple geometrical laws. These laws show also what
is common to the shapes that two people see when they see the same
thing from different points of view: what is common is what is studied
by projective geometry, which is concerned with what is independent of
measurement in geometrical figures. All the differences in appearance
due to perspective have to be learned in learning to draw: for this
purpose, it is necessary to learn to see things as they really seem,
and not as they seem to seem.

But, it will be said, what can you mean by how things really seem
and how they seem to seem? We come here upon an important fact about
learning. When, in early infancy, we are learning to correlate sight
and touch, we acquire the habit of reacting to a visual stimulus in a
manner which is more objective than that in which a camera reacts.
When we see a coin not directly in front of us, we judge it to be
circular, although the camera would show it as oval, and a man would
have to make it oval in a picture of a scene which contained it. We
learn, therefore, to react to a visual shape in a manner corresponding
to how it would appear if it were in the centre of the field of vision,
provided we do not immediately focus upon it, which is what we
naturally do when anything visible interests us. As a matter of fact,
we are constantly looking in different directions, and, as a rule, only
noticing what, at the moment, is in the centre of our field of vision.
Thus our visual world consists rather of a synthesis of things viewed
directly in succession than of things seen simultaneously while the
centre of the field is kept fixed. This is one reason why the rules of
perspective have to be learned, although a picture which ignores them
makes an impression of being wrong.

Another reason for the objectivity of the impressions we derive from
sight is correlation with other senses, especially touch. Through
this correlation we soon get to know that a man twenty yards away
is really just as big as a man one yard away. When children are
learning to draw, they find it very difficult to make distant objects
sufficiently small, because they know they are not really small. We
soon learn to judge the distance of a visual object, and to react to
it according to the size that it would have if touched--or travelled
over--in the case of very large objects such as mountains. Our sense
of size is not derived from sight, but from such sources as touch and
locomotion; our metrical judgments, when the stimulus is only visual,
are a result of previous experience.

By the time a child can speak well, he has had a great deal of this
kind of experience. Consequently our verbal reactions contain a great
deal more objectivity than they would if they came at an earlier stage
of infancy. The result is that a number of people can view a scene
simultaneously, and use exactly the same words about it. The words
which we naturally use in describing what we see are those describing
features that will also be evident to others in our neighbourhood. We
say, there is a man, not, there is a coloured shape whose visual
dimensions are such-and-such an angle vertically, and such another
horizontally. The inference is a physiological inference, and only
subsequent reflection makes us aware that it has taken place. We
can, however, become aware of it through occasional mistakes; a dot
on the window-pane may be mistaken for a man in a distant field. In
this case, we can discover our error by opening the window, or by
moving the head. In general, however, physiological inferences of this
sort are correct, since they have resulted from correlations which
are very common, and are likely to be present on a given occasion.
Consequently our words tend to conceal what is private and peculiar in
our impressions, and to make us believe that different people live in a
common world to a greater extent than is in fact the case.

We have been using the word objectivity in the preceding pages,
and it is time to consider exactly what we mean by it. Suppose some
scene--say in a theatre--is simultaneously seen by a number of people
and photographed by a number of cameras. The impression made upon
a person or a camera is in some respects like that made upon other
persons and cameras, in other respects different. We shall call the
elements which are alike objective elements in the impression,
and those which are peculiar we shall call subjective. Thus those
features of shapes which are considered in projective geometry will
be objective, whereas those considered in metrical geometry (where
lengths and angles are measured) cannot be made objective through sight
alone, but demand the use of other senses. In the photographs, a man
on the stage will be longer if the camera is near the stage than if it
is far off, assuming all the cameras to be alike. But if four actors
are standing in a row in one photograph, they will be standing in a
row in another; this is an objective feature of the impression. And
the differences in the visual impressions of a number of spectators
with normal eyesight are exactly analogous to the differences in the
photographs; so also are the likenesses. Thus the subjectivity that
we are speaking about at present is something belonging to the physical
world, not to psychology. It marks the fact that the stimulus, whether
to an eye or to a camera, is not exactly the same wherever the eye or
the camera may be placed; there are features of the stimulus which are
constant (within limits), but there are others which are different from
any two different points of view.

The tendency of our perceptions is to emphasise increasingly the
objective elements in an impression, unless we have some special
reason, as artists have, for doing the opposite. This tendency begins
before speech, is much accentuated after speech has been acquired,
and is prolonged by scientific physics. The theory of relativity is
only the last term, so far, in the elimination of subjective elements
from impressions. But it must not be supposed that the subjective
elements are any less real than the objective elements; they are
only less important. They are less important because they do not point
to anything beyond themselves as the others do. We want our senses to
give us information, _i.e._ to tell us about something more than our
own momentary impression. We acquire information through our senses
if we attend to the objective elements in the impression and ignore
the others; but the subjective elements are just as truly part of the
actual impression. This is obvious as soon as we realise that the
camera is as subjective as we are.

Such considerations lead irresistibly to the scientific view that,
when an object can be seen or photographed from a number of points
of view, there is a connected set of events (light-waves) travelling
outward from a centre; that, moreover, there are some respects in
which all these events are alike, and others in which they differ one
from another. We must not think of a light-wave as a thing, but as a
connected group of rhythmical events. The mathematical characteristics
of such a group can be inferred by physics, within limits; but the
intrinsic character of the component events cannot be inferred. The
events constituting light-waves are only known through their effects
upon our eyes, optic nerves, and brains, and these effects are not
themselves light-waves, as is obvious from the fact that nerves and
brains are not transparent. Light in the physical world, therefore,
must consist of events which are in some way different from the events
which happen when we see; but we cannot say more than this as to the
intrinsic quality of these external events. Moreover, when a number of
people, as we say, see the same thing, what we have reason to believe
is that light-waves emanating from a certain region have reached the
eyes of all these people. As to what is in the region from which the
light-waves come, we cannot tell.

But--so the plain man is tempted to argue--we can tell quite well,
because we can touch objects that we see, and discover that there is
something hard and solid in the place from which the light-waves come.
Or, again, we may find that there is something there which, though not
solid, is very hot, and burns us when we try to touch it. We all feel
that touch gives more evidence of reality than sight; ghosts and
rainbows can be seen but not touched. One reason for this greater sense
of reality is that our spatial relation to an object when we touch it
with our finger-tips is given, and therefore an object does not give
such different impressions of touch to different people as it does of
sight. Another reason is that there are a number of objects that can be
seen but not touched--reflections, smoke, mist, etc.--and that these
objects are calculated to surprise the inexperienced. None of these
facts, however, justify the plain man in supposing that touch makes him
know real things as they are, though we are verbally forced to admit
that it brings him into contact with them.

We have seen on an earlier occasion how complex is the physical and
physiological process leading from the object to the brain when we
touch something; and we have seen that illusions of touch can be
produced artificially. What we experience when we have a sensation
of touch is, therefore, no more a revelation of the real nature of
the object touched than what we experience when we look at it. As a
matter of fact, if modern physics is to be believed, sight, prudently
employed, gives us a more delicate knowledge concerning objects
than touch can ever do. Touch, as compared with sight, is gross and
massive. We can photograph the path of an individual electron. We
perceive colours which indicate the changes happening in atoms. We can
see faint stars even though the energy of the light that reaches us
from them is inconceivably minute. Sight may deceive the unwary more
than touch, but for accurate scientific knowledge it is incomparably
superior to any of the other senses.

It is chiefly through ideas derived from sight that physicists have
been led to the modern conception of the atom as a centre from which
radiations travel. We do not know what happens in the centre. The idea
that there is a little hard lump there, which _is_ the electron or
proton, is an illegitimate intrusion of common-sense notions derived
from touch. For aught we know, the atom may consist entirely of the
radiations which come out of it. It is useless to argue that radiations
cannot come out of nothing. We know that they come, and they do not
become any more really intelligible by being supposed to come out of a
little lump.

Modern physics, therefore, reduces matter to a set of events which
proceed outward from a centre. If there is something further in the
centre itself, we cannot know about it, and it is irrelevant to
physics. The events that take the place of matter in the old sense are
inferred from their effect on eyes, photographic plates, and other
instruments. What we know about them is not their intrinsic character,
but their structure and their mathematical laws. Their structure is
inferred chiefly through the maxim same cause, same effect. It
follows from this maxim that if the effects are different, the causes
must be different; if, therefore, we see red and blue side by side,
we are justified in inferring that in the direction where we see
red something different is happening from what is happening in the
direction where we see blue. By extensions of this line of argument
we arrive at the mathematical laws of the physical world. Physics is
mathematical, not because we know so much about the physical world,
but because we know so little: it is only its mathematical properties
that we can discover. For the rest, our knowledge is negative. In
places where there are no eyes or ears or brains there are no colours
or sounds, but there are events having certain characteristics which
lead them to cause colours and sounds in places where there are eyes
and ears and brains. We cannot find out what the world looks like from
a place where there is nobody, because if we go to look there will be
somebody there; the attempt is as hopeless as trying to jump on ones
own shadow.

Matter as it appears to common sense, and as it has until recently
appeared in physics, must be given up. The old idea of matter was
connected with the idea of substance, and this, in turn, with a view
of time that the theory of relativity shows to be untenable. The old
view was that there is one cosmic time, and that, given any two events
in any two parts of the universe, either they are simultaneous, or the
first is earlier than the second, or the second earlier than the first.
It was thought that the time-order of the two events must always be
objectively definite, although _we_ might be unable to determine it.
We now find that this is not the case. Events which can be regarded as
all in one place, or all parts of the history of one piece of matter,
still have a definite time-order. So do events in different places if a
person situated where the second takes place can see the first before
the second happens, or, more exactly, if light can travel from the
place of the one to the place of the other so as to reach the other
place before the second event. (Here we mean by a place the position
of a given piece of matter: however the matter may move relatively
to other matter, it is always in the same place from its own point
of view.) But if light travelling from the place of the one event to
the place of the other event arrives at the place of the other event
after the other event has taken place, and conversely, then there is
no definite objective time-order of the two events, and there is no
reason for regarding either as earlier than the other; nor yet for
regarding the two as simultaneous; ideally careful observers will judge
differently according to the way in which they are moving. Thus time
is not cosmic, but is to some extent individual and personal for each
piece of matter.

What do we mean by a piece of matter in this statement? We do not
mean something that preserves a simple identity throughout its history,
nor do we mean something hard and solid, nor even a hypothetical
thing-in-itself known only through its effects. We mean the effects
themselves, only that we no longer invoke an unknowable cause for
them. We find that energy in various forms spreads outwards from
various centres; we find also that such centres have a certain degree
of persistence, though this persistence is not absolute--the modern
physicist faces cheerfully the possibility that an electron and a
proton may mutually annihilate each other, and even suggests that this
may be the main source of the radiant energy of the stars, because
when it happens it makes an explosion. What is asserted may be put as
follows: When energy radiates from a centre, we can describe the laws
of its radiation conveniently by imagining something in the centre,
which we will call an electron or a proton according to circumstances,
and for certain purposes it is convenient to regard this centre as
persisting, _i.e._ as not a single point in space-time but a series
of such points, separated from each other by time-like intervals. All
this, however, is only a convenient way of describing what happens
elsewhere, namely the radiation of energy away from the centre. As to
what goes on in the centre itself, if anything, physics is silent.

What Dr. Whitehead calls the pushiness of matter disappears
altogether on this view. Matter is a convenient formula for
describing what happens where it isnt. I am talking physics, not
metaphysics; when we come to metaphysics, we may be able, tentatively,
to add something to this statement, but science alone can hardly add
to it. Materialism as a philosophy becomes hardly tenable in view of
this evaporation of matter. But those who would formerly have been
materialists can still adopt a philosophy which comes to much the
same thing in many respects. They can say that the type of causation
dealt with in physics is fundamental, and that all events are subject
to physical laws. I do not wish, as yet, to consider how far such a
view should be adopted; I am only suggesting that it must replace
materialism as a view to be seriously examined.




PART III

MAN FROM WITHIN




CHAPTER XVI

SELF-OBSERVATION


It will be remembered that throughout Part I, we agreed to consider
only those facts about a man which can be discovered by external
observation, and we postponed the question whether this excluded any
genuine knowledge or not. The usual view is that we know many things
which could not be known without self-observation, but the behaviourist
holds that this view is mistaken. I might be inclined to agree wholly
with the behaviourist but for the considerations which were forced upon
us in Part II, when we were examining our knowledge of the physical
world. We were then led to the conclusion that, assuming physics to
be correct, the data for our knowledge of physics are infected with
subjectivity, and it is impossible for two men to observe the same
phenomenon except in a rough and approximate sense. This undermines the
supposed objectivity of the behaviourist method, at least in principle;
as a matter of degree, it may survive to some extent. Broadly speaking,
if physics is true and if we accept a behaviourist definition of
knowledge such as that of Chapter VIII, we ought, as a rule, to know
more about things that happen near the brain than about things that
happen far from it, and most of all about things that happen in the
brain. This _seemed_ untrue because people thought that what happens
in the brain is what the physiologist sees when he examines it; but
this, according to the theory of Chapter XII, happens in the brain of
the physiologist. Thus the _a priori_ objection to the view that we
know best what happens in our brains is removed, and we are led back
to self-observation as the most reliable way of obtaining knowledge.
This is the thesis which is to be expanded and sustained in the present
chapter.

As every one knows, the certainty of self-observation was the basis
of Descartes system, with which modern philosophy began. Descartes,
being anxious to build his metaphysic only upon what was absolutely
certain, set to work, as a preliminary, to doubt anything that he could
make himself doubt. He succeeded in doubting the whole external world,
since there might be a malicious demon who took pleasure in presenting
deceitful appearances to him. (For that matter, dreams would have
supplied a sufficient argument.) But he could not manage to doubt his
own existence. For, said he, I am really doubting; whatever else may be
doubtful, the fact that I doubt is indubitable. And I could not doubt
if I did not exist. He summed up the argument in his famous formula:
_I think, therefore I am_. And having arrived at this certainty, he
proceeded to build up the world again by successive inferences. Oddly
enough, it was very like the world in which he had believed before his
excursion into scepticism.

It is instructive to contrast this argument with Dr. Watsons. Dr.
Watson, like Descartes, is sceptical of many things which others
accept without question; and, like Descartes, he believes that there
are some things so certain that they can be safely used as the basis
of a startling philosophy. But the things which Dr. Watson regards
as certain are just those which Descartes regarded as doubtful, and
the thing which Dr. Watson most vehemently rejects is just what
Descartes regarded as absolutely unquestionable. Dr. Watson maintains
that there is no such thing as thinking. No doubt he believes in
his own existence, but not because he thinks he can think. The
things that strike him as absolutely indubitable are rats in mazes,
time-measurements, physiological facts about glands and muscles, and so
on. What are we to think when two able men hold such opposite views?
The natural inference would be that _everything_ is doubtful. This may
be true, but there are degrees of doubtfulness, and we should like to
know which of these two philosophers, if either, is right as to the
region of minimum doubtfulness.

Let us begin by examining Descartes view. I think, therefore I am is
what he says, but this wont do as it stands. What, from his own point
of view, he should profess to know is not _I_ think, but there is
thinking. He finds doubt going on, and says: There is doubt. Doubt
is a form of thought, therefore there is thought. To translate this
into _I_ think is to assume a great deal that a previous exercise
in scepticism ought to have taught Descartes to call in question. He
would say that thoughts imply a thinker. But why should they? Why
should not a thinker be simply a certain series of thoughts, connected
with each other by causal laws? Descartes believed in substance,
both in the mental and in the material world. He thought that there
could not be motion unless something moved, nor thinking unless some
one thought. No doubt most people would still hold this view; but in
fact it springs from a notion--usually unconscious--that the categories
of grammar are also the categories of reality. We have already seen
that matter is merely a name for certain strings of sets of events.
It follows that what we call motion of matter really means that the
centre of such a set of events at one time does not have the same
spatial relations to other events as the connected centre at another
time has to the connected other events. It does not mean that there is
a definite entity, a piece of matter, which is now in one place and
now in another. Similarly, when we say, I think first this and then
that, we ought not to mean that there is a single entity I which
has two successive thoughts. We ought to mean only that there are two
successive thoughts which have causal relations of the kind that makes
us call them parts of one biography, in the same sort of way in which
successive notes may be parts of one tune; and that these thoughts are
connected with the body which is speaking in the way (to be further
investigated) in which thoughts and bodies are connected. All this is
rather complicated, and cannot be admitted as part of any ultimate
certainty. What Descartes really felt sure about was a certain
occurrence, which he described in the words I think. But the words
were not quite an accurate representation of the occurrence; indeed,
words never can escape from certain grammatical and social requirements
which make them say at once more and less than we really mean. I think
we ought to admit that Descartes was justified in feeling sure that
there was a certain occurrence, concerning which doubt was impossible;
but he was not justified in bringing in the word I in describing this
occurrence, and it remains to be considered whether he was justified in
using the word think.

In using a general word such as think, we are obviously going beyond
the datum, from a logical point of view. We are subsuming a particular
occurrence under a heading, and the heading is derived from past
experience. Now all words are applicable to many occurrences; therefore
all words go beyond any possible datum. In this sense, it is impossible
ever to convey in words the particularity of a concrete experience; all
words are more or less abstract. Such, at least, is a plausible line
of argument, but I am by no means sure that it is valid. For example,
the sight of a particular dog may make the general word dog come
into your mind; you then know that it is a dog, but you may not notice
what sort of dog it is. In this sense, the knowledge with which we
start is abstract and general; that is to say, it consists of a learned
reaction to a stimulus of a certain sort. The reactions, at any rate
in so far as they are verbal, are more uniform than the stimuli. A
witness might be asked Did you see a dog? Yes. What sort of dog?
Oh, just an ordinary dog; I dont remember more about it. That is to
say, the witnesss reaction consisted of the generalised word dog
and no more. One is almost reminded of quantum phenomena in the atom.
When light falls on a hydrogen atom, it may make the electron jump from
the first orbit to the second, or to the third, etc. Each of these
is a generalised reaction to a stimulus which has no corresponding
generality. So dogs and cats have each their individual peculiarities,
but the ordinary inobservant person responds with the generalised
reaction dog or cat, and the particularity of the stimulus leads to
no corresponding particularity in the knowledge-reaction.

To return to Descartes and his thinking: it is possible, according to
what we have just said, that Descartes knew he was thinking with more
certainty than he knew what he was thinking about. This possibility
requires that we should ask what he meant by thinking. And since, for
him, thinking was the primitive certainty, we must not introduce any
external stimulus, since he considered it possible to doubt whether
anything external existed.

Descartes used the word thinking somewhat more widely than we should
generally do nowadays. He included all perception, emotion, and
volition, not only what are called intellectual processes. We may
perhaps with advantage concentrate upon perception. Descartes would say
that, when he sees the moon, he is more certain of his visual percept
than he is of the outside object. As we have seen, this attitude is
rational from the standpoint of physics and physiology, because a given
occurrence in the brain is capable of having a variety of causes, and
where the cause is unusual common sense will be misled. It would be
theoretically possible to stimulate the optic nerve artificially in
just the way in which light coming from the moon stimulates it; in this
case, we should have the same experience as when we see the moon, but
should be deceived as to its external source. Descartes was influenced
by an argument of this sort, when he brought up the possibility of a
deceitful demon. Therefore what he felt certain about was not what
he had initially felt certain about, but what remained certain after
an argument as to the causes of perception. This brings us to a
distinction which is important, but difficult to apply; the distinction
between what we in fact do not doubt, and what we should not doubt if
we were completely rational. We do not in fact question the existence
of the sun and moon, though perhaps we might teach ourselves to do
so by a long course of Cartesian doubt. Even then, according to
Descartes, we could not doubt that we have the experiences which we
have hitherto called seeing the sun and seeing the moon, although
we shall need different words if we are to describe these experiences
correctly.

The question arises: Why should we not doubt everything? Why should we
remain convinced that we have these experiences? Might not a deceitful
demon perpetually supply us with false memories? When we say a moment
ago I had the experience which I have hitherto called seeing the sun,
perhaps we are deceived. In dreams we often remember things that never
happened. At best, therefore, we can be sure of our present momentary
experience, not of anything that happened even half a minute ago.
And before we can so fix our momentary experience as to make it the
basis of a philosophy, it will be past, and therefore uncertain. When
Descartes said I think, he may have had certainty; but by the time he
said therefore I am, he was relying upon memory, and may have been
deceived. This line of argument leads to complete scepticism about
everything. If we are to avoid such a result, we must have some new
principle.

In actual fact, we start by feeling certainty about all sorts of
things, and we surrender this feeling only where some definite argument
has convinced us that it is liable to lead to error. When we find any
class of primitive certainties which never leads to error, we retain
our convictions in regard to this class. That is to say, wherever we
feel initial certainty, we require an argument to make us doubt, not an
argument to make us believe. We may therefore take, as the basis of our
beliefs, any class of primitive certainties which cannot be shown to
lead us into error. This is really what Descartes does, although he is
not clear about it himself.

Moreover, when we have found an error in something of which we were
previously certain, we do not as a rule abandon entirely the belief
which misled us, but we seek, if we can, to modify it so that it
shall no longer be demonstrably false. This is what has happened
with perception. When we think we see an external object, we may be
deceived by a variety of causes. There may be a mirage or a reflection;
in this case, the source of the error is in the external world, and a
photographic plate would be equally deceived. There may be a stimulus
to the eye of the sort that makes us see stars, or we may see little
black dots owing to a disordered liver, in which case, the source of
the error is in the body but not in the brain. We may have dreams in
which we seem to see all sorts of things; in this case, the source
of the error is in the brain. Having gradually discovered these
possibilities of error, people have become somewhat wary as to the
objective significance of their perceptions; but they have remained
convinced that they really have the perceptions they thought they had,
although the common-sense interpretation of them is sometimes at fault.
Thus, while retaining the conviction that they are sure of something,
they have gradually changed their view as to what it is that they are
sure of. Nothing is known that tends to show error in the view that we
really have the percepts we think we have, so long as we are prudent
in interpreting them as signs of something external. That is the valid
basis for Descartes view that thought is more certain than external
objects. When thought is taken to mean the experiences which we
usually regard as percepts of objects, there are sound reasons for
accepting Descartes opinion to this extent.

Let us now take up Dr. Watsons view. We shall find, if I am not
mistaken, that his position also is to a very large extent valid. That
being so, we shall seek to find an intermediate opinion, accepting what
seems valid and rejecting what seems doubtful in the contentions of
both protagonists.

Dr. Watsons view as to what is most certain is one which is in entire
accordance with common sense. All psychological matters the plain man
regards as more or less open to question, but he has no doubts about
his office, his morning train, the tax-collector, the weather, and
the other blessings of this life. It may amuse him, in an idle hour,
to listen to some one playing with the idea that life is a dream, or
suggesting that the thoughts of the people in the train are more real
than the train. But unless he is a philosophical lecturer, he does not
countenance such notions in business hours. Who can imagine a clerk in
an office conceiving metaphysical doubts as to the existence of his
boss? Or would any railroad president regard with favour the theory
that his railroad is only an idea in the minds of the shareholders?
Such a view, he would say, though it is often sound as regards
gold-mines, is simply silly when it comes to a railroad: anybody can
see it, and can get himself run over if he wanders on the tracks under
the impression that they do not exist. Belief in the unreality of
matter is likely to lead to an untimely death, and that, perhaps, is
the reason why this belief is so rare, since those who entertained it
died out. We cannot dismiss the common-sense outlook as simply silly,
since it succeeds in daily life; if we are going to reject it in part,
we must be sure that we do so in favor of something equally tough as a
means of coping with practical problems.

Descartes says: I think, therefore I am. Watson says: There are rats in
mazes, therefore I dont think. At least, a parodist might thus sum up
his philosophy. What Watson really says is more like this: (1) The most
certain facts are those which are public, and can be confirmed by the
testimony of a number of observers. Such facts form the basis of the
physical sciences: physics, chemistry, biology, anatomy, physiology,
to mention only those that are relevant to the matter in question. (2)
The physical sciences are capable of affording an explanation of all
the publicly observable facts about human behaviour. (3) There is no
reason to suppose that there are any facts about human beings that can
be known only in some other way. (4) In particular, introspection, as
a means of discovering by self-observation things that are in principle
undiscoverable by observation of others, is a pernicious superstition,
which must be swept away before any really sound knowledge of man
becomes possible. (5) And, as a corollary, there is no reason to
believe in the existence of thought as opposed to speech and other
bodily behaviour.

I have numbered the above propositions, as it is important to keep them
separate. On the whole, (1), (2), and (3) seem to me to be true, but
(4) and (5) seem to me to be false. Behaviourists, I think, incline to
the view that (4) and (5) follow from (1), (2), and (3); but this view
I attribute to what I should regard as errors concerning the basis of
physics. That is why it was necessary to discuss physics before coming
to a decision on this question of self-observation. But let us examine
each of the above propositions in turn.

(1) It is true that the facts upon which the physical sciences are
based are all of them public, in the sense that many men can observe
them. If a phenomenon is photographed, any number of people can inspect
the photograph. If a measurement is made, not only may several people
be present, but others can repeat the experiment. If the result does
not confirm the first observer, the supposed fact is rejected. The
publicity of physical facts is always regarded as one of the greatest
assets of physics. On a common-sense basis, therefore, the first of the
propositions in which we have summed up the behaviourist philosophy
must be admitted.

There are, however, some very important provisos which must be
mentioned. In the first place, a scientific observer is not expected
to note his integral reaction to a situation, but only that part of it
which experience leads him to regard as objective, _i.e._ the same as
the reaction of any other competent observer. This process of learning
to note only objective features in our reaction is, as we have seen,
begun in infancy; training in science only carries it further. A good
observer does not mention what is peculiar to himself in his reaction.
He does not say: A boring speck of light danced about, causing me
eye-fatigue and irritation; finally it settled at such-and-such a
point. He says simply: The reading was such-and-such. All this
objectivity is a result of training and experience. One may say, in
fact, that very few men have the right reaction to a scientific
situation. Therefore an immense amount of theory is mixed up with what
passes in science as pure observation. The nature and justification of
this theory is a matter requiring investigation.

In the second place, we must not misinterpret the nature of the
publicity in the case of physical phenomena. The publicity consists in
the fact that a number of people make closely similar reactions at a
given moment. Suppose, for example, that twelve men are told to watch a
screen for the appearance of a bright light, and to say now when it
appears. Suppose the experimenter hears them all just when he himself
sees the light; then he has good reason to believe that they have each
had a stimulus similar to his. But physics compels us to hold that they
have had twelve separate stimuli, so that when we say they have all
seen the same light we can only legitimately mean that their twelve
stimuli had a common causal origin. In attributing our perceptions to a
normal causal origin outside ourselves, we run a certain risk of error,
since the origin may be unusual: there may be reflection or refraction
on the way to the eye, there may be an unusual condition of the eye
or optic nerve or brain. All these considerations give a certain very
small probability that, on a given occasion, there is not such an
outside cause as we suppose. If, however, a number of people concur
with us, _i.e._ simultaneously have reactions which they attribute to
an outside cause that can be identified with the one we had inferred,
then the probability of error is enormously diminished. This is exactly
the usual case of concurrent testimony. If twelve men, each of whom
lies every other time that he speaks, independently testify that some
event has occurred, the odds in favour of their all speaking the truth
are 4095 to 1. The same sort of argument shows that our public senses,
when confirmed by others, are probably speaking the truth, except where
there are sources of collective illusion such as mirage or suggestion.

In this respect, however, there is no _essential_ difference between
matters of external observation and matters of self-observation.
Suppose, for example, that, for the first time in your life, you smell
assaftida. You say to yourself that is a most unpleasant smell. Now
unpleasantness is a matter of self-observation. It may be _correlated_
with physiological conditions which can be observed in others, but it
is certainly not identical with these, since people knew that things
were pleasant and unpleasant before they knew about the physiological
conditions accompanying pleasure and its opposite. Therefore when
you say that smell is unpleasant you are noticing something that
does not come into the world of physics as ordinarily understood. You
are, however, a reader of psycho-analysis, and you have learned that
sometimes hate is concealed love and love is concealed hate. You say to
yourself, therefore: Perhaps I really like the smell of assaftida,
but am ashamed of liking it. You therefore make your friends smell it,
with the result that you soon have no friends. You then try children,
and finally chimpanzees. Friends and children give verbal expression
to their disgust: chimpanzees are expressive, though not verbal. All
these facts lead you to state: The smell of assaftida is unpleasant.
Although self-observation is involved, the result has the same kind of
certainty, and the same kind of objective verification, as if it were
one of the facts that form the empirical basis of physics.

(2) The second proposition, to the effect that the physical sciences
are capable of affording an explanation of all the publicly observable
facts about human behaviour, is one as to which it is possible to argue
endlessly. The plain fact is that we do not yet know whether it is true
or false. There is much to be said in its favour on general scientific
grounds, particularly if it is put forward, not as a dogma, but as a
methodological precept, a recommendation to scientific investigators
as to the direction in which they are to seek for solution of their
problems. But so long as much of human behaviour remains unexplained
in terms of physical laws, we cannot assert dogmatically that there is
no residue which is theoretically inexplicable by this method. We may
say that the trend of science, so far, seems to render such a view
improbable, but to say even so much is perhaps rash, though, for my
part, I should regard it as still more rash to say that there certainly
is such a residue. I propose, therefore, as a matter of argument, to
admit the behaviourist position on this point, since my objections to
behaviourism as an ultimate philosophy come from quite a different kind
of considerations.

(3) The proposition we are now to examine may be stated as follows:
All facts that can be known about human beings are known by the
same method by which the facts of physics are known. This I hold to
be true, but for a reason exactly opposite to that which influences
the behaviourist. I hold that the facts of physics, like those of
psychology, are obtained by what is really self-observation, although
common sense mistakenly supposes that it is observation of external
objects. As we saw in Chapter XIII, your visual, auditory, and other
percepts are all in your head, from the standpoint of physics.
Therefore, when you see the sun, it is, strictly speaking, an event
in yourself that you are knowing: the inference to an external cause
is more or less precarious, and is on occasion mistaken. To revert to
the assaftida: it is by a number of self-observations that you know
that the smell of assaftida is unpleasant, and it is by a number of
self-observations that you know that the sun is bright and warm. There
is no essential difference between the two cases. One may say that the
data of psychology are those private facts which are not very directly
linked with facts outside the body, while the data of physics are those
private facts which have a very direct causal connection with facts
outside the body. Thus physics and psychology have the same method;
but this is rather what is commonly taken to be the special method of
psychology than what is regarded as the method of physics. We differ
from the behaviourist in assimilating physical to psychological method,
rather than the opposite.

(4) Is there a source of knowledge such as is believed in by those
who appeal to introspection? According to what we have just been
saying, all knowledge rests upon something which might, in a sense, be
called introspection. Nevertheless, there may be some distinction to
be discovered. I think myself that the only distinction of importance
is in the degree of correlation with events outside the body of the
observer. Suppose, for example, that a behaviourist is watching a rat
in a maze, and that a friend is standing by. He says to the friend
Do you see that rat? If the friend says yes, the behaviourist is
engaged in his normal occupation of observing physical occurrences.
But if the friend says no, the behaviourist exclaims, I must give up
this boot-legged whiskey. In that case, if his horror still permits
him to think clearly, he will be obliged to say that in watching the
imaginary rat he was engaged in introspection. There was certainly
something happening, and he could still obtain knowledge by observing
what was happening, provided he abstained from supposing that it had
a cause outside his body. But he cannot, without outside testimony
or some other extraneous information, distinguish between the real
rat and the imaginary one. Thus in the case of the real rat also,
his primary datum ought to be considered introspective, in spite of
the fact that it does not seem so; for the datum in the case of the
imaginary rat also does not _seem_ to be merely introspective.

The real point seems to be this: some events have effects which radiate
all round them, and can therefore produce reactions in a number of
observers; of these, ordinary speech is an illustration. But other
events produce effects which travel linearly, not spherically; of
these, speech into a telephone from a sound-proof telephone box may
serve as an illustration. This can be heard by only one person beside
the speaker; if instead of a speaker we had an instrument at the
mouthpiece, only one person could hear the sound, namely the person
at the other end of the telephone. Events which happen inside a human
body are like the noise in the telephone: they have effects, in the
main, which travel along nerves to the brain, instead of spreading
out in all directions equally. Consequently, a man can know a great
deal about his own body which another man can only know indirectly.
Another man can see the hole in my tooth, but he cannot feel my
toothache. If he infers that I feel toothache, he still does not have
the very same knowledge that I have; he may use the same words, but
the stimulus to his use of them is different from the stimulus to
mine, and I can be acutely aware of the pain which is the stimulus to
my words. In all these ways a man has knowledge concerning his own
body which is obtained differently from the way in which he obtains
knowledge of other bodies. This peculiar knowledge is, in one sense,
introspective, though not quite in the sense that Dr. Watson denies.

(5) We come now to the real crux of the whole matter, namely to the
question: Do we think? This question is very ambiguous, so long as
thinking has not been clearly defined. Perhaps we may state the
matter thus: Do we know events in us which would not be included in
an absolutely complete knowledge of physics? I mean by a complete
knowledge of physics a knowledge not only of physical laws, but also
of what we may call geography, _i.e._ the distribution of energy
throughout space-time. If the question is put in this way, I think it
is quite clear that we do know things not included in physics. A blind
man could know the whole of physics, but he could not know what things
look like to people who can see, nor what is the difference between
red and blue as seen. He could know all about wave-lengths, but people
knew the difference between red and blue as seen before they knew
anything about wave-lengths. The person who knows physics and can see
knows that a certain wave-length will give him a sensation of red, but
this knowledge is not part of physics. Again, we know what we mean by
pleasant and unpleasant, and we do not know this any better when
we have discovered that pleasant things have one kind of physiological
effect and unpleasant things have another. If we did not already know
what things are pleasant and what unpleasant, we could never have
discovered this correlation. But the knowledge that certain things are
pleasant and certain others unpleasant is no part of physics.

Finally, we come to imaginations, hallucinations, and dreams. In all
these cases, we may suppose that there is an external stimulus, but
the cerebral part of the causal chain is unusual, so that there is not
in the outside world something connected with what we are imagining
in the same way as in normal perception. Yet in such cases we can
quite clearly know what is happening to us; we can, for example,
often remember our dreams. I think dreams must count as thought, in
the sense that they lie outside physics. They may be accompanied by
movements, but knowledge of them is not knowledge of these movements.
Indeed all knowledge as to movements of matter is inferential, and
the knowledge which a scientific man should take as constituting
his primary data is more like our knowledge of dreams than like our
knowledge of the movements of rats or heavenly bodies. To this extent,
I should say, Descartes is in the right as against Watson. Watsons
position seems to rest upon naive realism as regards the physical
world, but naive realism is destroyed by what physics itself has to say
concerning physical causation and the antecedents of our perceptions.
On these grounds, I hold that self-observation can and does give us
knowledge which is not part of physics, and that there is no reason to
deny the reality of thought.




CHAPTER XVII

IMAGES


In this chapter we shall consider the question of images. As the reader
doubtless knows, one of the battle-cries of behaviourism is death
to images. We cannot discuss this question without a good deal of
previous clearing of the ground.

What are images as conceived by their supporters? Let us take this
question first in the sense of trying to know some of the phenomena
intended, and only afterwards in the sense of seeking a formal
definition.

In the ordinary sense, we have visual images if we shut our eyes and
call up pictures of scenery or faces we have known; we have auditory
images when we recall a tune without actually humming it; we have
tactual images when we look at a nice piece of fur and think how
pleasant it would be to stroke it. We may ignore other kinds of images,
and concentrate upon these, visual, auditory, and tactual. There is no
doubt that we have such experiences as I have suggested by the above
words; the only question is as to how these experiences ought to be
described. Then we have another set of experiences, namely dreams,
which feel like sensations at the moment, but do not have the same kind
of relation to the external world as sensations have. Dreams, also,
indubitably occur, and again it is a question of analysis whether we
are to say that they contain images or not.

The behaviourist does not admit images, but he equally does not
admit sensations and perceptions. Although he does not say so quite
definitely, he may be taken to maintain that there is nothing but
matter in motion. We cannot, therefore, tackle the question of images
by contrasting them with sensations or perceptions, unless we have
first clearly proved the existence of these latter and defined their
characteristics. Now it will be remembered that in Chapter V we
attempted a behaviourist definition of perception, and decided that its
most essential feature was sensitivity. That is to say, if a person
always has a reaction of a certain kind B when he has a certain spatial
relation to an object of a certain kind A, but not otherwise, then we
say that the person is sensitive to A. In order to obtain from this a
definition of perception, it is necessary to take account of the law
of association; but for the moment we will ignore this complication,
and say that a person perceives any feature of his environment, or
of his own body, to which he is sensitive. Now, however, as a result
of the discussion in Chapter XVI, we can include in his reaction, not
only what others can observe, but also what he alone can observe.
This enlarges the known sphere of perception, practically if not
theoretically. But it leaves unchanged the fact that the essence
of perception is a causal relation to a feature of the environment
which, except in astronomy, is approximately contemporaneous with the
perception, though always at least slightly earlier, owing to the
time taken by light and sound to travel and the interval occupied in
transmitting a current along the nerves.

Let us now contrast with this what happens when you sit still with
your eyes shut, calling up pictures of places you have seen abroad,
and perhaps ultimately falling asleep. Dr. Watson, if I understand
him aright, maintains that either there is actual stimulation of the
retina, or your pictures are mere word-pictures, the words being
represented by small actual movements such as would, if magnified and
prolonged, lead to actual pronunciation of the words. Now if you are
in the dark with your eyes shut, there is no stimulation of the retina
from without. It may be that, by association, the eye can be affected
through stimuli to other senses; we have already had an example in the
fact that the pupil can be taught to contract at a loud noise if this
had been frequently experienced along with a bright light. We cannot,
therefore, dismiss the idea that a stimulus to one sense may, as a
result of past events, have an effect upon the organs of another sense.
Images might be definable as effects produced in this way. It may be
that, when you see a picture of Napoleon, there is an effect upon your
aural nerves analogous to that of having the word Napoleon pronounced
in your presence, and that that is why, when you see the picture, the
word Napoleon comes into your head. And similarly, when you shut
your eyes and call up pictures of foreign scenes, you may actually
pronounce, completely or incipiently, the word Italy, and this may,
through association, stimulate the optic nerve in a way more or less
similar to that in which some actual place in Italy stimulated it on
some former occasion. Thence association alone may carry you along
through a series of journeys, until at last, when you fall asleep, you
think you are actually making them at the moment. All this is quite
possible, but so far as I know there is no reason to hold that it is
more than possible, apart from an _a priori_ theory excluding every
other explanation.

What I think is clearly untenable is the view, sometimes urged by Dr.
Watson, that when we are, as we think, seeing imaginary pictures with
the eyes shut, we are really only using such words as would describe
them. It seems to me as certain as anything can be that, when I
visualise, something is happening which is connected with the sense of
sight. For example, I can call up quite clear mental pictures of the
house in which I lived as a child; if I am asked a question as to the
furniture of any of the rooms in that house, I can answer it by first
calling up an image and then looking to see what the answer is, just
as I should look to see in an actual room. It is quite clear to me
that the picture comes first and that words after; moreover, the words
need not come at all. I cannot tell what is happening in my retina or
optic nerve at these moments of visualisation, but I am quite sure
that something is happening which has a connection with the sense of
sight that it does not have with other senses. And I can say the same
of aural and tactual images. If this belief were inconsistent with
anything else that seems to me equally certain, I might be induced to
abandon it. But so far as I can see, there is no such inconsistency.

It will be remembered that we decided in favour of perceptions as
events distinct from those which they perceive, and only causally
connected with them. There is, therefore, no reason why association
should not work in this region as well as in the region of muscles
and glands; in other words, there is no reason to deny what used to
be called association of ideas, in spite of the fact that bodily
changes can also be associated. If a physical basis is wanted, it can
be assumed to exist in the brain. The state of the brain which causes
us to hear the word Napoleon may become associated with the state of
brain which causes us to see a picture of Napoleon, and thus the word
and the picture will call each other up. The association _may_ be in
the sense-organs or nerves, but may equally well be in the brain. So
far as I know, there is no conclusive evidence either way, nor even
that the association is not purely mental.

When we try to find a definition of the difference between a sensation
and an image, it is natural to look first for intrinsic differences.
But intrinsic differences between ordinary sensations and ordinary
images, for example as to liveliness, are found to be subject to
exceptions, and therefore unsuitable for purposes of definition. Thus
we are brought to differences as to causes and effects.

It is obvious that, in an ordinary case, you perceive a table because
(in some sense) the table is there. That is to say, there is a causal
chain leading backwards from your perception to something outside your
body. This alone, however, is hardly sufficient as a criterion. Suppose
you smell peat smoke and think of Ireland, your thought can equally be
traced to a cause outside your body. The only real difference is that
the outside cause (peat smoke) would not have had the effect (images
of Ireland) upon every normal person, but only upon such as had smelt
peat smoke in Ireland, and not all of them. That is to say, the normal
cerebral apparatus does not cause the given stimulus to produce the
given effect except where certain previous experiences have occurred.
This is a very vital distinction. Part of what occurs in us under the
influence of a stimulus from without depends upon past experience; part
does not. The former part includes images, the latter consists of pure
sensations. This, however, as we shall see later, is inadequate as a
definition.

Mental occurrences which depend upon past experience are called
mnemic occurrences, following Semon. Images are thus to be included
among mnemic occurrences, at least so far as human experience goes.
This, however, does not suffice to define them, since there are others,
_e.g._ recollections. What further defines them is their similarity
to sensations. This only applies strictly to simple images; complex
ones may occur without a prototype, though all their parts will have
prototypes among sensations. Such, at least, is Humes principle, and
on the whole it seems to be true. It must not, however, be pressed
beyond a point. As a rule, an image is more or less vague, and has a
number of similar sensations as its prototypes. This does not prevent
the connection with sensation in general, but makes it a connection
with a number of sensations, not with one only.

It happens that, when a complex of sensations has occurred at some
time in a persons experience, the recurrence of part of the whole
tends to produce images of the remaining parts or some of them. This is
association, and has much to do with memory.

It is common to speak of images as centrally excited, as opposed to
sensations, which are excited by a stimulus to some sense organ. In
essence this is quite correct, but there is need of some caution in
interpreting the phrase. Sensations also have _proximate_ causes in
the brain; images also may be due to some excitement of a sense-organ,
when they are roused by a sensation through association. But in such
cases there is nothing to explain their occurrence except the past
experience and its effect on the brain. They will not be aroused by
the same stimulus in a person with similar sense-organs but different
past experience. The connection with past experience is clearly known;
it is, however, an explanatory hypothesis, not directly verifiable in
the present state of knowledge, to suppose that this connection works
through an effect of the past experience on the brain. This hypothesis
must be regarded as doubtful, but it will save circumlocution to adopt
it. I shall therefore not repeat, on each occasion, that we cannot feel
sure it is true. In general, where the causal connection with past
experience is obvious, we call an occurrence mnemic, without implying
this or that hypothesis as to the explanation of mnemic phenomena.

It is perhaps worth while to ask how we know that images are like the
sensations which are their prototypes. The difficulty of this question
arises as follows. Suppose you call up an image of the Brooklyn
Bridge, and you are convinced that it is like what you see when you
look at Brooklyn Bridge. It would seem natural to say that you know
the likeness because you remember Brooklyn Bridge. But remembering is
often held to involve, as an essential element, the occurrence of an
image which is regarded as referring to a prototype. Unless you can
remember without images, it is difficult to see how you can be sure
that images resemble prototypes. I think that in fact you cannot be
sure, unless you can find some indirect means of comparison. You might,
for example, have photographs of Brooklyn Bridge taken from a given
place on two different days, and find them indistinguishable, showing
that Brooklyn Bridge has not changed in the interval. You might see
Brooklyn Bridge on the first of these days, remember it on the second,
and immediately afterwards look at it. In looking at it, you might find
every detail coming to you with a feeling of expectedness, or you might
find some details coming with a feeling of surprise. In this case you
would say that your image had been wrong as regards the details which
were surprising. Or, again, you might make a picture of Brooklyn Bridge
on paper, from memory, and then compare it with the original or a
photograph. Or you might content yourself by writing down a description
of it in words, and verifying its accuracy by direct observation.
Innumerable methods of this kind can be devised by which you can test
the likeness of an image to its prototype. The result is that there is
often a great likeness, though seldom complete accuracy. The belief in
the likeness of an image to its prototype is, of course, not generated
in this way, but only tested. The belief exists prior to evidence as to
its correctness, like most of our beliefs. I shall have more to say on
this subject in the next chapter, which will be concerned with memory.
But I think enough has been said to show that it is not unreasonable
to regard images as having a greater or less degree of resemblance to
their prototypes. To claim more is hardly justifiable.

We can now reach a definite conclusion about perception, sensation, and
images. Let us imagine a number of people placed, as far as possible,
in the same environment; we will suppose that they sit successively in
a certain chair in a dark room, in full view of illuminated pictures
of two eminent politicians of opposite parties whose names are written
underneath them. We will suppose that all of them have normal eyesight.
Their reactions will be partly similar, partly different. If any of
these observers are babies too young to have learnt to focus, they will
not see sharp outlines, but a mere blurr, not from an optical defect,
but from a lack of cerebral control over muscles. In this respect,
experience has an effect even upon what must count as pure sensation.
But this difference is really analogous to the difference between
having ones eyes open and having them shut; the difference is in the
sense-organ, although it may be due to a difference in the brain. We
will therefore assume that all the spectators know how to adjust the
eyes so as to see as well as possible, and all try to see. We shall
then say that, if the spectators differ as widely as is possible for
normal human beings, what is common to the reactions of all of them
is sensation, provided it is connected with the sense of sight, or,
more correctly, provided it has that quality which we observe to be
common and peculiar to visual objects. But probably all of them, if
they are over three months old, will have tactile images while they
see the pictures. And if they are more than about a year old, they
will interpret them as pictures, which represent three-dimensional
objects; before that age, they may see them as coloured patterns,
not as representations of faces. Most animals, though not all, are
incapable of interpreting pictures as representations. But in an adult
human being this interpretation is not deliberate; it has become
automatic. It is, I think, mainly a question of tactile images: the
images you have in looking at a picture are not those appropriate to a
smooth flat surface, but those appropriate to the object represented.
If the object represented is a large one, there will also be images of
movement--walking round the object, or climbing up it, or what not.
All these are obviously a product of experience, and therefore do not
count as part of the sensation. This influence of experience is still
more obvious when it comes to reading the names of the politicians,
considering whether they are good likenesses, and feeling what a fine
fellow one of them looks and what unmitigated villainy is stamped upon
the features of the other. None of this counts as sensation, yet it is
part of a mans spontaneous reaction to an outside stimulus.

It is evidently difficult to avoid a certain artificiality in
distinguishing between the effects of experience and the rest in a
mans reaction to a stimulus. Perhaps we could tackle the matter in a
slightly different way. We can distinguish stimuli of different sorts:
to the eye, the ear, the nose, the palate, etc. We can also distinguish
elements of different sorts in the reaction: visual elements, auditory
elements, etc. The latter are defined, not by the stimulus, but by
their intrinsic quality. A visual sensation and a visual image have
a common quality which neither shares with an auditory sensation or
an auditory image. We may then say: a visual image is an occurrence
having the visual quality but not due to a stimulus to the eye, _i.e._
not having as a direct causal antecedent the incidence of light-waves
upon the retina. Similarly an auditory image will be an occurrence
having the auditory quality but not due to sound-waves reaching the
ear, and so on for the other senses. This means a complete abandonment
of the attempt to distinguish psychologically between sensations and
images; the distinction becomes solely one as to physical antecedents.
It is true that we can and do arrive at the distinction without
scientific physics, because we find that certain elements in our
integral reactions have the correlations that make us regard them as
corresponding to something external while others do not--correlations
both with the experience of others and with our own past and future
experiences. But when we refine upon this common-sense distinction and
try to make it precise, it becomes the distinction in terms of physics
as stated just now.

We might therefore conclude that an image is an occurrence having the
quality associated with stimulation by some sense-organ, but not due
to such stimulation. In human beings, images seem to depend upon past
experience, but perhaps in more instinctive animals they are partly due
to innate cerebral mechanisms. In any case dependence upon experience
is not the mark by which they are to be defined. This shows how
intimate is the dependence of traditional psychology upon physics, and
how difficult it is to make psychology into an autonomous science.

There is, however, still a further refinement necessary. Whatever is
included under our present definition is an image, but some things
not included are also images. The sight of an object may bring with
it a visual image of some other object frequently associated with it.
This latter is called an image, not a sensation, because, though also
visual, it is not appropriate to the stimulus in a certain sense: it
would not appear in a photograph of the scene, or in a photograph
of the retina. Thus we are forced to say: the sensation element in
the reaction to a stimulus is that part which enables you to draw
inferences as to the nature of the extra-cerebral event (if any)
which was the stimulus;[9] the rest is images. Fortunately, images
and sensations _usually_ differ in intrinsic quality; this makes it
possible to get an approximate idea of the external world by using the
usual intrinsic differences, and to correct it afterwards by means of
the strict causal definition. But evidently the matter is difficult
and complicated, depending upon physics and physiology, not upon pure
psychology. This is the main thing to be realised about images.

      [9] _I.e._ the immediate stimulus, not the physical object.

The above discussion has suggested a definition of the word image.
We might have called an event an image when it is recognisably of
the same kind as a percept, but does not have the stimulus which it
would have if it were a percept. But if this definition is to be made
satisfactory, it will be necessary to substitute a different word in
place of percept. For example, in the percept of a visible object
it would be usual to include certain associated tactual elements, but
these must, from our point of view, count as images. It will be better
to say, therefore, that an image is an occurrence recognisably visual
(or auditory, etc., as the case may be), but not caused by a stimulus
which is of the nature of light (or sound etc., as the case may be), or
at any rate only indirectly so caused as a result of association. With
this definition, I do not myself feel any doubt as to the existence of
images. It is clear that they constitute most of the material of dreams
and day-dreams, that they are utilised by composers in making music,
that we employ them when we get out of a familiar room in the dark
(though here the rats in mazes make a different explanation possible),
and that they account for the shock of surprise we have when we take
salt thinking it is sugar or (as happened to me recently) vinegar
thinking it is coffee. The question of the causation of images--_i.e._
whether it is in the brain or in other parts of the body--is not one
which it is necessary to our purposes to decide, which is fortunate,
since, so far as I know, there is not at present any adequate evidence
on the point. But the existence of images and their resemblance to
perception is important, as we shall see in the next chapter.

Images come in various ways, and play various parts. There are
those that come as accretions to a case of sensation, which are not
recognised as images except by the psychologist; these form, for
example, the tactual quality of things we only see, and the visual
quality of things we only touch. I think dreams belong, in part, to
this class of images: some dreams result from misinterpreting some
ordinary stimulus, and in these cases the images are those suggested
by a sensation, but suggested more uncritically than if we were awake.
Then there are images which are not attached to a present reality, but
to one which we locate in the past; these are present in memory, not
necessarily always, but sometimes. Then there are images not attached
to reality at all so far as our feeling about them goes: images which
merely float into our heads in reverie or in passionate desire.
And finally there are images which are called up voluntarily, for
example, in considering how to decorate a room. This last kind has its
importance, but I shall say nothing more about it at present, since we
cannot profitably discuss it until we have decided what we are to mean
by the word voluntary. The first kind, which comes as an accretion
to sensation, and gives to our feeling of objects a certain rotundity
and full-bloodedness which the stimulus alone would hardly warrant, has
been considered already. Therefore what remains for the present is the
use of images in memory and imagination; and of these two I shall begin
with memory.




CHAPTER XVIII

IMAGINATION AND MEMORY


In this chapter we have to consider the two topics of imagination and
memory. The latter has already been considered in Chapter VI, but there
we viewed it from outside. We want now to ask ourselves whether there
is anything further to be known about it by taking account of what is
only perceptible to the person remembering.

As regards the part played by images, I do not think this is essential.
Sometimes there are memory-images, sometimes not; sometimes when images
come in connection with memory, we may nevertheless know that the
images are incorrect, showing that we have also some other and more
reliable source of memory. Memory _may_ depend upon images, as in the
case mentioned above, of the house where I lived as a child. But it may
also be purely verbal. I am a poor visualiser, except for things I saw
before I was ten years old; when now I meet a man and wish to remember
his appearance, I find that the only way is to describe him in words
while I am seeing him, and then remember the words. I say to myself:
This man has blue eyes and a brown beard and a small nose; he is
short, with a rounded back and sloping shoulders. I can remember these
words for months, and recognise the man by means of them, unless two
men having these characteristics are present at once. In this respect,
a visualiser would have the advantage of me. Nevertheless, if I had
made my verbal inventory sufficiently extensive and precise, it would
have been pretty sure to answer its purpose. I do not think there is
anything in memory that absolutely demands images as opposed to words.
Whether the words we use in thought are themselves sometimes images
of words, or are always incipient movements (as Watson contends), is a
further question, as to which I offer no opinion, since it ought to be
capable of being decided experimentally.

The most important point about memory is one which has nothing to do
with images, and is not mentioned in Watsons brief discussion. I mean
the reference to the past. This reference to the past is not involved
in mere habit memory, _e.g._ in skating or in repeating a poem formerly
learned. But it is involved in recollection of a past incident. We do
not, in this case, merely repeat what we did before: then, we felt the
incident as present, but now we feel it as past. This is shown in the
use of the past tense. We say to ourselves at the time I _am having_ a
good dinner, but next day we say I _did have_ a good dinner. Thus we
do not, like a rat in a maze, repeat our previous performance: we alter
the verbal formula. Why do we do so? What constitutes this reference of
a recollection to the past?[10]

     [10] On this subject, cf. Broad, _The Mind and Its Place in
          Nature_, p. 264 ff., in his chapter on Memory.

Let us take up the question first from the point of view of
sensitivity. The stimulus to a recollection is, no doubt, always
something in the present, but our reaction (or part of it) is more
intimately related to a certain past event than to the present
stimulus. This, in itself, can be paralleled in inanimate objects,
for example, in a gramophone record. It is not the _likeness_ of our
reaction to that called forth on a former occasion that concerns us
at the moment; it is its _un-likeness_, in the fact that now we have
the feeling of pastness, which we did not have originally. You cannot
sing into a dictaphone I love you, and have it say five days hence
I loved you last Wednesday; yet that is what we do when we remember.
I think, however, that this feature of memory is probably connected
with a feature of reactions due to association when the association
is cerebral: I think also that this is connected with the difference
in quality that exists usually, though not always, between images and
sensations. It would seem that, in such cases, the reaction aroused
through association is usually different from that which would have
been aroused directly, in certain definite ways. It is fainter, and
has, when attended to, the sort of quality that makes us call it
imaginary. In a certain class of cases, we come to know that we can
make it real if we choose; this applies, _e.g._ to the tactual images
produced by visible objects that we can touch. In such cases, the image
is attached by us to the object, and its imaginary character fails to
be noticed. These are the cases in which the association is not due to
some accident of our experience, but to a collocation which exists in
nature. In other cases, however, we are perfectly aware, if we reflect,
that the association depends upon some circumstance in our private
lives. We may, for instance, have had a very interesting conversation
at a certain spot, and always think of this conversation when we find
ourselves in this place. But we know that the conversation does not
actually take place again when we go back to where it happened. In
such a case, we notice the intrinsic difference between the event as
a sensible fact in the present and the event as merely revived by
association. I think this difference has to do with our feeling of
pastness. The difference which we can directly observe is not, of
course, between our present recollection and the past conversation,
but between our present recollection and present sensible facts. This
difference, combined with the inconsistency of our recollection with
present facts if our recollection were placed in the present, is
perhaps a cause of our referring memories to the past. But I offer this
suggestion with hesitation; and, as we shall find when we have examined
imagination, it cannot be the whole truth, though it may be part of it.

There are some facts that tend to support the above view. In dreams,
when our critical faculty is in abeyance, we may live past events
over again under the impression that they are actually happening; the
reference of recollections to the past must, therefore, be a matter
involving a somewhat advanced type of mental activity. Conversely,
we sometimes have the impression that what is happening now really
happened in the past; this is a well-known and much discussed illusion.
It happens especially when we are profoundly absorbed in some inward
struggle or emotion, so that outer events only penetrate faintly.
I suggest that, in these circumstances, the quality of sensations
approximates to that of images, and that this is the source of the
illusion.

If this suggestion is right, the feeling of pastness is really complex.
Something is suggested by association, but is recognisably different
from a present sensible occurrence. We therefore do not suppose that
this something is happening now; and we may be confirmed in this by
the fact that it is inconsistent with something that is happening now.
We may then either refer the something to the past, in which case we
have a recollection, though not necessarily a correct one; or we may
regard the something as purely imaginary, in which case we have what we
regard as pure imagination. It remains to inquire why we do sometimes
the one and sometimes the other, which brings us to the discussion of
imagination. I think we shall find that memory is more fundamental
than imagination, and that the latter consists merely of memories of
different dates assembled together. But to support this theory will
demand first an analysis of imagination and then, in the light of this
analysis, an attempt to give further precision to our theory of memory.

Imagination is not, as the word might suggest, essentially connected
with images. No doubt images are often, even usually, present when
we imagine, but they need not be. A man can improvise on the piano
without first having images of the music he is going to make; a poet
might write down a poem without first making it up in his head.
In talking, words suggest other words, and a man with sufficient
verbal associations may be successfully carried along by them for a
considerable time. The art of talking without thinking is particularly
necessary to public speakers, who must go on when once they are on
their feet, and gradually acquire the habit of behaving in private
as they do before an audience. Yet the statements they make must
be admitted to be often imaginative. The essence of imagination,
therefore, does not lie in images.

The essence of imagination, I should say, is the absence of belief
together with a novel combination of known elements. In memory, when
it is correct, the combination of elements is not novel; and whether
correct or not, there is belief. I say that in imagination there is a
novel combination of known elements, because, if nothing is novel,
we have a case of memory, while if the elements, or any of them,
are novel, we have a case of perception. This last I say because I
accept Humes principle that there is no idea without an antecedent
impression. I do not mean that this is to be applied in a blind and
pedantic manner, where abstract ideas are concerned. I should not
maintain that no one can have an idea of liberty until he has seen the
Statue of Liberty. The principle applies rather to the realm of images.
I certainly do not think that, in an image, there can be any element
which does not resemble some element in a previous perception, in the
distinctive manner of images.

Hume made himself an unnecessary difficulty in regard to the theory
that images copy impressions. He asked the question: Suppose a
man has seen all the different shades of colour that go to make up
the spectrum, except just one shade. To put the thing in modern
language, suppose he has never seen light of a certain small range of
wave-lengths, but has seen light of all other wave-lengths. Will he
be able to form an image of the shade he has never seen? Hume thinks
he will, although this contradicts the principle. I should say that
images are always more or less vague copies of impressions, so that an
image might be regarded as a copy of any one of a number of different
impressions of slightly different shades. In order to get a test
case for Humes question, we should have to suppose that there was a
broad band of the spectrum that the man had never seen--say the whole
of the yellow. He would then, one may suppose, be able to form images
which, owing to vagueness, might be applicable to orange-yellow, and
others applicable to green-yellow, but none applicable to a yellow
midway between orange and green. This is an example of an unreal puzzle
manufactured by forgetting vagueness. It is analogous to the following
profound problem: A man formerly hairy is now bald; he lost his hairs
one by one; therefore there must have been just one hair that made
the difference, so that while he had it he was not bald but when he
lost it he was. Of course baldness is a vague conception; and so
is copying, when we are speaking of the way in which images copy
prototypes.

What causes us, in imagination, to put elements together in a new way?
Let us think first of concrete instances. You read that a ship has
gone down on a route by which you have lately travelled; very little
imagination is needed to generate the thought I might have gone
down. What happens here is obvious: the route is associated both with
yourself and with shipwreck, and you merely eliminate the middle term.
Literary ability is largely an extension of the practice of which the
above is a very humble example. Take, say:

    And all our yesterdays have lighted fools
    The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!
    Lifes but a walking shadow, a poor player
    Who struts and frets his hour upon the stage,
    And then is heard no more. It is a tale
    Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury
    Signifying nothing.

I do not pretend to explain all the associations which led Shakespeare
to think of these lines, but some few are obvious. Dusty death is
suggested by Genesis iii. 19: Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou
return. Having spoken of lighting fools the way, it is natural
to think of a candle, and thence of a walking shadow being
lighted by the candle along the way. From shadows to players was a
well-established association in Shakespeares mind; thus in _Midsummer
Nights Dream_ he says of players: The best in this kind are but
shadows, and the worst are no worse, if imagination amend them. From
a poor player to a tale told by an idiot is no very difficult
transition for a theatre-manager; and sound and fury no doubt often
formed part of the tales to which he had to listen in spite of their
signifying nothing. If we knew more about Shakespeare, we could
explain more of him in this sort of way.

Thus exceptional imaginative gifts appear to depend mainly upon
associations that are unusual and have an emotional value owing to
the fact that there is a certain uniform emotional tone about them.
Many adjectives are suitable to death: in a mood quite different from
Macbeths, it may be called noble, puissant and mighty. A Chancellor
of the Exchequer, thinking of the Death Duties, might feel inclined to
speak of lucrative death; nevertheless he would not, like Vaughan,
speak of dear, beauteous death. Shakespeare also would not have
spoken of death in such terms, for his view of it was pagan; he speaks
of that churl death. So a mans verbal associations may afford a key
to his emotional reactions, for often what connects two words in his
mind is the fact that they rouse similar emotions.

The absence of belief that accompanies imagination is a somewhat
sophisticated product; it fails in sleep and in strong and emotional
excitement. Children invent terrors for fun, and then begin to believe
in them. The state of entertaining an idea without believing it is one
involving some tension, which demands a certain level of intellectual
development. It may be assumed that imagination, at first, always
involved belief, as it still does in dreams. I am not concerned at the
moment to define belief, but a criterion is influence on action. If
I say suppose there were a tiger outside your front door, you will
remain calm; but if I say, with such a manner as to command belief,
there is a tiger outside your front door, you will stay at home, even
if it involves missing your train to the office. This illustrates what
I mean when I say that imagination, in its developed form, involves
absence of belief. But this is not true of its primitive forms. And
even a civilised adult, passing through a churchyard on a dark night,
may feel fear if his imagination turns in the direction of ghosts.

When imagination passes into belief, it does not, as a rule, become a
belief about the past. Generally we place the imagined object in the
present, but not where it would be perceptible to our senses. If we
place it in the past, it is because the past has some great emotional
significance for us. If a person we love has been in great danger,
and we do not know whether he has come through safely, imagination
of his death may lead us to believe that he has been killed. And
often imagination leads us to believe that something is going to
happen. What is common to all such cases is the emotional interest:
this first causes us to imagine an event, and then leads us to think
that it has happened, is happening, or will happen, according to the
circumstances. Hope and fear have this effect equally; wish-fulfilment
and dread-fulfilment are equally sources of dreams and day-dreams.
A great many beliefs have a source of this kind. But, in spite of
psycho-analysis, there are a great many that have a more rational
foundation. I believe that Columbus first crossed the ocean in 1492,
though 1491 or 1493 would have suited me just as well. I cannot
discover that there is any emotional element in this belief, or in the
belief that Semipalatinsk is in Central Asia. The view that all our
beliefs are irrational is perhaps somewhat overdone nowadays, though it
is far more nearly true than the views that it has displaced.

We must now return to the subject of memory. Memory proper does not,
like imagination, involve a re-arrangement of elements derived from
past experience; on the contrary, it should restore such elements
in the pattern in which they occurred. This is the vital difference
between memory and imagination; belief, even belief involving reference
to the past, may, as we have seen, be present in what is really
imagination though it may not seem to be so to the person concerned.
That being so, we still have to consider what constitutes the reference
to the past, since the view tentatively suggested before we had
considered imagination turns out to be inadequate.

There is one possible view, suggested, though not definitely adopted,
by Dr. Broad in his chapter on Memory already referred to. According
to this view, we have to start from temporal succession as perceived
within what is called the specious present, _i.e._ a short period of
time such that the events that occur throughout it can be perceived
together. (I shall return to this subject presently.) For example, you
can see a quick movement as a whole; you are not merely aware that
the object was first in one place and then in another. You can see
the movement of the second-hand of a watch, but not of the hour-hand
or minute-hand. When you see a movement in this sense, you are aware
that one part of it is earlier than another. Thus you acquire the idea
earlier, and you can mean by past earlier than this, where this
is what is actually happening. This is a logically possible theory,
but it seems nevertheless somewhat difficult to believe. I do not
know, however, of any easier theory, and I shall therefore adopt it
provisionally while waiting for something better.

For the understanding of memory, it is a help to consider the links
connecting its most developed forms with other occurrences of a less
complex kind. True recollection comes at the end of a series of stages.
I shall distinguish five stages on the way, so that recollection
becomes the sixth in gradual progress. The stages are as follows:

1. _Images._--As we have seen, images, at any rate in their simpler
parts, in fact copy past sensations more or less vaguely, even when
they are not known to do so. Images are mnemic phenomena, in the
sense that they are called up by stimuli formerly associated with their
prototypes, so that their occurrence is a result of past experience
according to the law of association. But obviously an image which in
fact copies a past occurrence does not constitute a recollection unless
it is _felt_ to be a copy.

2. _Familiarity._--Images and perceptions may come to us, and so may
words or other bodily movements, with more or less of the feeling we
call familiarity. When you recall a tune that you have heard before,
either by images or by actually singing it, part of what comes to you
may feel familiar, part unfamiliar. This may lead you to judge that
you have remembered the familiar part rightly and the unfamiliar part
wrongly, but this judgment belongs to a later stage.

3. _Habit-Memory._--We have already discussed this in Chapter VI.
People say they remember a poem if they can repeat it correctly.
But this does not necessarily involve any recollection of a past
occurrence; you may have quite forgotten when and where you read the
poem. This sort of memory is mere habit, and is essentially like
knowing how to walk although you cannot remember learning to walk. This
does not deserve to be called memory in the strict sense.

4. _Recognition._--This has two forms. (_a_) When you see a dog, you
can say to yourself there is a dog, without recalling any case in
which you have seen a dog before, and even without reflecting that
there have been such cases. This involves no knowledge about the past;
essentially it is only an associative habit. (_b_) You may know I
saw this before, though you do not know when or where, and cannot
recollect the previous occurrence in any way. In such a case there is
knowledge about the past, but it is very slight. When you judge: I saw
_this_ before, the word this must be used vaguely, because you did
not see exactly what you see now, but only something very like this.
Thus all that you are really knowing is that, on some past occasion,
you saw something very like what you are seeing now. This is about the
minimum of knowledge about the past that actually occurs.

5. _Immediate Memory._--I come now to a region intermediate between
sensation and true memory, the region of what is sometimes called
immediate memory. When a sense-organ is stimulated, it does not,
on the cessation of the stimulus, return at once to its unstimulated
condition: it goes on (so to speak) vibrating, like a piano-string,
for a short time. For example, when you see a flash of lightning, your
sensation, brief as it is, lasts much longer than the lightning as a
physical occurrence. There is a period during which a sensation is
fading: it is then called an acoleuthic sensation. It is owing to
this fact that you can see a movement as a whole. As observed before,
you cannot see the minute-hand of a watch moving, but you can see
the second-hand moving. That is because it is in several appreciably
different places within the short time that is required for one visual
sensation to fade, so that you do actually, at one moment, see it in
several places. The fading sensations, however, feel different from
those that are fresh, and thus the various positions which are all
sensibly present are placed in a series by the degree of fading, and
you acquire the perception of movement as a process. Exactly the same
considerations apply to hearing a spoken sentence.

Thus not only an instant, but a short finite time is sensibly present
to you at any moment. This short finite time is called the specious
present. By the felt degree of fading, you can distinguish earlier and
later in the specious present, and thus experience temporal succession
without the need of true memory. If you see me quickly move my arm from
left to right, you have an experience which is quite different from
what you would have if you now saw it at the right and remembered that
a little while ago you saw it at the left. The difference is that, in
the quick movement, the whole falls within the specious present, so
that the entire process is sensible. The knowledge of something as
in the immediate past, though still sensible, is called immediate
memory. It has great importance in connection with our apprehension of
temporal processes, but cannot count as a form of true memory.

6. _True Recollection._--We will suppose, for the sake of definiteness,
that I am remembering what I had for breakfast this morning. There
are two questions which we must ask about this occurrence: (_a_) What
is happening now when I recollect? (_b_) What is the relation of the
present happening to the event remembered? As to what is happening now,
my recollection may involve either images or words; in the latter case,
the words themselves may be merely imagined. I will take the case in
which there are images without words, which must be the more primitive,
since we cannot suppose that memory would be impossible without words.

The first point is one which seems so obvious that I should be ashamed
to mention it, but for the fact that many distinguished philosophers
think otherwise. The point is this: whatever may be happening now, the
event remembered is _not_ happening. Memory is often spoken of as if
it involved the actual persistence of the past which is remembered;
Bergson, _e.g._ speaks of the interpenetration of the present by the
past. This is mere mythology; the event which occurs when I remember
is quite different from the event remembered. People who are starving
can remember their last meal, but the recollection does not appease
their hunger. There is no mystic survival of the past when we remember;
merely a new event having a certain relation to the old one. What this
relation is, we shall consider presently.

It is quite clear that images are not enough to constitute
recollection, even when they are accurate copies of a past occurrence.
One may, in a dream, live over again a past experience; while one is
dreaming, one does not seem to be recalling a previous occurrence, but
living through a fresh experience. We cannot be said to be remembering,
in the strict sense, unless we have a belief referring to the past.
Images which, like those in dreams, feel as if they were sensations,
do not constitute recollection. There must be some feeling which makes
us refer the images to a past prototype. Perhaps familiarity is enough
to cause us to do so. And perhaps this also explains the experience of
trying to remember something and feeling that we are not remembering
it right. Parts of a complex image may feel more familiar than other
parts, and we then feel more confidence in the correctness of the
familiar parts than in that of the others. The conviction that the
image we are forming of a past event is wrong might _seem_ to imply
that we must be knowing the past otherwise than by images, but I do not
think this conclusion is really warranted, since degrees of familiarity
in images suffice to explain this experience.

(_b_) What is the relation of the present happening to the event
remembered? If we recollect correctly, the several images will have
that kind of resemblance of quality which images can have to their
prototypes, and their structure and relations will be identical with
those of their prototypes. Suppose, for instance, you want to remember
whether, in a certain room, the window is to the right or left of the
door as viewed from the fireplace. You can observe your image of the
room, consisting (_inter alia_) of an image of the door and an image
of the window standing (if your recollection is correct) in the same
relation as when you are actually seeing the room. Memory will consist
in attaching to this complex image the sort of belief that refers to
the past; and the correctness of memory consists of similarity of
quality and identity of structure between the complex image and a
previous perception.

As for the trustworthiness of memory, there are two things to be said.
Taken as a whole, memory is one of the independent sources of our
knowledge; that is to say, there is no way of arriving at the things we
know through memory by any argument wholly derived from things known
otherwise. But no single memory is obliged to stand alone, because it
fits, or does not fit, into a system of knowledge about the past based
upon the sum-total of memories. When what is remembered is a perception
by one or more of the public senses, other people may corroborate it.
Even when it is private, it may be confirmed by other evidence. You
may remember that you had a toothache yesterday, and that you saw
the dentist to-day; the latter fact may be confirmed by an entry in
your diary. All these make a consistent whole, and each increases the
likelihood of the other. Thus we can test the truth of any particular
recollection, though not of memory as a whole. To say that we cannot
test the truth of memory as a whole is not to give a reason for
doubting it, but merely to say that it is an independent source of
knowledge, not wholly replaceable by other sources. We know that our
memory is fallible, but we have no reason to distrust it on the whole
after sufficient care in verification has been taken.

The causation of particular acts of recollection seems to be wholly
associative. Something in the present is very like something in the
past, and calls up the context of the past occurrence in the shape of
images or words; when attention falls upon this context, we believe
that it occurred in the past, not as mere images, and we then have an
act of recollection.

There are many difficult problems connected with memory which I have
not discussed, because they have an interest which is more purely
psychological than philosophical. It is memory as a source of knowledge
that specially concerns the philosopher.




CHAPTER XIX

THE INTROSPECTIVE ANALYSIS OF PERCEPTION


We have considered perception already from the behaviourist standpoint,
and also from that of physics. In the present chapter we are to
consider it from the standpoint of self-observation, with a view to
discovering as much as we can about the intrinsic character of the
event in us when we perceive. I shall begin with certain traditional
doctrines as to mental events, and shall thence pass to the doctrines
that I wish to advocate.

The words mind and matter are used glibly, both by ordinary people
and by philosophers, without any adequate attempt at definition.
Philosophers are much to blame for this. My own feeling is that there
is not a sharp line, but a difference of degree; an oyster is less
mental than a man, but not wholly un-mental. And I think mental is a
character, like harmonious or discordant, that cannot belong to a
single entity in its own right, but only to a system of entities. But
before defending this view, I wish to spend some time on the theories
that have been current in the past.

Traditionally, there are two ways of becoming aware that something
exists, one by the senses, the other by what is called introspection,
or what Kant called the inner sense. By means of introspection, it is
maintained, we become aware of occurrences quite different in kind from
those perceived through the outer senses. Occurrences known through
introspection are traditionally called mental, and so are any other
occurrences which intrinsically resemble them.

Mental occurrences are traditionally of three main types, called
knowing, willing, and feeling. Feeling, in this connection, means
pleasure and unpleasure--we do not say pleasure and pain, because
pain is an ambiguous word: it may stand for painful sensation, as
when you say I have a pain in my tooth, or it may stand for the
unpleasant character of the sensation. Roughly pleasure is a quality
which makes you want an experience to continue, and unpleasure is the
opposite quality which makes you want an experience to stop. However, I
am not concerned to enlarge upon feeling at present.

As for the other two kinds of mental occurrence, knowing and
willing are recognised as too narrow to describe what is meant.
Philosophers wish to include not only knowledge but also error, and
not only the sort of knowledge that is expressed in beliefs but also
the sort that occurs in perception. The word cognition or cognitive
state is used to cover everything that could possibly be described as
either knowledge or error; perception is _prima facie_ included, but
pure sensation is more debatable.

Willing, again, is too narrow a term. A term is required which will
include desire and aversion, and generally those states of mind which
lead up to action. These are all included under the head of conation,
a technical term invented for this special purpose.

Cognition and conation both have, in the orthodox theory, the property
of being directed to an _object_. What you perceive or believe, what
you desire or will, is something different from your state of mind. To
take instances: you remember a past event, but your remembering occurs
now; therefore your remembering is a different occurrence from what you
remember. You will to move your arm, but the movement is a physical
occurrence, and therefore obviously different from your volition. Many
psychologists have taken this relation to an object as the essential
characteristic of mind--notably the two Austrians Brentano and Meinong.
Sometimes feeling also is regarded as having an object: it is held
that we are pleased or displeased _at_ something. This view, however,
has never won general acceptance, whereas the view that cognition and
conation are directed to objects may be regarded as orthodox.

It is undeniable that this characteristic of being directed to objects
is, in some sense, a property of cognition and conation, but there
is room for great difference of opinion as to the proper analysis of
the property. I think we cannot hope to understand the word mental
until we have undertaken this analysis, and I shall therefore proceed
to address myself to it. I shall confine myself to cognition, which is
more important for our present purposes than conation.

As regards cognition, though philosophers have disagreed widely, I
think that, until recently, most would have assented to at least the
following paragraph:

Cognition is of various sorts. Take, as important kinds, perception,
memory, conception, and beliefs involving concepts. Perception is the
ordinary awareness of sensible objects: seeing a table, hearing a
piano, and so on. Memory is awareness of a past occurrence, when this
awareness is direct, not inferred or derived from testimony. Conception
is more difficult to characterise. One may say, as a way of pointing
out what is intended, that we conceive whenever we understand the
meaning of an abstract word, or think of that which is in fact the
meaning of the word. If you see a white patch of snow, or recall it
by means of images, you do not have a concept; but if you think about
whiteness, you have a concept. Similarly if, after seeing a number of
coins, you think about roundness as a common characteristic of all of
them, you have a concept. The object of your thought, in such a case,
is a _universal_ or a Platonic idea. Every sentence must contain at
least one word expressing a concept, and therefore every belief that
can be expressed in words contains concepts.

Each of these kinds of cognitive attitude involves its own problems.
In the present chapter we are concerned with perception. This has to
be treated both introspectively and causally; it is the introspective
treatment that we have now to undertake.

When you have the experience called seeing a table, there is a
certain amount of difference between your unreflecting judgment and
what careful examination reveals as to the nature of your experience.
You judge that the table is rectangular, but the patch of colour in
your visual field is not a rectangle; when you learn to draw, you have
to draw the table as it really seems and not as it seems to seem. You
have images of sensations of touch; if you were to try to touch the
table and it turned out to be an optical illusion, you would get a
violent shock of surprise. You have also expectations of a certain
degree of permanence and weight. If you went to lift the table, you
would find your muscles quite wrongly adjusted if the table were much
lighter than it looked. All these elements must be included in the
perception, though not in the sensation.

Sensation, as opposed to perception, is more or less hypothetical.
It is supposed to be the core, in the perception, which is solely due
to the stimulus and the sense-organ, not to past experience. When
you judge that the table is rectangular, it is past experience that
enables and compels you to do so; if you had been born blind and just
operated upon, you could not make this judgment. Nor would you have
expectations of hardness, etc. But none of this can be discovered by
introspection. From an introspective point of view, the elements due
to past experience are largely indistinguishable from those due to the
stimulus alone. One supposes that past experience modifies the brain,
and thereby modifies the mental occurrence due to the stimulus. The
notion of sensation as opposed to perception belongs, therefore, to the
causal study of perception, not to the introspective study.

There is, however, a distinction to be made here. You can discover
by mere self-observation that visual objects are accompanied by
expectations or images of touch; and similarly if you touch an object
in the dark you will probably be led to form some visual image of
it. Here you can arrive at a certain degree of analysis of your
perception through the fact that images, as a rule, _feel_ different
from the immediate results of a sensory stimulus. On the other hand,
no amount of introspection alone will reveal such things as the blind
spot. The filling in of a sensation by elements belonging to the same
sense is much less discoverable by introspection than the filling
in by associated images belonging to other senses. Thus although
by introspection alone we could discover _part_ of the influence
of experience on perception, there is another part which we cannot
discover in this way.

Remaining in the introspective attitude, it is evident that the
contents of our minds at any given moment are very complex. Throughout
our normal waking life we are always seeing, hearing, and touching,
sometimes smelling and tasting, always having various bodily
sensations, always feeling pleasant or unpleasant feelings (usually
both), always having desires or aversions. We are not normally aware
of all these items, but we can become aware of any of them by turning
our attention in the right direction. I am not at present discussing
unconscious mental states, because they, obviously, can only be known
causally, and we are now considering what can be known introspectively.
There may be any number of perceptions that cannot be known by
introspection; the point for us, at the moment, is that those that can
be discovered by introspection at any one time are many and various.

I do not wish, just now, to discuss the nature of attention; I wish
only to point out that it enables us to take the first steps in
abstraction. Out of the whole multiplicity of objects of sense, it
enables us to single out a small selection, which is an indispensable
preliminary to abstraction. For example, attention will enable us to
discriminate a coloured pattern which we are seeing, and to separate
it from the other things we see and from images and other objects of
sense and thoughts which may exist simultaneously. For the sake of
simplicity, let us suppose that we discriminate a black and white
pattern in the form of a triangle. Within this pattern we can further
discriminate sides and angles and an inside and outside--of course the
sides are not mathematical lines nor the angles mathematical points.

We now come to a question of very great importance, upon which our
views of the relations of mind and matter largely depend. The question
is this:

What difference is there between the propositions there is a triangle
and I see a triangle?

Both these statements seem as certain as any statement can be--at least
if rightly interpreted. As always happens in such cases, we are quite
certain of something, but not quite certain what it is that we are
certain of. I want to ask whether this something that we are certain
of is really different in the above two statements, or whether the
difference between them is only as to surroundings of which we are not
certain. Most philosophers hold that there is a difference in what we
are certain of; Mach, James, Dewey, the American realists, and I hold
that the difference is in the uncertain context. Let us examine this
question.

The _suggestions_ of the two statements I see a triangle and there
is a triangle are obviously different. The first states an event in
my life, and suggests its possible effects upon me. The second aims at
stating an event in the world, supposed to be equally discoverable by
other people. You might say there is a triangle if you had seen it
a moment ago but now had your eyes shut; in this case you would not
say I see a triangle. On the other hand, one sometimes, under the
influence of indigestion or fatigue, sees little black dots floating in
the air; in such circumstances you would say I see a black dot, but
not there is a black dot. This illustration shows that when you say
there is a black dot you are making a stronger assertion than when
you say I see a black dot. In the other case, when you say there is
a triangle because you saw it a moment ago, though not now, you have
three stages: First, memory assures you of the proposition I saw a
triangle, and then you pass on to there was a triangle, and then,
further, to there is a triangle, because nothing can have happened to
destroy it so quickly. Here we have obviously passed far beyond the
region of immediate certainty.

It seems clear, therefore, that, of our two statements, the one which
comes nearest to expressing the fact of which we are immediately
certain is I see a triangle, because the other makes inferences to
something public, and thus goes beyond the bare datum. This is on the
assumption that we should not say there is a black dot when we see
a black dot which we attribute to eye-trouble and therefore suppose
that no one else can see. Let us therefore concentrate upon I see a
triangle, and ask ourselves whether the whole of this, or only part,
can be accepted as a primitive certainty.

A moments reflection shows that both I and see are words which
take us beyond what the momentary event reveals. Take I to begin
with. This is a word whose meaning evidently depends upon memory
and expectation. I means the person who had certain remembered
experiences and is expected to have certain future experiences. We
might say I see a triangle now and I saw a square a moment ago. The
word I has exactly the same meaning in its two occurrences in this
sentence, and therefore evidently has a meaning dependent upon memory.
Now it is our object to arrive at the contribution to your knowledge
which is made by seeing the triangle at the moment. Therefore, since
the word I takes you beyond this contribution, we must cut it out
if we want to find a correct verbal expression for what is added to
our knowledge by seeing the triangle. We will say a triangle is being
seen. This is at any rate one step nearer to what we are seeking.

But now we must deal with the word seen. As ordinarily used, this is
a causal word, suggesting something dependent upon the eyes. In this
sense, it obviously involves a mass of previous experience; a new-born
baby does not know that what it sees depends upon its eyes. However,
we could eliminate this. Obviously all objects of sight have a common
quality, which no objects of touch or hearing have; a visual object is
different from an auditory object, and so on. Therefore instead of
saying a triangle is being seen, we should say there is a visual
triangle. Of course the meanings of the words visual and triangle
can only be learnt by experience, but they are not _logically_
dependent upon experience. A being could be imagined which would know
the words at birth; such a being could express its datum in the words
there is a visual triangle. In any case, the problems remaining
belong to the study of concepts; we will therefore ignore them at
present.

Now in English the words there is are ambiguous. When I used them
before, saying, there is a triangle, I meant them in the sense of
_voila_ or _da ist_. Now I mean them in the sense of _il y a_
or _es giebt_. One might express what is meant by saying a visual
triangle exists, but the word exist has all sorts of metaphysical
connotations that I wish to avoid. Perhaps it is best to say occurs.

We have now arrived at something which is just as true when your
perception is illusory as when it is correct. If you say a visual
black dot is occurring, you are speaking the truth, if there is one
in your field of vision. We have eliminated the suggestion that others
could see it, or that it could be touched, or that it is composed of
matter in the sense of physics. All these suggestions are present when
one says, in ordinary conversation, there is a black dot; they are
intended to be eliminated by the addition of the word visual and the
substitution of is occurring for there is. By these means we have
arrived at what is indubitable and intrinsic in the addition to your
knowledge derived from a visual datum.

We must now ask ourselves once more: Is there still a distinction,
within what is immediate and intrinsic, between the occurrence of a
visual datum and the cognition of it? Can we say, on the basis of
immediate experience, not only a visual black dot occurs, but also
a visual black dot is cognised? My feeling is that we cannot. When
we say that it is cognised, we seem to me to mean that it is part
of an experience, that is to say, that it can be remembered, or can
modify our habits, or, generally, can have what are called mnemic
effects. All this takes us beyond the immediate experience into the
realm of its causal relations. I see no reason to think that there is
any duality of subject and object in the occurrence itself, or that
it can properly be described as a case of knowledge. It gives rise
to knowledge, through memory, and through conscious or unconscious
inferences to the common correlates of such data. But in itself it
is not knowledge, and has no duality. The datum is a datum equally
for physics and for psychology; it is a meeting point of the two. It
is neither mental nor physical, just as a single name is neither in
alphabetical order nor in order of precedence; but it is part of the
raw material of both the mental and the physical worlds. This is the
theory which is called neutral monism, and is the one that I believe
to be true.




CHAPTER XX

CONSCIOUSNESS?


Twenty-three years have elapsed since William James startled the
world with his article entitled Does consciousness exist? In this
article, reprinted in the volume called _Essays in Radical Empiricism_,
he set out the view that there is only one primal stuff or material in
the world, and that the word consciousness stands for a function,
not an entity. He holds that there are thoughts, which perform the
function of knowing, but that thoughts are not made of any different
stuff from that of which material objects are made. He thus laid
the foundations for what is called neutral monism, a view advocated
by most American realists. This is the view advocated in the present
volume. In this chapter, we have to ask ourselves whether there is
anything that we can call consciousness in any sense involving a
peculiar kind of stuff, or whether we can agree with William James that
there is no inner duplicity in the stuff of the world as we know it,
and that the separation of it into knowing and what is known does not
represent a fundamental dualism.

There are two very different meanings attached to the word
consciousness by those who use it. On the one hand, we are said to be
conscious of something; in this sense, consciousness is a relation.
On the other hand, consciousness may be regarded as a quality of
mental occurrences, not consisting in their relation to other things.
Let us take the first view first, since, in discussing it, we shall
find reasons for rejecting the second view.

What is the relation we call being conscious of something? Take the
difference between a person awake and a person asleep. The former
reacts to all kinds of stimuli to which the latter does not react; we
therefore say that the latter is not conscious of what is happening
in his neighbourhood. But even if the sleeper does react in a fashion,
for example, by turning away from the light, such a reaction does not
fall within what is commonly regarded as knowledge or awareness; we
should say that the sleeper turned over unconsciously. If he wakes
up sufficiently to speak intelligently, for instance to address the
disturber by name, we consider him conscious. So we do if we find
that he remembers the incident next morning. But common sense does
not regard any and every bodily movement in response to a stimulus as
evidence of consciousness. There is no doubt, I think, that common
sense regards certain kinds of response as evidence of some mental
process caused by the stimulus, and regards the consciousness as
residing in the inferred mental occurrence.

Sometimes, however, as in hypnotism and sleep-walking, people refuse
to admit consciousness even where many of the usual marks of it are
present. For this there are certain reasons. One of them is subsequent
lack of memory; another is lack of intelligence in what is being done.
If you offer a hypnotised patient a drink of ink, telling him it is
port wine, and he drinks it up with every sign of enjoyment, you say
that he is not conscious, because he does not react normally to
the nasty taste. It would seem better, however, to say that he is
conscious of the hypnotist and what he commands, though not of other
things of which he would be conscious in a normal condition. And lack
of subsequent memory is a very difficult criterion, since we normally
forget many things that have happened to us, and the sleep-walkers
forgetting is only unusually complete. This is obviously a matter of
degree. Take next mornings memories in the case of a man who was drunk
overnight. They become more and more vague as he reviews the later
hours of the evening, but there is no sharp line where they cease
abruptly. Thus, if memory is a test, consciousness must be a matter of
degree. I think that here, again, common sense regards a certain amount
of memory as necessary evidence to prove that there were mental
processes at the time of the acts in question, acts in sleep being
regarded as not involving mind, and other acts in certain abnormal
conditions being supposed to resemble those of sleep in this respect.

It follows that, if we are to find out what is commonly meant by
consciousness, we must ask ourselves what is meant by a mental
occurrence. Not every mental occurrence, however, is in question.
The only kinds concerned are those which seem to have relation to an
object. A feeling of pleasant drowsiness would commonly count as
mental, but does not involve consciousness of an object. It is
this supposed peculiar relation to an object that we have to examine.

We may take, as the best example, an ordinary act of perception. I
see, let us say, a table, and I am convinced that the table is outside
me, whereas my seeing of it is a mental occurrence, which is inside
me. In such a case I am conscious of the table--so at least common
sense would say. And since I cannot see without seeing something, this
relation to an object is of the very essence of seeing. The same
essential relation to an object, it would be said, is characteristic
of every kind of consciousness.

But when we begin to consider this view more closely, all sorts of
difficulties arise. We have already seen that, on grounds derived from
physics, the table itself, as a physical thing, cannot be regarded as
the object of our perception, if the object is something essential to
the existence of the perception. In suitable circumstances, we shall
have the same perception although there is no table. In fact, there
is no event outside the brain which _must_ exist whenever we see
a table. It seems preposterous to say that when we think we see a
table we really see a motion in our own brain. Hence we are led to the
conclusion that the object which is essential to the existence of
an act of perception is just as mental as the perceiving. In fact,
so this theory runs, the mental occurrence called perceiving is one
which contains within itself the relation of perceiver and perceived,
both sides of the relation being equally mental.

Now, however, there seems no longer any reason to suppose that there is
any essentially relational character about what occurs in us when we
perceive. The original reason for thinking so was the naively realistic
view that we see the actual table. If what we see is as mental as our
seeing, why distinguish between the two? The coloured pattern that
we see is not really out there, as we had supposed; it is in our
heads, if we are speaking of physical space. True, more than a coloured
pattern occurs when we see a table. There are tactual expectations or
images: there is probably belief in an external object; and afterwards
there may be memory or other mnemic effects. All this may be taken as
representing what the above theory took to be the subject side of an
act of perception, while the coloured pattern is what the theory took
to be the object side. But both sides are on a level as regards being
mental. And the relation between the two sides is not of such a kind
that the existence of the one logically demands the existence of the
other; on the contrary, the relation between the two sides is causal,
being dependent upon experience and the law of association.

If this is correct, what really happens when, as common sense would
say, we are conscious of a table, is more or less as follows. First
there is a physical process external to the body, producing a stimulus
to the eye which occurs rarely (not never) in the absence of an actual
physical table. Then there is a process in the eye, nerves, and brain,
and finally there is a coloured pattern. This coloured pattern, by the
law of association, gives rise to tactual and other expectations and
images; also, perhaps, to memories and other habits. But everything in
this whole series consists of a causally continuous chain of events
in space-time, and we have no reason to assert that the events in us
are so very different from the events outside us--as to this, we must
remain ignorant, since the outside events are only known as to their
abstract mathematical characteristics, which do not show whether these
events are like thoughts or unlike them.

It follows that consciousness cannot be defined either as a
peculiar kind of relation or as an intrinsic character belonging to
certain events and not to others. Mental events are not essentially
relational, and we do not know enough of the intrinsic character of
events outside us to say whether it does or does not differ from that
of mental events. But what makes us call a certain class of events
mental and distinguish them from other events is the combination
of sensitivity with associative reproduction. The more markedly this
combination exists, the more mental are the events concerned; thus
mentality is a matter of degree.

There is, however, a further point which must be discussed in this
connection, and that is self-consciousness, or awareness of our own
mental events. We already had occasion to touch on this in Chapter
XVI in connection with Descartes I think, therefore I am. But I want
to discuss the question afresh in connection with consciousness.

When the plain man sees a table in the presence of a philosopher, the
plain man can be driven, by the arguments we have repeatedly brought
forward, to admit that he cannot have complete certainty as to anything
outside himself. But if he does not lose his head or his temper, he
will remain certain that there is a coloured pattern, which may be in
him, but indubitably exists. No argument from logic or physics even
tends to show that he is mistaken in this; therefore there is no reason
why he should surrender his conviction. The argument about knowledge
in Chapter VIII showed that, accepting the usual views of physicists
as to causal laws, our knowledge becomes more certain as the causal
chain from object to reaction is shortened, and can only be quite
certain when the two are in the same place in space-time, or at least
contiguous. Thus we should expect that the highest grade of certainty
would belong to knowledge as to what happens in our own heads. And this
is exactly what we have when we are aware of our own mental events,
such as the existence of a coloured pattern when we thought we were
seeing a table.

We might, therefore, if we were anxious to preserve the word mental,
define a mental event as one that can be known with the highest
grade of certainty, because, in physical space-time, the event and the
knowing of it are contiguous. Thus mental events will be certain of
the events that occur in heads that have brains. They will not be _all_
events that occur in brains, but only such as cause a reaction of the
kind that can be called knowledge.

There are, however, still a number of difficult questions, to which, as
yet, a definitive answer cannot be given. When we know a thought of
our own, what happens? And do we know the thought in a more intimate
way than we know anything else? Knowledge of external events, as we
have seen, consists of a certain sensitivity to their presence, but
not in having in or before our minds anything similar to them, except
in certain abstract structural respects. Is knowledge of our own minds
equally abstract and indirect? Or is it something more analogous to
what we ordinarily imagine knowledge to be?

Take first the question: What happens when we know a thought of our
own? Taking the definition of knowing that we adopted in Chapter
VIII, we shall say: We know a thought of our own when an event in
our brain causes a characteristic reaction which is present when the
event occurs and not otherwise. In this sense, whenever we say, I see
a table, we are knowing a thought, since an event in our brain is the
only invariable antecedent of such a statement (assuming it to be made
truthfully). We may _think_ we are knowing a table, but this is an
error.

Thus the difference between introspective and other knowledge is only
in our intention and in the degree of certainty. When we say, I see a
table, we may intend to know an external object, but if so we may be
mistaken; we are, however, actually knowing the occurrence of a visual
percept. When we describe the same occurrence in the words a certain
coloured pattern is occurring, we have changed our intention and are
much more certain of being right. Thus all that differentiates our
reaction when it gives introspective knowledge from our reaction when
it gives knowledge of another kind is the elimination of a possible
source of error.

I come now to the question: Do we know our own thoughts in a more
intimate way than we know anything else? This is a question to which it
is difficult to give precision; it describes something that one _feels_
to be a problem without being able to say exactly what the problem
is. However, some things can be said which may serve to clear up our
feelings, if not our ideas.

Suppose you are asked to repeat after a man whatever he says, as a
test of your hearing. He says how do you do? and you repeat how
do you do? This is your knowledge-reaction, and you hear yourself
speaking. You can perceive that what you hear when you speak is
closely similar to what you hear when the other man speaks. This makes
you feel that your reaction reproduces accurately what you heard.
Your knowledge-reaction, in this case, is the cause of an occurrence
closely similar to the occurrence that you are knowing. Moreover, our
inveterate naive realism makes us think that what we said was what we
heard while we were speaking. This is, of course, an illusion, since
an elaborate chain of physical and physiological causation intervenes
between speaking and hearing oneself speak; nevertheless, the illusion
re-enforces our conviction that our knowledge, in such a case, is very
intimate. And it is, in fact, as intimate as it can hope to be, when
our knowledge-reaction reproduces the very event we are knowing, or
at least an event extremely similar to it. This _may_ be the case on
other occasions, but we can only know, with any certainty, that it
is the case when what is known is a percept. This accounts for the
fact that our most indubitable and complete knowledge is concerning
percepts, not concerning other mental events or events in the external
world. Our reaction to a sound can be to make a similar sound, and if
we are clever enough we can paint something very like what we see. But
we cannot show our knowledge of a pleasure by creating for ourselves
another very similar pleasure, nor of a desire by creating a similar
desire. Thus percepts are known with more accuracy and certainty than
anything else either in the outer world or in our own minds.

The conclusion we have reached in this chapter is that William James
was right in his views on consciousness. No mental occurrence has,
in its own intrinsic nature, that sort of relational character that
was implied in the opposition of subject and object, or of knower and
known. Nevertheless we can distinguish mental events from others,
and our most indubitable knowledge is concerned with a certain class
of mental events. We have arrived at this result by following out to
its logical conclusion the behaviourist definition of knowledge which
we gave in Chapter VIII. We have had to modify considerably the point
of view which originally led us to that definition, the modification
having been forced upon us by the physical knowledge which, starting
from a common-sense realism, has been gradually driven, through the
causal theory of perception, to a view of cognition far more subjective
than that from which physicists, like the rest of mankind, originally
set out. But I do not see how there can be any escape from this
development.




CHAPTER XXI

EMOTION, DESIRE, AND WILL


Hitherto, in our investigation of man from within, we have considered
only the cognitive aspect, which is, in fact, the most important to
philosophy. But now we must turn our attention to the other sides of
human nature. If we treat them more briefly than the cognitive side,
it is not because they are less important, but because their main
importance is practical and our task is theoretical. Let us begin with
the emotions.

The theory of the emotions has been radically transformed by the
discovery of the part played by the ductless glands. Cannons _Bodily
Changes in Pain, Hunger, Fear and Rage_ is a book whose teaching
has come to be widely known, though not more so than its importance
warrants. It appears that certain secretions from the glands into the
blood are the essential physiological conditions of the emotions.
Some people say that the physiological changes correlated with these
secretions _are_ the emotions. I think this view must be received with
some caution. As everyone knows, the adrenal glands secrete adrenin,
which produces the bodily symptoms of fear or rage. On one occasion my
dentist injected a considerable amount of this substance into my blood,
in the course of administering a local ansthetic. I turned pale and
trembled, and my heart beat violently; the bodily symptoms of fear were
present, as the books said they should be, but it was quite obvious to
me that I was not actually feeling fear. I should have had the same
bodily symptoms in the presence of a tyrant about to condemn me to
death, but there would have been something extra which was absent when
I was in the dentists chair. What was different was the cognitive
part: I did not feel fear because I knew there was nothing to be afraid
of. In normal life, the adrenal glands are stimulated by the perception
of an object which is frightful or enraging; thus there is already a
cognitive element present. The fear or rage attaches itself to the
object which has stimulated the glands, and the full emotion arises.
But when adrenin is artificially administered, this cognitive element
is absent, and the emotion in its entirety fails to arise. Probably if
it were administered in sleep it would produce a dream of terror, in
which the dreamers imagination would supply an object for fear. The
same thing might happen on waking life with animals or young children.
But with an adult of average rationality, the knowledge that there is
nothing to be afraid of inhibits the full development of the emotion.
Fear and rage are both active emotions, demanding a certain kind of
behaviour towards an object; when this behaviour is obviously not
called for, it is impossible to feel either emotion fully.

There are, however, other emotions, such as melancholy, which do not
demand an object. These, presumably, can be caused in their entirety
by administering the proper secretions. A disordered liver may cause
melancholy which is not relieved by knowledge of its source. The
emotions which do not require an object are those which do not call for
any appropriate line of action.

Emotions are subject to conditioning, so that the stimuli which call
them out become more various as a result of experience. Dr. Watson has
found only two original stimuli to fear in young infants, namely loud
noises, and lack of support; but anything associated with either of
these may become terrifying.

The separation of an emotional element in our integral reaction to a
situation is more or less artificial. No doubt there is a definite
physiological concomitant, namely stimulation of a gland; but fear,
for example, involves a mode of action towards an object, for which
mode of action the secretion of adrenin is helpful. There is,
however, something in common among a number of occasions that have a
given emotional tone; this may be seen from the fact that they are
associated. When we are feeling some emotion strongly, we tend to think
of other occasions when we have had similar feelings. Association by
means of emotional similarity is a characteristic of a great deal of
poetry. And this accounts for the fact that, if our blood is in a state
usually associated with terror, we shall, if our critical faculty is in
abeyance, be very likely to imagine some cause of fear so vividly as to
believe that it is really present:

    In the night, imagining some fear,
    How easy is a bush supposed a bear.

But in a rational man, if he is not drunk or sleepy, other associations
are too strong for this production of imaginary terrors. That is why it
is possible to show the physical symptoms of fear under the influence
of adrenin, without actually feeling the emotion.

The emotions are what makes life interesting, and what makes us feel it
important. From this point of view, they are the most valuable element
in human existence. But when, as in philosophy, we are trying to
understand the world, they appear rather as a hindrance. They generate
irrational opinions, since emotional associations seldom correspond
with collocations in the external world. They cause us to view the
universe in the mirror of our moods, as now bright, now dim, according
to the state of the mirror. With the sole exception of curiosity, the
emotions are on the whole a hindrance to the intellectual life, though
the degree of vigour required for successful thinking is likely to be
correlated with a considerable susceptibility to emotion. If I say
little about the emotions in this book, it is not from under-estimating
their human importance, but solely because the task upon which we are
engaged is theoretical rather than practical: to understand the world,
not to change it. And if emotion determines the ends we shall pursue,
knowledge is what gives us the power to realise them. Even from the
practical point of view, the advancement of knowledge is more useful
than anything else that lies within human power.

I come now to the subject of _desire_, which we considered from a
behaviourist standpoint in Chapter III. I want now to ask whether there
is anything to be added from an introspective point of view.

Let us again remind ourselves that there is an element of artificiality
in isolating elements within the one process leading from stimulus to
reaction. Whenever a stimulus produces a reaction, we may consider the
reaction as the effect of the stimulus, or as the cause of further
effects. The former is the natural way of viewing the reaction when we
are concerned with knowledge; the latter is the natural way when we are
concerned with desire and will. In desire, we wish to change something
in ourselves or in our environment or both. The question is: What can
we discover introspectively about desire?

I think that here, as in the case of knowledge, the purely
behaviouristic account is more important causally than the
introspective account, and applies over a much wider range. Desire as
a characteristic of behaviour, as considered in Chapter III, begins
very low in the scale of evolution, and remains, even in human beings,
the whole of what can be discovered in a large number of instances.
The Freudian unconscious desires give a formula which is useful as
explaining causally a number of acts, but these desires do not exist as
anything except ways of behaving. Some desires, on the other hand, are
conscious and explicit. What, exactly, is added in these last that is
not present in the others?

Let us take some stock instance, say, Demosthenes desiring to become
a great orator. This was a desire of which he was conscious, and
in accordance with which he deliberately moulded his actions. One
may suppose, to begin with, a merely behaviouristic tendency to do
such things as seemed likely to impress his companions. This is
a practically universal characteristic of human nature, which is
displayed naively by children. Then come attempts, just like those of
rats in mazes, to reach the goal; wrong turnings, leading to derision;
right turnings, leading to a brief nibble at the cheese of admiration.
Self-observation, still of a behaviourist kind, may lead to the
formula: I want to be admired. At this point the desire has become
conscious. When this point has been reached, knowledge can be brought
to bear on the problem of achieving the desired end. By association,
the means come to be desired also. And so Demosthenes arrives at the
decision to subject himself to a difficult training as an orator, since
this seems the best way of achieving his end. The whole development
is closely analogous to that of explicit knowledge out of mere
sensitivity; it is, indeed, part of the very same evolution. We cannot,
in our integral reaction to a situation, separate out one event as
knowledge and another as desire; both knowledge and desire are features
which characterise the reaction, but do not exist in isolation.

In explicit conscious desire there is always an object, just as there
is in explicit conscious perception; we desire some event or some state
of affairs. But in the primitive condition out of which explicit desire
is evolved, this is not the case. We have a state of affairs which may
be said to involve discomfort, and activities of various sorts until a
certain different state of affairs is achieved, or fatigue supervenes,
or some other interest causes a distraction. These activities will
be such as to achieve the new state of affairs quickly if there has
been previous experience of a relevant kind. When we reach the level
of explicit conscious desire, it seems as if we were being attracted
to a goal, but we are really still pushed from behind. The attraction
to the goal is a shorthand way of describing the effects of learning
together with the fact that our efforts will continue till the goal
is achieved, provided the time required is not too long. There are
feelings of various kinds connected with desire, and in the case of
familiar desires, such as hunger, these feelings become associated
with what we know will cause the desire to cease. But I see no more
reason in the case of desire than in the case of knowledge to admit
an _essentially_ relational occurrence such as many suppose desire to
be. Only experience, memory and association--so I should say--confer
objects upon desire, which are initially blind tendencies to certain
kinds of activity.

It remains to say a few words about will. There is a sense in
which will is an observable phenomena, and another in which it is a
metaphysical superstition. It is obvious that I can say, I will hold
my breath for thirty seconds, and proceed to do so; that I can say, I
will go to America, and proceed to do so; and so on. In this sense,
will is an observable phenomenon. But as a faculty, as a separable
occurrence, it is, I think, a delusion. To make this clear, it will be
necessary to examine the observable phenomenon.

Very young infants do not appear to have anything that could be called
will. Their movements, at first, are reflexes, and are explicable,
where they first cease to be reflexes, by the law of conditioned
reflexes. One observes, however, something that looks very like will
when the child learns control over fingers and toes. It seems clear,
in watching this process, that, after some experience of involuntary
movements, the child discovers how to think of a movement first
and then make the movement, and that this discovery is exceedingly
pleasurable. We know that, in adult life, a deliberate movement is one
which we think of before we make it. Obviously we cannot think of a
movement unless we have previously made it; it follows that no movement
can be voluntary unless it has previously been involuntary. I think
that, as William James suggested, a voluntary movement is merely one
which is preceded by the thought of it, and has the thought of it as an
essential part of its cause.

When I say this, I do not mean to take any particular view as to what
constitutes thinking. It may consist almost entirely of talking, as
Dr. Watson holds; or it may be something more. That is not the point
at present. The point is that, whatever philosophy one may adopt, there
certainly is an occurrence which is described by ordinary people as
thinking of getting up in the morning, or thinking of any other
bodily movement. Whatever the analysis of this occurrence may be, it is
an essential part of the cause of any movement which can be attributed
to the will.

It is true, of course, that we may think of a movement without
performing it. This is analogous to imagining a state of affairs
without believing in it; each is a rather sophisticated and late
development. Each will only happen when we think of several things
at once, and one of them interferes with another. It may, I think,
be assumed that, whenever we think of a possible movement, we have a
tendency to perform it, and are only restrained, if at all, by some
thought, or other circumstance, having a contrary tendency.

If this is the case, there is nothing at all mysterious about the will.
Whatever may constitute thinking of a movement, it is certainly
something associated with the movement itself; therefore, by the usual
law of learned reactions we should expect that thinking of a movement
would tend to cause it to occur. This, I should say, is the essence of
will.

Emphatic cases of volition, where we decide after a period of
deliberation, are merely examples of conflicting forces. You may have
both pleasant and unpleasant associations with some place that you are
thinking of going to; this may cause you to hesitate, until one or
other association proves the stronger. There may be more than this in
volition, but I cannot see any good ground for believing that there is.




CHAPTER XXII

ETHICS


Ethics is traditionally a department of philosophy, and that is my
reason for discussing it. I hardly think myself that it ought to be
included in the domain of philosophy, but to prove this would take as
long as to discuss the subject itself, and would be less interesting.

As a provisional definition, we may take ethics to consist of general
principles which help to determine rules of conduct. It is not the
business of ethics to say how a person should act in such and such
specific circumstances; that is the province of casuistry. The
word casuistry has acquired bad connotations, as a result of the
Protestant and Jansenist attacks on the Jesuits. But in its old and
proper sense it represents a perfectly legitimate study. Take, say,
the question: In what circumstances is it right to tell a lie? Some
people, unthinkingly, would say: Never! But this answer cannot be
seriously defended. Everybody admits that you should lie if you meet a
homicidal maniac pursuing a man with a view to murdering him, and he
asks you whether the man has passed your way. It is admitted that lying
is a legitimate branch of the art of warfare; also that priests may
lie to guard the secrets of the confessional, and doctors to protect
the professional confidences of their patients. All such questions
belong to casuistry in the old sense, and it is evident that they are
questions deserving to be asked and answered. But they do not belong to
ethics in the sense in which this study has been included in philosophy.

It is not the business of ethics to arrive at actual rules of conduct,
such as: Thou shalt not steal. This is the province of morals. Ethics
is expected to provide a basis from which such rules can be deduced.
The rules of morals differ according to the age, the race, and the
creed of the community concerned, to an extent that is hardly realised
by those who have neither travelled nor studied anthropology. Even
within a homogeneous community differences of opinion arise. Should a
man kill his wifes lover? The Church says no, the law says no, and
common sense says no; yet many people would say yes, and juries often
refuse to condemn. These doubtful cases arise when a moral rule is
in process of changing. But ethics is concerned with something more
general than moral rules, and less subject to change. It is true that,
in a given community, an ethic which does not lead to the moral rules
accepted by that community is considered immoral. It does not, of
course, follow that such an ethic is in fact false, since the moral
rules of that community may be undesirable. Some tribes of head-hunters
hold that no man should marry until he can bring to the wedding the
head of an enemy slain by himself. Those who question this moral
rule are held to be encouraging licence and lowering the standard of
manliness. Nevertheless, we should not demand of an ethic that it
should justify the moral rules of head-hunters.

Perhaps the best way to approach the subject of ethics is to ask what
is meant when a person says: You _ought_ to do so-and-so or I
_ought_ to do so-and-so. Primarily, a sentence of this sort has an
emotional content; it means this is the act towards which I feel the
emotion of approval. But we do not wish to leave the matter there; we
want to find something more objective and systematic and constant than
a personal emotion. The ethical teacher says: You ought to approve
acts of such-and-such kinds. He generally gives reasons for this view,
and we have to examine what sorts of reasons are possible. We are here
on very ancient ground. Socrates was concerned mainly with ethics;
Plato and Aristotle both discussed the subject at length; before their
time, Confucius and Buddha had each founded a religion consisting
almost entirely of ethical teaching, though in the case of Buddhism
there was afterwards a growth of theological doctrine. The views of
the ancients on ethics are better worth studying than their views on
(say) physical science; the subject has not yet proved amenable to
exact reasoning, and we cannot boast that the moderns have as yet
rendered their predecessors obsolete.

Historically, virtue consisted at first of obedience to authority,
whether that of the gods, the government, or custom. Those who
disobeyed authority suffered obvious penalties. This is still the view
of Hegel, to whom virtue consists in obedience to the State. There
are, however, different forms of this theory, and the objections to
them are different. In its more primitive form, the theory is unaware
that different authorities take different views as to what constitutes
virtue, and it therefore universalises the practice of the community
in which the theoriser lives. When other ages and nations are found to
have different customs, these are condemned as abominations. Let us
consider this view first.

The view we are now to examine is the theory that there are certain
rules of conduct--_e.g._ the Decalogue--which determine virtue in all
situations. The person who keeps all the rules is perfectly virtuous;
the person who fails in this is wicked in proportion to the frequency
of his failures. There are several objections to this as the basis
of ethics. In the first place, the rules can hardly cover the whole
field of human conduct; _e.g._ there is nothing in the Decalogue to
show whether we ought to have a gold standard or not. Accordingly
those who hold this view regard some questions as moral issues,
while others have not this character. That means, in practice, that in
regard to moral issues we ought to act in a certain way, regardless
of consequences, while in other matters we ought to consider which
course will do the most good. Thus in effect we are driven to adopt two
different ethical systems, one where the code has spoken, the other
where it is silent. This is unsatisfactory to a philosopher.

The second objection to such a view is suggested by the first. We all
feel that certain results are desirable, and others undesirable; but
a code of conduct which takes no account of circumstances will have
sometimes the sort of consequences we think desirable, and sometimes
the sort we think undesirable. Take, _e.g._ the precept Thou shalt
not kill. All respectable people hold that this does not apply when
the State orders a person to kill; on this ground among others, the
New York School Board recently refused to sanction the teaching of the
Decalogue in schools.

A third objection is that it may be asked how the moral rules are
known. The usual answer, historically, is that they are known by
revelation and tradition. But these are extra-philosophical sources of
knowledge. The philosopher cannot but observe that there have been many
revelations, and that it is not clear why he should adopt one rather
than another. To this it may be replied that conscience is a personal
revelation to each individual, and invariably tells him what is right
and what is wrong. The difficulty of this view is that conscience
changes from age to age. Most people nowadays consider it wrong to burn
a man alive for disagreeing with them in metaphysics, but formerly this
was held to be a highly meritorious act, provided it was done in the
interests of the right metaphysics. No one who has studied the history
of moral ideas can regard conscience as invariably right. Thus we are
driven to abandon the attempt to define virtue by means of a set of
rules of conduct.

There is, however, another form of the view that virtue consists in
obedience to authority. This may be called the administrators ethic.
A Roman or Anglo-Indian pro-consul would define virtue as obedience to
the moral code of the community to which a man happens to belong. No
matter how moral codes may differ, a man should always obey that of
his own time and place and creed. A Mohammedan, for instance, would
not be regarded as wicked for practising polygamy, but an Englishman
would, even if he lived in a Mohammedan country. This view makes social
conformity the essence of virtue; or, as with Hegel, regards virtue as
obedience to the government. The difficulty of such theories is that
they make it impossible to apply ethical predicates to authority: we
cannot find any meaning for the statement that a custom is good or that
the government is bad. The view is appropriate to despots and their
willing slaves; it cannot survive in a progressive democracy.

We come a little nearer to a correct view when we define right conduct
by the motive or state of mind of the agent. According to this theory,
acts inspired by certain emotions are good, and those inspired by
certain other emotions are bad. Mystics hold this view, and have
accordingly a certain contempt for the letter of the law. Broadly
speaking, it would be held that acts inspired by love are good, and
those inspired by hate are bad. In practice, I hold this view to be
right; but philosophically I regard it as deducible from something more
fundamental.

All the theories we have hitherto considered are opposed to those which
judge the rightness or wrongness of conduct by its consequences. Of
these the most famous is the utilitarian philosophy, which maintained
that happiness is the good, and that we ought to act so as to maximise
the balance of happiness over unhappiness in the world. I should not
myself regard happiness as an adequate definition of the good, but I
should agree that conduct ought to be judged by its consequences. I do
not mean, of course, that in every practical exigency of daily life
we should attempt to think out the results of this or that line of
conduct, because, if we did, the opportunity for action would often
be past before our calculations were finished. But I do mean that
the received moral code, in so far as it is taught in education and
embodied in public opinion or the criminal law, should be carefully
examined in each generation, to see whether it still serves to achieve
desirable ends, and, if not, in what respects it needs to be amended.
The moral code, in short, like the legal code, should adapt itself to
changing circumstances, keeping the public good always as its motive.
If so, we have to consider in what the public good consists.

According to this view, right conduct is not an autonomous concept,
but means conduct calculated to produce desirable results. It will be
right, let us say, to act so as to make people happy and intelligent,
but wrong to act so as to make them unhappy and stupid. We have to
ask ourselves how we can discover what constitutes the ends of right
conduct.

There is a view, advocated, _e.g._ by Dr. G. E. Moore, that good is
an indefinable notion, and that we know _a priori_ certain general
propositions about the kinds of things that are good on their own
account. Such things as happiness, knowledge, appreciation of beauty,
are known to be good, according to Dr. Moore; it is also known that we
ought to act so as to create what is good and prevent what is bad. I
formerly held this view myself, but I was led to abandon it, partly by
Mr. Santayanas _Winds of Doctrine_. I now think that good and bad are
derivative from desire. I do not mean quite simply that the good is the
desired, because mens desires conflict, and good is, to my mind,
mainly a social concept, designed to find an issue from this conflict.
The conflict, however, is not only between the desires of different
men, but between incompatible desires of one man at different times,
or even at the same time, and even if he is solitary, like Robinson
Crusoe. Let us see how the concept of good emerges from reflection or
conflicts of desires.

We will begin with Robinson Crusoe. In him there will be conflicts,
for example, between fatigue and hunger, particularly between fatigue
at one time and foreseen hunger at another. The effort which he will
require in order to work when he is tired with a view to providing
food on another occasion has all the characteristics of what is called
a moral effort: we think better of a man who makes the effort than of
one who does not, and the making of it requires self-control. For some
reason, this sort of thing is called, not morals, but morale; the
distinction, however, seems to me illusory. Robinson Crusoe is bound
to realise that he has many desires, each of which is stronger at one
time than at another, and that, if he acts always upon the one that
is strongest at the moment, he may defeat others that are stronger in
the long run. So far, only intelligence is involved; but one may assume
that, with the progress of intelligence, there goes a growing desire
for a harmonious life, _i.e._ a life in which action is dominated by
consistent quasi-permanent desires. Again: some desires, in addition to
the desire for a harmonious life, are more likely to lead to harmony
then certain other desires. Intellectual curiosity, _e.g._ affords a
mild diffused satisfaction, whereas drugs provide ecstasy followed by
despair. If we arrive unexpectedly in Robinson Crusoes island and find
him studying botany, we shall think better of him than if we find him
dead drunk on his last bottle of whisky. All this belongs to morals,
although it is purely self-regarding.

When we come to considering men in society, moral questions become
both more important and more difficult, because conflicts between
the desires of different persons are harder to resolve than internal
conflicts among the desires of one person. There are some distinctions
to be made. First, there is the difference between the point of view
of the neutral authority contemplating a squabble in which it is not
interested, and the point of view of the disputants themselves. Then
there is the distinction between what we wish people to _do_, and what
we wish them to _feel_ in the way of emotions and desires.

The view of authority everywhere is that squabbles to which it is not a
party are undesirable, but that in the squabbles to which it is a party
virtue consists in promoting the victory of authority. In the latter
respect, it is acting, not as an authority, but merely as a combination
of quarrelsome individuals who think it more profitable to quarrel
with outsiders than with each other; we will therefore ignore this
aspect of authority, and consider its action only when it is a neutral.
In this case, it aims at preventing quarrels by punishing those who
begin them, or sometimes by punishing both parties. Monsieur Huc, the
Jesuit missionary who wrote a fascinating account of his travels in
China, Tartary, and Tibet about eighty years ago, relates an amusing
conversation he had with a mandarin. Monsieur Huc had remarked that
Chinese justice was dilatory, expensive, and corrupt. The mandarin
explained that it had been made so in obedience to an Imperial edict,
setting forth that the subjects of the Son of Heaven had become too
much addicted to litigation, and must be led to abandon this practice.
The rescript then proceeded to suggest to magistrates and judges
the desirability of the above defects as a means of diminishing the
number of law-suits. It appeared that the Emperors commands had been
faithfully obeyed in this respect--more so than in some others.

Another method adopted by public authorities to prevent the impulse
towards internal quarrels is the creation of _esprit de corps_, public
spirit, patriotism, etc., _i.e._ a concentration of quarrelsome
impulses or persons outside the group over which it rules. Such a
method, obviously, is partial and external; it would not be open to a
world-wide democratic authority, should this ever come into existence.
Such an authority would have to adopt better methods of producing
harmony; it would also have a higher claim to the obedience of citizens
than some authorities have at present.

What can we say from the point of view of the disputants themselves? It
is of course obvious that there will be a greater _total_ satisfaction
when two peoples desires harmonise than when they conflict, but that
is not an argument which can be used to people who in fact hate each
other. One can argue that the one who is going to be beaten would do
well to give way, but each will think that he himself is going to be
victorious. One can argue that there is more happiness to be derived
from love than from hate, but people cannot love to order, and there is
no satisfaction to be derived from an insincere love. Nor is it always
true in an individual case that love brings more happiness than hate.
During and immediately after the war, those who hated the Germans were
happier than those who still regarded them as human beings, because
they could feel that what was being done served a good purpose. I
think, therefore, that certain departments of morals, and those the
most important, cannot be inculcated from a personal point of view, but
only from the point of view of a neutral authority. That is why I said
that ethics is mainly social.

The attitude of a neutral authority would, it seems to me, be this:
Men desire all sorts of things, and in themselves all desires,
taken singly, are on a level, _i.e._ there is no reason to prefer
the satisfaction of one to the satisfaction of another. But when we
consider not a single desire but a group of desires, there is this
difference, that sometimes all the desires in a group can be satisfied,
whereas in other cases the satisfaction of some of the desires in
the group is incompatible with that of others. If A and B desire to
marry each other, both can have what they want, but if they desire to
kill each other, at most one can succeed, unless they are Kilkenny
cats. Therefore the former pair of desires is socially preferable to
the latter. Now our desires are a product of three factors: native
disposition, education, and present circumstances. The first factor is
difficult to deal with at present, for lack of knowledge. The third is
brought into operation by means of the criminal law, economic motives,
and social praise and blame, which make it on the whole to the interest
of an individual in a community to promote the interests of the
dominant group in that community. But this is done in an external way,
not by creating good desires, but by producing a conflict of greed and
fear in which it is hoped that fear will win. The really vital method
is education, in the large sense in which it includes care of the body
and habit-formation in the first few years. By means of education,
mens desires can be changed, so that they act spontaneously in a
social fashion. To force a man to curb his desires, as we do by the
criminal law, is not nearly so satisfactory as to cause him genuinely
to feel the desires which promote socially harmonious conduct.

And this brings me to the last point with which we are concerned,
namely, the distinction between feeling and doing. No doubt, from a
social point of view the important thing is what a man does, but it is
impossible to cause a man to do the right things consistently unless he
has the right desires. And the right desires cannot be produced merely
by praising them or by desiring to have them; the technique of moral
education is not one of exhortation or _explicit_ moral instruction.

We can now state the ethic at which we have arrived in abstract terms.
Primarily, we call something good when we desire it, and bad when
we have an aversion from it. But our use of words is more constant than
our desires, and therefore we shall continue to call a thing good even
at moments when we are not actually desiring it, just as we always
call grass green though it sometimes looks yellow. And the laudatory
associations of the word good may generate a desire which would not
otherwise exist: we may want to eat caviare merely because we are told
that it is good. Moreover the use of words is social, and therefore
we learn only to call a thing good, except in rare circumstances, if
most of the people we associate with are also willing to call it good.
Thus good comes to apply to things desired by the whole of a social
group. It is evident, therefore, that there can be more good in a world
where the desires of different individuals harmonise than in one where
they conflict. The supreme moral rule should, therefore, be: _Act so
as to produce harmonious rather than discordant desires_. This rule
will apply wherever a mans influence extends: within himself, in his
family, his city, his country, even the world as a whole, if he is able
to influence it.

There will be two main methods to this end: first, to produce social
institutions under which the interests of different individuals or
groups conflict as little as possible; second, to educate individuals
in such a way that their desires can be harmonised with each other and
with the desires of their neighbours. As to the first method, I shall
say nothing further, since the questions that arise belong to politics
and economics. As to the second, the important period is the formative
period of childhood, during which there should be health, happiness,
freedom, and a gradual growth of self-discipline through opportunities
for difficult achievement of a sort which is useful and yet satisfies
the impulse towards mastery of the environment. The desire for power,
which is present in most people and strongest in the most vigorous,
should be directed towards power over things rather than over people.

It is clear that, if harmonious desires are what we should seek, love
is better than hate, since, when two people love each other, both
can be satisfied, whereas when they hate each other one at most can
achieve the object of his desire. It is obvious also that desire for
knowledge is to be encouraged, since the knowledge that a man acquires
is not obtained by taking it away from some one else; but a desire for
(say) large landed estates can only be satisfied in a small minority.
Desire for power over other people is a potent source of conflict,
and is therefore to be discouraged; a respect for the liberty of
others is one of the things that ought to be developed by the right
kind of education. The impulse towards personal achievement ought to
go into such things as artistic creation or scientific discovery or
the promotion of useful institutions--in a word, into activities that
are creative rather than possessive. Knowledge, which may do positive
harm where mens desires conflict (for example, by showing how to make
war more deadly), will have only good results in a world where mens
desires harmonise, since it tends to show how their common desires are
to be realised.

The conclusion may be summed up in a single phrase: _The good life is
one inspired by love and guided by knowledge_.[11]

     [11] Cf. _What I Believe_, by the present author--To-day and
          To-morrow Series.




PART IV

THE UNIVERSE




CHAPTER XXIII

SOME GREAT PHILOSOPHIES OF THE PAST


Our discussions, hitherto, have been concerned very largely with
Man, but Man on his own account is not the true subject-matter of
philosophy. What concerns philosophy is the universe as a whole; Man
demands consideration solely as the instrument by means of which we
acquire knowledge of the universe. And that is why it is human beings
as capable of knowledge that have concerned us mainly in past chapters,
rather than as centres of will or of emotion. We are not in the mood
proper to philosophy so long as we are interested in the world only as
it affects human beings; the philosophic spirit demands an interest in
the world for its own sake. But since we apprehend the world through
our own senses, and think about it with our own intellect, the picture
that we acquire is inevitably coloured by the personal medium through
which it comes to us. Consequently we have to study this medium,
namely ourselves, in order to find out, if we can, what elements in
our picture of the world are contributed by us, and what elements we
may accept as representative of outside fact. Previous chapters have
studied cognition, both as an outwardly observable reaction, and as
it appears to introspection. In the chapters that remain, we shall
be concerned with what we can know about the universe, in view of
the nature of the instrument that we have to employ. I do not think
we can know as much as many philosophers of the past have supposed,
but I think it is worth while to have in our minds an outline of
their systems. I shall therefore begin by setting forth a few typical
philosophical constructions of earlier centuries.

Modern philosophy is generally taken as beginning with Descartes,
who flourished in the first half of the seventeenth century. We have
already had occasion, in Chapter XVI, to consider his argument I
think, therefore, I am, but now we will deal with him somewhat more
generally. He inaugurated two movements, one in metaphysics, one in
theory of knowledge. In metaphysics, he emphasised the gulf between
mind and matter, or between soul and body; in theory of knowledge he
advocated a critical scrutiny of premises. These two movements had
different histories, each of them interesting. The science of dynamics
was rapidly developing in Descartes time, and seemed to show that the
motions of matter could be calculated mathematically, given sufficient
data. As the motions of matter include our bodily acts, even speaking
and writing, it seemed as if the consequence must be a materialistic
theory of human behaviour. This consequence, however, was distasteful
to most philosophers, and they therefore invented various ways of
escaping from it. Descartes himself thought that the will could have
certain direct physical effects. He thought that the brain contains a
fluid called the animal spirits, and that the will could influence
the direction of its motion, though not the velocity. In this way he
was still able to hold that the will is effective in the manner in
which common sense supposes it to be. But this view did not fit in at
all well with the rest of his philosophy. He held that, apart from the
Supreme Substance, namely God, there are two created substances, mind
and matter; that the essence of mind is thought, and that the essence
of matter is extension. He made these two substances so different
that interaction between them became difficult to understand, and his
followers decided that there is never any effect either of mind on
matter or of matter on mind.

The motives for this development were various; perhaps the most
important was the development of physics immediately after Descartes
time. A law was discovered called the conservation of momentum. This
states that, if a system of bodies is in any sort of motion, and is
free from outside influences, the amount of motion _in any direction_
is constant. This showed that the kind of action of the will on the
animal spirits which Descartes had assumed was contrary to the
principles of dynamics. It seemed to follow that mind cannot influence
matter, and it was inferred that matter cannot influence mind, since
the two were regarded as co-equal substances. It was held that each
goes it own way, according to its own laws. The fact that our arm moves
when we will it to move was regarded as analogous to the fact that two
perfectly accurate clocks strike at the same moment, though neither
has any effect upon the other. The series of mental events and the
series of physical events were parallel, each going at the same rate as
the other, therefore they continued to synchronise, in spite of their
independence of each other.

Spinoza sought to make this parallelism less mysterious by denying
that there are two separate substances, mind and matter. He maintained
that there is only one substance, of which thought and extension are
attributes. But there seemed still no good reason why the events
belonging to the two attributes should develop along parallel lines.
Spinoza is in many ways one of the greatest philosophers, but his
greatness is rather ethical than metaphysical. Accordingly he was
regarded by contemporaries as a profound metaphysician but a very
wicked man.

The notion of the impossibility of interaction between mind and body
has persisted down to our own day. One still hears of psychophysical
parallelism, according to which to every state of the brain a state of
mind _corresponds_ and vice versa, without either acting on the other.
This whole point of view, though not exactly that of Descartes, derives
from him. It has a number of sources, religious, metaphysical, and
scientific; but there seems no ground whatever for regarding it as true.

Take, first, the rigid determinism of traditional physics, which was
to have been avoided. Spinoza rightly perceived that this could not
be avoided by such methods, and therefore accepted determinism in
the psychical as in the physical realm. If everything we _say_ is
determined by physical causes, our thoughts are only free when we
tell lies: so long as we say what we think, our thoughts also can be
inferred from physics. The philosophy which I advocate escapes this
consequence in several ways. In the first place, causality does not
involve _compulsion_, but only a law of sequence: if physical and
mental events run parallel, either may with equal justice be regarded
as causing the other, and there is no sense in speaking of them as
causally independent. Thus the Cartesian dualism does not have the
pleasant consequences which were intended. In the second place, modern
physics has become less deterministic than the physics of the past
few centuries. We do not know, _e.g._ what makes a radio-active atom
explode or an electron jump from a larger to a smaller orbit. In these
matters we only know statistical averages.

Take next the view that mind and matter are quite disparate. This we
have criticised already. It rests upon a notion that we know much
more about matter than we do, and in particular upon the belief that
the space of physics can be identified with the space of sensible
experience. This belief is absent in Leibniz, who, however, never quite
realised what his own view was. It is not absent in Kant, who realised
that the space of sensible experience is subjective, and inferred
that the space of physics is subjective. Since Kant, no one seems to
have thought clearly about space until Einstein and Minkowski. The
separation of physical and sensible space, logically carried out, shows
the groundlessness of traditional views about mind and matter. This
part of Descartes philosophy, therefore, though it accelerated the
progress of physics, must be regarded as metaphysically an aberration.

The other part of Descartes philosophy, namely, the emphasis upon
methodical doubt, and consequently upon theory of knowledge, has
been more fruitful. The beginning of a philosophic attitude is the
realisation that we do not know as much as we think we do, and to this
Descartes contributed notably. We have seen that he set to work to
doubt all he could, but found he could not doubt his own existence,
which he therefore took as the starting-point of his constructive
system. He supposed that the most certain fact in the world is I
think. This was unfortunate, since it gave a subjective bias to modern
philosophy. As a matter of fact, I seems to be only a string of
events, each of which separately is more certain than the whole. And
think is a word which Descartes accepted as indefinable, but which
really covers complicated relations between events. When is an event
a thought? Is there some intrinsic characteristic which makes it a
thought? Descartes would say yes, and so would most philosophers. I
should say no. Take, _e.g._ a visual and an auditory sensation. Both
are thoughts in Descartes sense, but what have they in common? Two
visual sensations _have_ an indefinable common quality, viz. that
which makes them visual. Two auditory sensations likewise. But a
visual and an auditory sensation have in common, if I am not mistaken,
no intrinsic property, but a certain capacity for being _known_
without inference. This amounts to saying that they are mnemic causes
of a certain kind of event, called a cognition, and that they have
moreover, a certain formal similarity to the cognition which they
cause. Therefore, instead of taking the general I think as our basis,
we ought to take the particular occurrences which are known without
inference, among which sensations (or rather perceptions) will be
included. These occurrences, as we have already seen, may be regarded
with equal justice as physical and mental: they are parts of chains of
physical causation, and they have mnemic effects which are cognitions.
The former fact makes us call them physical, the latter mental, both
quite truly. It is the particular events which are certain, not the
I think which Descartes made the basis of his philosophy. It is not
correct to regard the ultimate certainties as subjective, except in
the sense that they are events in that part of space-time in which our
body is--and our mind also, I should say.

A new turn was given to the Cartesian type of metaphysics by Leibniz
(16461716), who, like Descartes, was supremely eminent both in
mathematics and in philosophy. Leibniz rejected the view that there
is only one substance, as Spinoza held, or only two other than God,
as the orthodox followers of Descartes maintained. He also rejected
the dualism of mind and matter, holding that there are innumerable
substances all in a greater or less degree mental, and none in any
degree material. He maintained that every substance is immortal, and
that there is no interaction between one substance and another--this
last being a view derived from the Cartesian independence of mind
and matter. He also extended to his many substances the belief in
parallelism which had existed for the two substances of the Cartesians.
He called his substances monads, and maintained that every monad
mirrors the universe, and develops along lines which correspond, point
by point, with those along which every other monad is developing. A
mans soul or mind is a single monad, while his body is a collection of
monads, each mental in some degree, but less so than the monad which
is his soul. Inferior monads mirror the world in a more confused way
than higher ones do, but there is some element of confusion in the
perceptions of even the most superior monads. Every monad mirrors the
world from its own point of view, and the difference between points of
view is compared to a difference of perspective. Matter is a confused
way of perceiving a number of monads; if we perceived clearly, we
should see that there is no such thing as matter.

Leibnizs system had great merits and great demerits. The theory that
matter is a confused way of perceiving something non-material was
an advance upon anything to be found in his predecessors. He had,
though only semi-consciously, the distinction between physical and
perceptual space: there is space in each monads picture of the world,
and there is also the assemblage or pattern of points of view. The
latter corresponds to what I have called physical space, the former
to perceptual space. Leibniz maintained, as against Newton, that
space and time consists only of relations--a view which has achieved a
definitive triumph in Einsteins theory of relativity. The weak point
of his system was what he called the pre-established harmony, in
virtue of which all the monads (so to speak) kept step, in spite of
the fact that they were windowless and never acted upon each other.
Perception, for Leibniz, was not an effect of the object perceived, but
a modification arising in the perceiving monad and running parallel
with what was happening in the perceived object. This view would
never have seemed plausible but for the anterior Cartesian theory of
the mutual independence of mind and matter. And if Leibniz himself
developed, as he believed, in complete independence of all other
created things, it is not clear what good reasons he could have had for
believing in the existence of anything except himself, since, by his
own theory, his experiences would remain unchanged if everything else
were annihilated. In fact, he was only able to refute this possibility
by bringing in theological considerations, which, whether valid or
not, are out of place in philosophy. For this reason, his doctrines,
ingenious as they were, found little acceptance in France and England,
though in Germany they prevailed, in a modified form, until the time of
Kant.

The systems of Descartes, Spinoza and Leibniz have one very important
characteristic in common, namely, that they all depend upon the
category of substance. This is a concept which has developed out of
the common-sense notion of thing. A substance is that which has
qualities, and is in general supposed to be indestructible, though
it is difficult to see why. It acquired its hold over metaphysicians
partly because both matter and the soul were held to be immortal, and
partly through a hasty transference to reality of ideas derived from
grammar. We say Peter is running, Peter is talking, Peter is
eating, and so on. We think that there is one entity, Peter, who does
all these things, and that none of them could be done unless there were
someone to do them, but that Peter might quite well do none of them.
Similarly we assign qualities to Peter: we say he is wise and tall
and blond and so on. All these qualities, we feel, cannot subsist by
themselves in the void, but only when there is a subject to which they
belong; but Peter would remain Peter even if he became foolish and
short and dyed his hair. Thus Peter, who is regarded as a substance,
is self-subsistent as compared with his qualities and states, and he
preserves his substantial identity throughout all sorts of changes.
Similarly in the material world an atom is supposed (or rather was
supposed until recently) to preserve its identity throughout all time,
however it might move and whatever combinations it might form with
other atoms. The concept of motion, upon which all physics seemed to
depend, was only strictly applicable to a substance which preserves
its identity while changing its spatial relations to other substances;
thus substance acquired an even firmer hold upon physics than upon
metaphysics.

Nevertheless, the notion of substance, at any rate in any sense
involving permanence, must be shut out from our thoughts if we are to
achieve a philosophy in any way adequate either to modern physics or
to modern psychology. Modern physics, both in the theory of relativity
and in the Heisenberg-Schrdinger theories of atomic structure, has
reduced matter to a system of events, each of which lasts only for a
very short time. To treat an electron or a proton as a single entity
has become as wrong-headed as it would be to treat the population of
London or New York as a single entity. And in psychology, equally,
the ego has disappeared as an ultimate conception, and the unity
of a personality has become a peculiar causal nexus among a series
of events. In this respect, grammar and ordinary language have been
shown to be bad guides to metaphysics. A great book might be written
showing the influence of syntax on philosophy; in such a book, the
author could trace in detail the influence of the subject-predicate
structure of sentences upon European thought, more particularly in
this matter of substance. And it must be understood that the same
reasons which lead to the rejection of substance lead also to the
rejection of things and persons as ultimately valid concepts. I
say I sit at my table, but I ought to say: One of a certain string
of events causally connected in the sort of way that makes the whole
series that is called a person has a certain spatial relation to one
of another string of events causally connected with each other in a
different way and having a spatial configuration of the sort denoted
by the word table. I do not say so, because life is too short; but
that is what I should say if I were a true philosopher. Apart from
any other grounds, the inadequacy of the notion of substance would
lead us to regard the philosophy of Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz as
incompatible with modern science. There is of course in all three, a
great deal that does not depend upon substance, and that still has
value; but substance supplied the framework and a good deal of the
argumentation, and therefore introduces a fatal defect into these three
great systems.

I come now to the triad of British philosophers, Locke, Berkeley, and
Hume--English, Irish, and Scotch respectively. Perhaps from patriotic
bias or from community of national temperament, I find more that I
can accept, and regard as still important, in the writings of these
three than in the philosophy of their continental predecessors. Their
constructions are less ambitious, their arguments more detailed, and
their methods more empirical; in all these respects they show more
kinship with the modern scientific outlook. On the other hand, Locke
and Hume, if not Berkeley, approach philosophy too exclusively from
the side of psychology, and are concerned to study Man rather than the
universe.

Locke was a contemporary and friend of Newton; his great book, _An
Essay concerning Human Understanding_, was published at almost the
same moment as Newtons _Principia_. His influence has been enormous,
greater, in fact, than his abilities would seem to warrant; and this
influence was not only philosophical, but quite as much political and
social. He was one of the creators of eighteenth century liberalism:
democracy, religious toleration, freedom of economic enterprise,
educational progress, all owe much to him. The English Revolution of
1688 embodied his ideas; the American Revolution of 1776 and the
French Revolution of 1789 expressed what had grown, in a century, out
of his teaching. And in all these movements, philosophy and politics
went hand in hand. Thus the practical success of Lockes ideas has been
extraordinary.

When, knowing all this, one comes to read Locke himself, it is
difficult to resist a feeling of disappointment. He is sensible,
enlightened, minute, but uninspired and (to moderns) uninspiring.
One has to remember that his contemporaries found common sense
exhilarating after a century of wars of religion and a long struggle
with obscurantism. Locke combatted the doctrine of innate ideas,
according to which we learned only certain things by experience,
but possessed our abstract knowledge in virtue of our congenital
constitution. He regarded the mind at birth as a wax tablet, upon which
experience proceeded to write. Undoubtedly he was, in this matter,
more in the right than his opponents, although the terms in which the
controversy was waged are not such as a modern could employ. We should
say that the innate apparatus of man consists of reflexes rather than
ideas; also that our sense-organs, our glands, and our muscles lead
to responses of certain kinds, in which our own organisation plays a
part of the same importance as that played by the external stimulus.
The element in our knowledge-responses that corresponds to our own
bodily organisation might, perhaps, be regarded as representing what
Lockes opponents meant by innate. But it does not represent this
at all accurately so far as our feelings towards it are concerned.
The innate ideas were the ideas to be proud of; they embraced pure
mathematics, natural theology, and ethics. But nobody is proud of
sneezing or coughing. And when Locke tried to show, in detail, how our
knowledge is generated by experience, he was liberating philosophy from
a great deal of useless lumber, even if his own doctrines were not
altogether such as we can now accept.

Locke used his own principles only in ways consistent with common
sense; Berkeley and Hume both pushed them to paradoxical conclusions.
The philosophy of Berkeley, to my mind, has not received quite the
attention and respect that it deserves--not that I agree with it,
but that I think it ingenious and harder to refute than is often
supposed. Berkeley, as everyone knows, denied the reality of matter,
and maintained that everything is mental. In the former respect I
agree with him, though not for his reasons; in the latter respect, I
think his argument unsound and his conclusion improbable, though not
certainly false. However, I will leave the development of my own views
to a later chapter, and confine myself to Berkeleys argument.

Berkeley contended that when, for example, you see a tree, all
that you really _know_ to be happening is in you, and is mental. The
colour that you see, as Locke had already argued, does not belong to
the physical world, but is an effect upon you, produced, according
to Locke, by a physical stimulus. Locke held that the purely spatial
properties of perceived objects really belong to the objects, whereas
such things as colour, softness, sound, etc., are effects in us.
Berkeley went further, and argued that the spatial properties of
perceived objects are no exception. Thus the object perceived is
composed entirely of mental constituents, and there is no reason to
believe in the existence of anything not mental. He did not wish to
admit that a tree ceases to exist when we do not look at it, so he
maintained that it acquires permanence through being an idea in the
mind of God. It is still only an idea, but not one whose existence
depends upon the accidents of our perceptions.

The real objection to Berkeleys view is rather physical than
metaphysical. Light and sound take time to travel from their sources
to the percipient, and one must suppose that something is happening
along the route by which they travel. What is happening along the route
is presumably not mental, for, as we have seen, mental events are
those that have peculiar mnemic effects which are connected with living
tissue. Therefore, although Berkeley is right in saying that the events
we know immediately are mental, it is highly probable that he is wrong
as to the events which we infer in places where there are no living
bodies. In saying this, however, we are anticipating the results of a
fuller discussion in a later chapter.

Hume, proceeding from a starting-point essentially similar to that
of Locke and Berkeley, arrived at conclusions so sceptical that all
subsequent philosophers have shied away from them. He denied the
existence of the Self, questioned the validity of induction, and
doubted whether causal laws could be applied to anything except our own
mental processes. He is one of the very few philosophers not concerned
to establish any positive conclusions. To a great extent, I think, we
must admit the validity of his reasons for refusing to feel the usual
certainties. As regards the Self, he was almost certainly right. As we
have already argued, a person is not a single entity, but a series of
events linked together by peculiar causal laws. As regards induction,
the question is very difficult, and I shall devote a subsequent chapter
to it. As regards causal laws, the question, as we shall find later, is
the same as the question of induction. On both points Humes doubts are
not to be lightly dismissed.

The usual modern criticism of Locke, Berkeley, and Hume is that they
were unduly atomistic. They thought of the mind as a collection of
ideas, each as hard and separate as a billiard-ball. They had not
the conception of continuous change or of integral processes; their
causal units were too small. As we have already seen in connection with
_Gestaltpsychologie_ and with sentences, the causal unit is often a
configuration which cannot be broken up without losing its distinctive
causal properties. In this sense, it is true that the traditional
British philosophy was too atomistic. But in another sense I do not
think it is true, and I think much modern philosophy is confused on
this point. Although a configuration may lose its _causal_ properties
when broken up into its elements, it nevertheless does consist of
these elements related in certain ways; analysis into atoms is
perfectly valid, so long as it is not assumed that the causal efficacy
of the whole is compounded out of the separate effects of the separate
atoms. It is because I hold this view that I call the philosophy which
I advocate logical atomism. And to this extent I regard Locke,
Berkeley, and Hume as in the right as against their modern critics. But
this also is a topic which will be resumed in a later chapter.

Humes criticism of the notion of cause was what led Kant to his new
departure. Kants philosophy is difficult and obscure, and philosophers
still dispute as to what he meant. Those who disagree with him are held
by his supporters to have misunderstood him; I must therefore warn the
reader that what follows is my view of what he meant, and that there is
no agreed view.

Kant maintained that, in virtue of our mental constitution, we deal
with the raw material of sense-impressions by means of certain
categories and by arranging it in space and time. Both the categories
and the space-time arrangement are supplied by us, and do not belong to
the world except as known by us. But since our mental constitution is
a constant datum, all phenomena _as known_ will be spatio-temporal and
will conform to the categories. Among the latter cause is the most
important. Thus although there may be no cause in the world as it is
in itself (a point on which Kant was inconsistent in the interest of
morals), yet phenomena, _i.e._ things as they seem to us, will always
have other phenomena as their causes. And although there is no time in
the real world, things as they appear to us will be some earlier and
some later. Space, again is supplied by us, and therefore geometry can
be known _a priori_, without our having to study the outer world. Kant
thought that Euclidean geometry was quite certainly true, although it
could not be proved by logic alone, since Euclids axioms could be
denied without self-contradiction.

It was on this question of geometry that the weakness of Kants
system first became obvious. It was found that we have no grounds for
regarding Euclidean geometry as quite true. Since Einstein, we have
positive grounds for regarding it as not quite true. It appears that
geometry is just as empirical as geography. We depend upon observation
if we want to know whether the sum of the angles of a triangle is two
right angles just as much as if we want to know how much land there is
in the western hemisphere.

With regard to the categories there are equally great difficulties.
Let us take cause as our illustration. We see lightning, and then we
hear thunder; as phenomena, our seeing and hearing are connected as
cause and effect. But we must not--if we are to take the subjectivity
of cause seriously--suppose that our seeing or our hearing has an
outside cause. In that case, we have no reason to suppose that there
is anything outside ourselves. Nay, more: what _really_ happens when
we see is not, according to Kant, what we perceive by introspection;
what really happens is something without a date, without a position
in space, without causes and without effects. Thus we do not know
ourselves any better than we know the outside world. Space and time
and the categories interpose a mirage of illusion which cannot be
penetrated at any point. As an answer to Humes scepticism, this
seems a somewhat unsuccessful effort. And Kant himself, later, in the
_Critique of Practical Reason_, demolished much of his own edifice,
because he thought that ethics at least must have validity in the
real world. This part of his philosophy, however, is usually ignored
by his followers or apologetically minimised.

Kant gave a new turn to an old philosophical controversy, as to how
far our knowledge is _a priori_ and how far it is based on experience.
Kant admitted that without experience we could know nothing, and that
what we know is only valid within the realm of experience. But he held
that the general framework of our knowledge is _a priori_ in the sense
that it is not proved by means of particular facts of experience, but
represents the conditions to which phenomena have to conform in order
to be capable of being experienced. Before his day, the tendency had
been for continental philosophers to regard almost everything as
_a priori_ while British philosophers regarded almost everything as
empirical. But both sides thought that what is _a priori_ can be proved
by logic, at least in theory, whereas Kant held that mathematics is
_a priori_ and yet synthetic, _i.e._ not capable of being proved
by logic. In this he was misled by geometry. Euclidean geometry,
considered as true, is synthetic but not _a priori_; considered
merely as deducing consequences from premisses, it is _a priori_
but not synthetic. The geometry of the actual world, as required
by engineers, is empirical; the geometry of pure mathematics, which
does not inquire into the truth of the axioms but merely shows their
implications, is an exercise in pure logic.

It should be said, however, that, if the correct analysis of knowledge
bears any resemblance at all to that which has been suggested in this
book, the whole controversy between empiricists and apriorists becomes
more or less unreal. All beliefs are _caused_ by external stimuli; when
they are as particular as the stimuli they are of the sort which an
empiricist might regard as _proved_ by experience, but when they are
more general difficulties arise. A foreigner arrives in America and
sees the immigration officials, who lead him to the generalisation that
all Americans are rude; but a few minutes later the porter upsets this
induction in the hope of a tip. Thus sometimes a given belief will be
caused by one event and destroyed by another. If all the events in a
mans life, so far as they affect the belief in question, are such as
to cause it, he counts the belief true. The more general a belief is,
the more events are relevant to it, and therefore the more difficult
it is for it to be such as a man will long consider true. Roughly
speaking, the beliefs which count as _a priori_ will be those which
well might have been upset by subsequent events, but in fact were
confirmed. Here as elsewhere we are driven to the view that theory of
knowledge is not so fundamental as it has been considered since Kant.

There is one more traditional controversy which I wish to consider,
namely, that between monists and pluralists. Is the universe one,
or is it many? If many, how intimately are they interconnected? The
monistic view is very old: it is already complete in Parmenides (fifth
century B.C.). It is fully developed in Spinoza, Hegel, and Bradley.
The pluralistic view, on the other hand, is found in Heraclitus,
the atomists, Leibniz, and the British empiricists. For the sake of
definiteness, let us take the monistic view as found in Bradley, who
is in the main a follower of Hegel. He maintains that every judgment
consists in assigning a predicate to Reality as a whole: the whole is
the subject of every predicate. Suppose you start by saying Tommy
has a cold in the head. This may not _seem_ to be a statement about
the universe as a whole, but according to Bradley it is. If I may
be allowed to set forth his argument in popular language which his
followers might resent, I should put it something like this: First of
all, who is Tommy? He is a person with a certain nature, distinguished
from other persons by that nature; he may resemble others in many
respects, but not in all, so that you cannot really explain who Tommy
is unless you set forth all his characteristics. But when you try to
do this, you are taken beyond Tommy: he is characterised by relations
to his environment. He is affectionate or rebellious or thirsty, noisy
or quiet, and so on; all of these qualities involve his relations
to others. If you try to define Tommy without mentioning anything
outside him, you will find this quite impossible; therefore he is not a
self-subsistent being, but an unsubstantial fragment of the world. The
same thing applies even more obviously to his nose and his cold. How do
you know he has a cold? Because material substances of a certain kind
pass from his nose to his handkerchief, which would not be possible
if he alone existed. But now, when you take in the environment with a
view to defining Tommy and his nose and his cold, you find that you
cannot define his immediate environment without taking account of its
environment, and so on, until at last you have been forced to include
the whole world. Therefore Tommys cold is in reality a property of
the world, since nothing short of the world is sufficiently substantial
to have properties.

We may put the argument in a more abstract form. Everything which is
part of the world is constituted, in part, by its relations to other
things; but relations cannot be real. Bradleys argument against
relations is as follows. First he argues that, if there are relations,
there must be qualities between which they hold. This part of the
argument need not detain us. He then proceeds:

But how the relation can stand to the qualities is, on the other
side, unintelligible. If it is nothing to the qualities, then they
are not related at all; and, if so, as we saw, they have ceased to
be qualities, and their relation is a nonentity. But if it is to be
something to them, then clearly we shall require a _new_-connecting
relation. For the relation hardly can be the mere adjective of one or
both of its terms; or, at least, as such it seems indefensible. And,
being something itself, if it does not itself bear a relation to the
terms, in what intelligible way will it succeed in being anything to
them? But here again we are hurried off into the eddy of a hopeless
process, since we are forced to go on finding new relations without
end. The links are united by a link, and this bond of union is a link
which also has two ends; and these require each a fresh link to connect
them with the old. The problem is to find how the relation can stand to
its qualities, and this problem is insoluble.

I cannot deal adequately with this argument without abstruse
technicalities which would be out of place. I will, however, point out
what seems to me the essential error. Bradley conceives a relation as
something just as substantial as its terms, and not radically different
in kind. The analogy of the chain with links should make us suspicious,
since it clearly proves, if it is valid, that chains are impossible,
and yet, as a fact, they exist. There is not a word in his argument
which would not apply to physical chains. The successive links are
united not by another link, but by a spatial relation. I think Bradley
has been misled, unconsciously, by a circumstance to which I alluded
in an earlier chapter, namely, the fact that the _word_ for a relation
is as substantial as the _words_ for its terms. Suppose A and B are
two events, and A precedes B. In the proposition A precedes B, the
word precedes is just as substantial as the words A and B. The
relation of the _two_ events A and B is represented, in language, by
the time or space order of the _three_ words A, precedes, and
B. But this order is an actual relation, not a word for relation.
The first step in Bradleys regress does actually have to be taken in
giving verbal expression to a relation, and the word for a relation
does have to be related to the words for its terms. But this is a
linguistic, not a metaphysical, fact, and the regress does not have to
go any further.

It should be added that, as Bradley himself recognises, his
difficulties break out afresh when he comes to consider the relation of
subject and predicate when a character is assigned to Reality, and that
he is therefore compelled to conclude that _no_ truth is quite true.
A conclusion of this sort, based upon an extremely abstract argument,
makes it natural to suspect that there is some error in the argument.

Pluralism is the view of science and common sense, and is therefore
to be accepted if the arguments against it are not conclusive. For
my part, I have no doubt whatever that it is the true view, and that
monism is derived from a faulty logic inspired by mysticism. This logic
dominates the philosophy of Hegel and his followers; it is also the
essential basis of Bergsons system, although it is seldom mentioned in
his writings. When it is rejected, ambitious metaphysical systems such
as those of the past are seen to be impossible.




CHAPTER XXIV

TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD


The question of truth and falsehood has been wrapped in unnecessary
mystery owing to a number of causes. In the first place, people wish to
think that their beliefs are more apt to be true than false, so that
they seek a theory that will show that truth is normal and falsehood
more or less accidental. In the second place, people are very vague as
to what they mean by belief or judgment, though persuaded that they
know beliefs or judgments to be the objects to which the predicates
true or false apply. In the third place, there is a tendency to
use truth with a big T in the grand sense, as something noble and
splendid and worthy of adoration. This gets people into a frame of mind
in which they become unable to think. But just as the grave-diggers in
_Hamlet_ became familiar with skulls, so logicians become familiar with
truth. The hand of little employment hath the daintier sense, says
Hamlet. Therefore it is not from the logician that awe before truth is
to be expected.

There are two questions in our present subject: (1) What are the
objects to which the predicates true and false apply? (2) What is
the difference between such as are true and such as are false? We will
begin with the first of these questions.

_Prima facie_, true and false apply to statements, whether in
speech or in writing. By extension, they are supposed to apply to the
beliefs expressed in those statements, and also to hypotheses which are
entertained without being believed or disbelieved. But let us first
consider the truth and falsehood of statements, following our practice
of going as far as we can with the behaviourists before falling back on
introspection. We considered the meaning of words earlier; now we have
to consider sentences. Of course a sentence may consist of a single
word, or of a wink; but generally it consists of several words. In
that case, it has a meaning which is a function of the meanings of the
separate words and their order. A sentence which has no meaning is not
true or false; thus it is only sentences as vehicles of a certain sort
of meaning that have truth or falsehood. We have therefore to examine
the meaning of a sentence.

Let us take some very humble example. Suppose you look in a time-table
and find it there stated that a passenger train leaves Kings Cross for
Edinburgh at 10 A.M. What is the meaning of this assertion? I shudder
when I think of its complexity. If I were to try to develop the theme
adequately, I should be occupied with nothing else till the end of
the present volume, and then I should have only touched the fringe of
the subject. Take first the social aspect: it is not essential that
anybody but the engineer and fireman should travel by the train, though
it is essential that others should be _able_ to travel by it if they
fulfil certain conditions. It is not essential that the train should
reach Edinburgh: the statement remains true if there is an accident or
breakdown on the way. But it is essential that the management of the
railway should intend it to reach Edinburgh. Take next the physical
aspect: it is not essential, or even possible, that the train should
start _exactly_ at ten; one might perhaps say that it must not start
more than ten seconds before its time or more than fifty seconds after,
but these limits cannot be laid down rigidly. In countries where
unpunctuality is common they would be much wider. Then we must consider
what we mean by starting, which no one can define unless he has
learnt the infinitesimal calculus. Then we consider the definitions of
Kings Cross and Edinburgh, both of which are more or less vague terms.
Then we must consider what is meant by a train. Here there will be
first of all complicated legal questions; what constitutes fulfilment
of a railway companys obligations in the way of running trains? Then
there are questions as to the constitution of matter, since evidently
a train is a piece of matter; also of course there are questions as
to methods of estimating Greenwich time at Kings Cross. Most of the
above points have to do with the meaning of single words, not with the
meaning of the whole sentence. It is obvious that the ordinary mortal
does not trouble about such complications when he uses the words: to
him a word has a meaning very far from precise, and he does not try to
exclude marginal cases. It is the search for precision that introduces
complications. We think we attach a meaning to the word man, but we
dont know whether to include Pithecanthropus Erectus. To this extent,
the meaning of the word is vague.

As knowledge increases, words acquire meanings which are more precise
and more complex; new words have to be introduced to express the less
complex constituents which have been discovered. A word is intended to
describe something in the world; at first it does so very badly, but
afterwards it gradually improves. Thus single words embody knowledge,
although they do not make assertions.

In an ideal logical language, there will be words of different kinds.
First, proper names. Of these, however, there are no examples in
actual language. The words which are _called_ proper names describe
collections, which are always defined by some characteristic;
thus assertions about Peter are really about everything that is
Peterish. To get a true proper name, we should have to get to a
single particular or a set of particulars defined by enumeration,
not by a common quality. Since we cannot acquire knowledge of actual
particulars, the words we use denote, in the best language we can make,
either adjectives or relations between two or more terms. In addition
to these, there are words indicative of structure: _e.g._ in A is
greater than B, the words is and than have no separate meaning,
but merely serve to show the sense of the relation greater, _i.e._
that it goes from A to B, not from B to A.

Strictly speaking, we are still simplifying. True adjectives and
relations will require particulars for their terms; the sort of
adjectives we can know, such as blue and round, will not be
applicable to particulars. They are therefore analogous to the
adjective populous applied to a town. To say this town is populous
means many people live in this town. A similar transformation would
be demanded by logic in all the adjectives and relations we can know
empirically. That is to say, no word that we can understand would occur
in a grammatically correct account of the universe.

Leaving on one side the vagueness and inaccuracy of words, let us ask
ourselves; in what circumstances do we feel convinced that we know a
statement to be true or false as the case may be? A present statement
will be regarded as true if, _e.g._ it agrees with recollection or
perception; a past statement, if it raised expectations now confirmed.
I do not mean to say that these are the only grounds upon which we
regard statements as true; I mean that they are simple and typical,
and worth examining. If you say it was raining this morning, I may
recollect that it was or that it wasnt. One may perhaps say that the
words this morning are associated for me with the word raining or
with the words not raining. According to which occurs, I judge your
statement true or false. If I have neither association, I do not judge
your statement either true or false unless I have material for an
inference; and I do not wish to consider inference yet. If you say the
lights have gone out, when I can see the lights shining, I judge that
you speak falsely, because my perception is associated with the words
lights shining. If you say the lights will go out in a minute, you
produce a certain familiar kind of tension called expectation, and
after a time you produce a judgment that you spoke falsely (if the
lights do not go out). These are the ordinary _direct_ ways of deciding
on the truth or falsehood of statements about past, present, or future.

It is necessary to distinguish between direct and indirect grounds
for accepting or rejecting statements. Pragmatism considers only
indirect grounds. Broadly speaking, it considers a statement false when
the consequences of accepting it are unfortunate. But this belongs
to the region of inference. I ask you the way to the station, you
tell me wrong, and I miss my train; I then _infer_ that you told me
wrong. But if you say the lights are out when I see them shining,
I reject your statement without inference. In this case, something
in my present circumstances is associated with words different from
yours, and different in ways which I have learnt to regard as involving
incompatibility. The ultimate test of falsehood is _never_, so I think,
the nature of the consequences of a belief, but the association between
words and sensible or remembered facts. A belief is verified when a
situation arises which gives a feeling of expectedness in connection
with it; it is falsified when the feeling is one of surprise. But
this only applies to beliefs which await some future contingency for
verification or refutation. A belief which is an immediate reaction
to a situation--_e.g._ when you are waiting for a race to begin and
presently you say theyre off--has no need of verification, but
verifies other beliefs. And even where the confirmation of a belief is
in the future, it is the expectedness, not the pleasantness, of the
consequences that confirms the truth of the belief.

I think it is a mistake to treat belief as one kind of occurrence,
as is done in traditional psychology. The sort of belief which is
based upon memory or perception alone differs from the sort which
involves expectation. When you find in the time-table that a train
leaves Kings Cross at ten, your belief that this statement occurs in
the time-table does not await future confirmation, but your belief
about the train does: you may go to Kings Cross and see the train
start. A belief which concerns an event may be a recollection, a
perception, or an expectation. It may be none of these, in the case of
an event which you have not seen and do not expect to see--_e.g._ Csar
crossing the Rubicon, or the abolition of the House of Lords. But
such beliefs always involve inference. I do not at this stage consider
logical and mathematical beliefs, some of which must be, _in a sense_,
non-inferential. But I think we shall find that this sense is different
from that in which memories and perceptions are non-inferential.

A belief, I should say, interpreted narrowly, is a form of words
related to an emotion of one of several kinds. (I shall give a broader
meaning later.) The emotion is different according as the belief
embodies a reminiscence, a perception, an expectation, or something
outside the experience of the believer. Moreover, a form of words
is not essential. Where the emotion is present, and leads to action
relevant to some feature of the environment, there may be said to be
a belief. The fundamental test of a belief, of no matter what sort,
is that it causes some event which actually takes place to arouse
the emotion of expectedness or its opposite. I do not now attempt to
decide what an emotion is. Dr. Watson gives a behaviouristic account
of emotions, which would, if adopted, make my definition of belief
purely behaviouristic. I have framed the definition so as not to
involve a decision on the question of introspection.

The subject of truth and falsehood may be subdivided as follows:

  A. _Formal Theory._--Given the meanings of the component words, what
      decides whether a sentence is true or false?

  B. _Causal Theory._--Can we distinguish between truth and falsehood
      by (_a_) their causes, (_b_) their effects?

  C. _Individual and Social Elements._--A statement is a social
      occurrence, a belief is something individual.

      How can we define a belief, and what is it when not composed of
      words?

  D. _Consistency and Truth._--Can we get outside the circle of
      beliefs or statements to something else which shows them true,
      not merely consistent? In other words, what possible relation is
      there between propositions and facts?

It is very hard to disentangle these questions. The first question,
as to formal theories, leads to the fourth, as to the relations of
propositions to facts. _E.g._ Brutus killed Csar is true because
of a certain fact; what fact? The fact that Brutus killed Csar. This
keeps us in the verbal realm, and does not get us outside it to some
realm of non-verbal fact by which verbal statements can be verified.
Hence our fourth problem arises. But this leads us to our second
problem, as to causes and effects of what is true or false, for it
is here that we shall naturally look for the vital relation between
propositions and facts. And here again we must distinguish between
_thinking_ truly and _speaking_ truly. The former is an individual
affair, the latter a social affair. Thus all our problems hang together.

I will begin with C, the difference between a belief and a statement.
By a statement I mean a form of words, uttered or written, with a
view to being heard or read by some other person or persons, and not
a question, interjection, or command, but such as we should call an
assertion. As to the question what forms of words are assertions, that
is one for the grammarian and differs from language to language. But
perhaps we can say rather more than that. The distinction, however,
between an assertion and an imperative is not sharp. In England,
notices say Visitors are requested not to walk on the grass. In
America, they say Keep off! This means you. Effectively, the two have
the same meaning: yet the English notice consists only of a statement,
while the American notice consists of an imperative followed by a
statement which must be false if read by more than one person. In so
far as statements are intended to influence the conduct of others, they
partake of the nature of imperatives or requests. Their characteristic,
however, is that they endeavour to effect their aim by producing a
_belief_ which may or may not exist in the mind of the speaker. Often,
however, they _express_ a belief, without stopping to consider the
effect upon others. Thus a statement may be defined as a form of words
which either expresses a belief or is intended to create one. Our next
step, therefore, must be the definition of belief.

Belief is a word which will be quite differently defined if we take
an analytic point of view from the way in which we shall define it if
we regard the matter causally. From the point of view of science, the
causal point of view is the more important. Beliefs influence action
in certain ways; what influences action in these ways may be called a
belief, even if, analytically, it does not much resemble what would
ordinarily be so called. We may therefore widen our previous definition
of belief. Consider a man who goes to the house where his friend used
to live, and, finding he has moved, says, I _thought_ he still lived
here, whereas he acted merely from habit without thought. If we are
going to use words causally, we ought to say that this man had a
belief and therefore a belief will be merely a characteristic of
a string of actions. We shall have to say: A man believes a certain
proposition _p_ if, whenever he is aiming at any result to which _p_
is relevant, he acts in a manner calculated to achieve the result if
_p_ is true, but not otherwise. Sometimes this gives definite results,
sometimes not. When you call a telephone number, it is clear that you
believe that to be the number of the subscriber you want. But whether
you believe in the conservation of energy or a future life may be
harder to decide. You may hold a belief in some contexts and not in
others; for we do not think in accordance with the so-called Laws
of Thought. Belief like all the other categories of traditional
psychology, is a notion incapable of precision.

This brings me to the question whether the truth or falsehood of a
belief can be determined either by its causes or by its effects. There
is, however, a preliminary difficulty. I said just now that A believes
_p_ if he acts in a way which will achieve his ends if _p_ is _true_.
I therefore assumed that we know what is meant by truth. I assumed,
to be definite, that we know what is meant by truth as applied to
a form of words. The argument was as follows: From observation of
a persons acts, you infer his beliefs, by a process which may be
elaborate as the discovery of Keplers Laws from the observed motions
of the planets. His beliefs are not assumed to be states of mind,
but merely characteristics of series of actions. These beliefs, when
ascertained by observation, can be expressed in words; you can say,
_e.g._ This person believes that there is a train from Kings Cross at
10 A.M. Having once expressed the belief in words of which the meaning
is known, you have arrived at the stage where formal theories are
applicable. Words of known meaning, put together according to a known
syntax, are true or false in virtue of some fact, and their relation to
this fact results logically from the meanings of the separate words and
the laws of syntax. This is where logic is strong.

It will be seen that, according to what we have said, truth is
applicable primarily to a form of words, and only derivatively to
a belief. A form of words is a social phenomenon, therefore the
fundamental form of truth must be social. A form of words is true when
it has a certain relation to a certain fact. What relation to what
fact? I think the fundamental relation is this: a form of words is true
if a person who knows the language is led to that form of words when
he finds himself in an environment which contains features that are
the meanings of those words, and these features produce reactions in
him sufficiently strong for him to use words which mean them. Thus a
train leaves Kings Cross at 10 A.M. is true if a person can be led
to say, It is now 10 A.M., this is Kings Cross, and I see a train
starting. The environment causes words, and words directly caused by
the environment (if they are statements) are true. What is called
verification in science consists in putting oneself in a situation
where words previously used for other reasons result directly from
the environment. Of course, given this basis, there are innumerable
indirect ways of verifying statements, but all, I think, depend upon
this direct way.

The above theory may be thought very odd, but it is partly designed
to meet the fourth of our previous questions, namely, How can we get
outside words to the facts which make them true or false? Obviously we
cannot do this within logic, which is imprisoned in the realm of words;
we can only do it by considering the relations of words to our other
experiences, and these relations, in so far as they are relevant, can
hardly be other than causal. I think the above theory, as it stands,
is too crude to be quite true. We must also bring in such things as
expectedness, which we discussed earlier. But I believe that the
definition of truth or falsehood will have to be sought along some such
lines as I have indicated.

I want in conclusion to indulge in two speculations. The first concerns
a possible reconciliation of behaviourism and logic. It is clear that,
when we have a problem to solve, we do not always solve it as the rat
does, by means of random movements; we often solve it by thinking,
_i.e._ by a process in which we are not making any overt movements.
The same thing was sometimes true of Khlers chimpanzees. Now what is
involved in the possibility of solving a problem by verbal thinking?
We put words together in various ways which are not wholly random, but
limited by previous knowledge of the _sort_ of phrase that is likely to
contain a solution of our problem. At last we hit upon a phrase which
seems to give what we want. We then proceed to an overt action of the
kind indicated by the phrase; if it succeeds, our problem is solved.
Now this process is only intelligible if there is some connection
between the laws of syntax and the laws of physics--using syntax
in a psychological rather than a grammatical sense. I think this
connection is _assumed_ in logic and ordinary philosophy, but it ought
to be treated as a problem requiring investigation by behaviourist
methods. I lay no stress on this suggestion, except as giving a hint
for future investigations. But I cannot think that the behaviourist has
gone far towards the solution of his problem until he has succeeded in
establishing a connection between syntax and physics. Without this,
the efficacy of thought cannot be explained on his principles.

My second speculation is as to the limitations which the structure
of language imposes upon the extent of our possible knowledge of
the world. I am inclined to think that quite important metaphysical
conclusions, of a more or less sceptical kind, can be drawn from simple
considerations as to the relation between language and things. A spoken
sentence consists of a temporal series of events; a written sentence
is a spatial series of bits of matter. Thus it is not surprising that
language can represent the course of events in the physical world;
it can, in fact, make a map of the physical world, preserving its
structure in a more manageable form, and it can do this because it
consists of physical events. But if there were such a world as the
mystic postulates, it would have a structure different from that of
language, and would therefore be incapable of being verbally described.
It is fairly clear that nothing verbal can conform or confute this
hypothesis.

A great deal of the confusion about relations which has prevailed in
practically all philosophies comes from the fact that relations are
indicated, not by relations, but by words which are as substantial as
other words. Consequently, in thinking about relations, we constantly
hover between the unsubstantiality of the relation itself and the
substantiality of the word. Take, say, the fact that lightning precedes
thunder. We saw earlier that to express this by a language closely
reproducing the structure of the fact, we should have to say simply:
lightning, thunder, where the fact that the first word precedes the
second means that what the first word means precedes what the second
word means. But even if we adopted this method for temporal order, we
should still need words for all other relations, because we could not
without intolerable ambiguity symbolise them also by the order of our
words. When we say lightning precedes thunder, the word precedes
has a quite different relation to what it means from that which the
words lightning and thunder have to what they respectively mean.
Wittgenstein[12] says that what really happens is that we establish a
relation between the word lightning and the word thunder, namely
the relation of having the word precedes between them. In this way he
causes relations to be symbolised by relations. But although this may
be quite correct, it is sufficiently odd to make it not surprising that
people have thought the word precedes means a relation in the same
sense in which lightning means a kind of event. This view, however,
must be incorrect. I think it has usually been held unconsciously, and
has produced many confusions about relations which cease when it is
exposed to the light of day--for example, those which lead Bradley to
condemn relations.

     [12] _Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus_ (Kegan Paul).

In all this I have been considering the question of the relation
between the structure of language and the structure of the world. It is
clear that anything that can be said in an inflected language can be
said in an uninflected language; therefore, everything that can be said
in language can be said by means of a temporal series of uninflected
words. This places a limitation upon what can be expressed in words.
It may well be that there are facts which do not lend themselves to
this very simple schema; if so, they cannot be expressed in language.
Our confidence in language is due to the fact that it consists of
events in the physical world, and, therefore, shares the structure of
the physical world, and therefore can express that structure. But if
there be a world which is not physical, or not in space-time, it may
have a structure which we can never hope to express or to know. These
considerations might lead us to something like the Kantian _a priori_,
not as derived from the structure of the mind, but as derived from the
structure of language, which is the structure of the physical world.
Perhaps that is why we know so much physics and so little of anything
else. However, I have lapsed into mystical speculation, and will leave
these possibilities, since, by the nature of the case, I cannot _say_
anything true about them.




CHAPTER XXV

THE VALIDITY OF INFERENCE


It is customary in science to regard certain facts as data, from
which laws and also other facts are inferred. We saw in Chapter VII
that the _practice_ of inference is much wider than the theories of any
logician would justify, and that it is nothing other than the law of
association or of learned reactions. In the present chapter, I wish
to consider what the logicians have evolved from this primitive form of
inference, and what grounds we have, as rational beings, for continuing
to infer. But let us first get as clear a notion as we can of what
should be meant by a datum.

The conception of a datum cannot be made absolute. Theoretically,
it should mean something that we know without inference. But before
this has any definite meaning, we must define both knowledge and
inference. Both these terms have been considered in earlier chapters.
For our present purpose it will simplify matters to take account only
of such knowledge as is expressed in words. We considered in Chapter
XXIV the conditions required in order that a form of words may be
true; for present purposes, therefore, we may say that knowledge
means the assertion of a true form of words. This definition is not
quite adequate, since a man may be right by chance; but we may ignore
this complication. We may then define a datum as follows: A datum
is a form of words which a man utters as the result of a stimulus, with
no intermediary of any learned reaction beyond what is involved in
knowing how to speak. We must, however, permit such learned reactions
as consist in adjustments of the sense-organs or in mere increase of
sensitivity. These merely improve the receptivity to data, and do not
involve anything that can be called inference.

If the above definition is accepted, all our data for knowledge of
the external world must be of the nature of percepts. The belief in
external objects is a learned reaction acquired in the first months of
life, and it is the duty of the philosopher to treat it as an inference
whose validity must be tested. A very little consideration shows that,
logically, the inference cannot be demonstrative, but must be at best
probable. It is not logically _impossible_ that my life may be one
long dream, in which I merely imagine all the objects that I believe
to be external to me. If we are to reject this view, we must do so on
the basis of an inductive or analogical argument, which cannot give
complete certainty. We perceive other people behaving in a manner
analogous to that in which we behave, and we assume that they have had
similar stimuli. We may hear a whole crowd say oh at the moment when
we see a rocket burst, and it is natural to suppose that the crowd
saw it too. Nor are such arguments confined to living organisms. We
can talk to a dictaphone and have it afterwards repeat what we said;
this is most easily explained by the hypothesis that at the surface
of the dictaphone events happened, while I was speaking, which were
closely analogous to those that were happening just outside my ears.
It remains _possible_ that there is no dictaphone and I have no ears
and there is no crowd watching the rocket; my percepts _may_ be all
that is happening in such cases. But, if so, it is difficult to arrive
at any causal laws, and arguments from analogy are more misleading
than we are inclined to think them. As a matter of fact, the whole
structure of science, as well as the world of common sense, demands
the use of induction and analogy if it is to be believed. These forms
of inference, therefore, rather than deduction, are those that must be
examined if we are to accept the world of science or any world outside
of our own dreams.

Let us take a simple example of an induction which we have all
performed in practice. If we are hungry, we eat certain things we see
and not others--it may be said that we infer edibility inductively
from a certain visual and olfactory appearance. The history of this
process is that children a few months old put everything into their
mouths unless they are stopped; sometimes the result is pleasant,
sometimes unpleasant; they repeat the former rather than the latter.
That is to say: given that an object having a certain visual and
olfactory appearance has been found pleasant to eat, an object having
a very similar appearance will be eaten; but when a certain appearance
has been found connected with unpleasant consequences when eaten, a
similar appearance does not lead to eating next time. The question is:
what logical justification is there for our behaviour? Given all our
past experience, are we more likely to be nourished by bread than by a
stone? It is easy to see why we think so, but can we, as philosophers
justify this way of thinking?

It is, of course, obvious that unless one thing can be a sign of
another both science and daily life would be impossible. More
particularly, reading involves this principle. One accepts printed
words as signs, but this is only justifiable by means of induction.
I do not mean that induction is necessary to establish the existence
of other people, though that also, as we have seen, is true. I mean
something simpler. Suppose you want your hair cut, and as you walk
along the street you see a notice hair-cutting, first floor. It
is only by means of induction that you can _establish_ that this
_notice_ makes it in some degree probable that there is a hair-cutters
establishment on the first floor. I do not mean that you employ the
principle of induction; I mean that you act in accordance with it,
and that you would have to appeal to it if you were accompanied by a
long-haired sceptical philosopher who refused to go upstairs till he
was persuaded there was some point in doing so.

The principle of induction, _prima facie_, is as follows: Let there
be two kinds of events, A and B (_e.g._ lightning and thunder), and
let many instances be known in which an event of the kind A has
been quickly followed by one of the kind B, and no instances of the
contrary. Then either a sufficient number of instances of this
sequence, or instances of suitable kinds will make it increasingly
probable that A is always followed by B, and in time the probability
can be made to approach certainty without limit provided the right
kind and number of instances can be found. This is the principle we
have to examine. Scientific theories of induction generally try to
substitute well-chosen instances for numerous instances, and represent
number of instances as belonging to crude popular induction. But in
fact popular induction depends upon the emotional interest of the
instances, not upon their number. A child who has burnt its hand
_once_ in a candle-flame establishes an induction, but words take
longer, because at first they are not emotionally interesting. The
principle used in primitive practice is: Whatever, on a given occasion,
immediately precedes something very painful or pleasant, is a sign
of that interesting event. Number plays a secondary part as compared
with emotional interest. That is one reason why rational thought is so
difficult.

The logical problem of induction is to show that the proposition A
is always accompanied (or followed) by B can be rendered probable by
knowledge of instances in which this happens, provided the instances
are suitably chosen or very numerous. Far the best examination of
induction is contained in Mr. J. M. Keyness _Treatise on Probability_.
There is a valuable doctors thesis by the late Jean Nicod, _Le
Problme logique de linduction_, which is very ably reviewed by R. B.
Braithwaite in _Mind_, October 1925. A man who reads these three will
know most of what is known about induction. The subject is technical
and difficult, involving a good deal of mathematics, but I will attempt
to give the gist of the results.

We will begin with the condition in which the problem had been left by
J. S. Mill. He had four canons of induction, by means of which, given
suitable examples, it could be demonstrated that A and B were causally
connected, if the law of causation could be assumed. That is to say,
given the law of causation, the scientific use of induction could
be reduced to deduction. Roughly the method is this: We know that B
must have a cause; the cause cannot be C or D or E, etc., because we
find by experiment or observation that these may be present without
producing B. On the other hand, we never succeed in finding A without
its being accompanied (or followed) by B. If A and B are both capable
of quantity, we may find further that the more there is of A the more
there is of B. By such methods we eliminate all possible causes except
A; therefore, since B must have a cause, that cause must be A. All
this is not really induction at all; true induction only comes in in
proving the law of causation. This law Mill regards as proved by mere
enumeration of instances: we know vast numbers of events which have
causes, and no events which can be shown to be uncaused; therefore, it
is highly probable that all events have causes. Leaving out of account
the fact that the law of causality cannot have quite the form that Mill
supposed, we are left with the problem: Does mere number of instances
afford a basis for induction? If not, is there any other basis? This is
the problem to which Mr. Keynes addresses himself.

Mr. Keynes holds that an induction may be rendered more probable by
number of instances, not because of their mere number, but because of
the probability, if the instances are very numerous, that they will
have nothing in common except the characteristics in question. We want,
let us suppose, to find out whether some quality A is always associated
with some quality B. We find instances in which this is the case; but
it may happen that in all our instances some quality C is also present,
and that it is C that is associated with B. If we can so choose our
instances that they have nothing in common except the qualities A and
B, then we have better grounds for holding that A is always associated
with B. If our instances are very numerous, then, even if we do not
_know_ that they have no other common quality, it may become quite
likely that this is the case. This, according to Mr. Keynes, is the
sole value of many instances.

A few technical terms are useful. Suppose we want to establish
inductively that there is some probability in favour of the
generalisation: Everything that has the property _F_ also has the
property _f_. We will call this generalisation _g_. Suppose we have
observed a number of instances in which _F_ and _f_ go together, and
no instances to the contrary. These instances may have other common
properties as well; the sum-total of their common properties is called
the _total positive analogy_, and the sum-total of their _known_ common
qualities is called the _known positive analogy_. The properties
belonging to some but not to all of the instances in question are
called the _negative analogy_: all of them constitute the _total
negative analogy_, all those that are _known_ constitute the _known
negative analogy_. To strengthen an induction, we want to diminish the
positive analogy to the utmost possible extent; this, according to Mr.
Keynes, is why numerous instances are useful.

On pure induction, where we rely solely upon number of instances,
without _knowing_ how they affect the analogy, Mr. Keynes concludes
(_Treatise in Probability_, p. 236):

We have shown that if each of the instances necessarily follows
from the generalisation, then each additional instance increases the
probability of the generalisation, so long as the new instance could
not have been predicted with certainty from a knowledge of the former
instances.... The common notion, that each successive verification of
a doubtful principle strengthens it, is formally proved, therefore
without any appeal to conceptions of law or of causality. _But we have
not proved_ that this probability approaches certainty as a limit, or
even that our conclusion becomes more likely than not, as the number of
verifications or instances is indefinitely increased.

It is obvious that induction is not much use unless, with suitable
care, its conclusions can be rendered more likely to be true than
false. This problem therefore necessarily occupies Mr. Keynes.

It is found that an induction will approach certainty as a limit if two
conditions are fulfilled:

(1) If the generalisation is false, the probability of its being true
in a new instance when it has been found to be true in a certain
number of instances, however great that number may be, falls short of
certainty by a finite amount.

(2) There is a finite _a priori_ probability in favour of our
generalisation.

Mr. Keynes uses finite here in a special sense. He holds that not all
probabilities are numerically measurable; a finite probability is one
which exceeds some numerically measurable probability however small.
_E.g._ our generalisation has a finite _a priori_ probability if it is
less unlikely than throwing heads a billion times running.

The difficulty is, however, that there is no easily discoverable way of
estimating the _a priori_ probability of a generalisation. In examining
this question, Mr. Keynes is led to a very interesting postulate
which, if true, will, he thinks, give the required finite _a priori_
probability. His postulate as he gives it is not quite correct, but I
shall give his form first, and then the necessary modification.

Mr. Keynes supposes that the qualities of objects cohere in groups,
so that the number of _independent_ qualities is much less than the
total number of qualities. We may conceive this after the analogy
of biological species: a cat has a number of distinctive qualities
which are found in all cats, a dog has a number of other distinctive
qualities which are found in all dogs. The method of induction can, he
says, be justified if we assume that the objects in the field, over
which our generalisations extend, do not have an infinite number of
independent qualities; that, in other words, their characteristics,
however numerous, cohere together in groups of invariable connection,
which are finite in number (p. 256). Again (p. 258): As a biological
foundation for Analogy, therefore, we seem to need some such assumption
as that the amount of variety in the universe is limited in such a way
that there is no one object so complex that its qualities fall into an
infinite number of independent groups ... or rather that none of the
objects about which we generalise are as complex as this; or at least
that, though some objects may be infinitely complex, we sometimes have
a finite probability that an object about which we seek to generalise
is not infinitely complex.

This postulate is called the principle of limitation of variety. Mr.
Keynes again finds that it is needed in attempts to establish laws
by statistics; if he is right, it is needed for all our scientific
knowledge outside pure mathematics. Jean Nicod pointed out that it is
not quite sufficiently stringent. We need, according to Mr. Keynes,
a finite probability that the object in question has only a finite
number of independent qualities; but what we really need is a finite
probability that the number of its independent qualities is less than
some assigned finite number. This is a very different thing, as may be
seen by the following illustration. Suppose there is some number of
which we know only that it is finite; it is infinitely improbable that
it will be less than a million, or a billion, or any other assigned
finite number, because, whatever such number we take, the number
of smaller numbers is finite and the number of greater numbers is
infinite. Nicod requires us to assume that there is a finite number _n_
such that there is a finite probability that the number of independent
qualities of our object is less than _n_. This is a much stronger
assumption than Mr. Keyness, which is merely that the number of
independent qualities is finite. It is the stronger assumption which is
needed to justify induction.

This result is very interesting and very important. It is remarkable
that it is in line with the trend of modern science. Eddington has
pointed out that there is a certain finite number which is fundamental
in the universe, namely the number of electrons. According to the
quantum theory, it would seem that the number of possible arrangements
of electrons may well also be finite, since they cannot move in all
possible orbits, but only in such as make the action in one complete
revolution conform to the quantum principle. If all this is true, the
principle of limitation of variety may well also be true. We cannot,
however, arrive at a proof of our principle in this way, because
physics uses induction, and is therefore presumably invalid unless
the principle is true. What we can say, in a general way, is that
the principle does not refute itself, but, on the contrary, leads to
results which confirm it. To this extent, the trend of modern science
may be regarded as increasing the plausibility of the principle.

It is important to realise the fundamental position of probability in
science. At the very best, induction and analogy only give probability.
Every inference worthy of the name is inductive, therefore all inferred
knowledge is at best probable. As to what is meant by probability,
opinions differ. Mr. Keynes takes it as a fundamental logical category:
certain premisses may make a conclusion more or less probable, without
making it certain. For him, probability is a relation between a premiss
and a conclusion. A proposition does not have a definite probability
on its own account; in itself, it is merely true or false. But it has
probabilities of different amounts in regard to different premisses.
When we speak, elliptically, of _the_ probability of a proposition,
we mean its probability in relation to all our relevant knowledge.
A proposition in probability cannot be refuted by mere observation:
improbable things may happen and probable things may fail to happen.
Nor is an estimate of probability relevant to given evidence proved
wrong when further evidence alters the probability.

For this reason the inductive principle cannot be proved or disproved
by experience. We might prove validly that such and such a conclusion
was enormously probable, and yet it might not happen. We might
prove invalidly that it was probable, and yet it might happen.
What happens affects the probability of a proposition, since it is
relevant evidence; but it never alters the probability relative to
the previously available evidence. The whole subject of probability,
therefore, on Mr. Keyness theory, is strictly _a priori_ and
independent of experience.

There is however another theory, called the frequency theory, which
would make probability not indefinable, and would allow empirical
evidence to affect our estimates of probability relative to given
premisses. According to this theory in its crude form, the probability
that an object having the property _F_ will have the property _f_ is
simply the proportion of the objects having both properties to all
those having the property _F_. For example, in a monogamous country
the probability of a married person being male is exactly a half. Mr.
Keynes advances strong arguments against all forms of this theory that
existed when his book was written. There is however an article by R. H.
Nisbet on The Foundations of Probability in _Mind_ for January 1926,
which undertakes to rehabilitate the frequency theory. His arguments
are interesting, and suffice to show that the controversy is still an
open one, but they do not, in my opinion, amount to decisive proof.
It is to be observed, however, that the frequency theory, if it could
be maintained, would be preferable to Mr. Keyness, because it would
get rid of the necessity for treating probability as indefinable, and
would bring probability into much closer touch with what actually
occurs. Mr. Keynes leaves an uncomfortable gap between probability and
fact, so that it is far from clear why a rational man will act upon a
probability. Nevertheless, the difficulties of the frequency theory
are so considerable that I cannot venture to advocate it definitely.
Meanwhile, the details of the discussion are unaffected by the view
we may take on this fundamental philosophical question. And on either
view the principle of limitation of variety will be equally necessary
to give validity to the inferences by induction and analogy upon which
science and daily life depend.




CHAPTER XXVI

EVENTS, MATTER, AND MIND


Everything in the world is composed of events; that, at least, is the
thesis I wish to maintain. An event, as I understand it, is something
having a small finite duration and a small finite extension in space;
or rather, in view of the theory of relativity, it is something
occupying a small finite amount of space-time. If it has parts, these
parts, I say, are again events, never something occupying a mere point
of instant, whether in space, in time, or in space-time. The fact that
an event occupies a finite amount of space-time does not prove that it
has parts. Events are not impenetrable, as matter is supposed to be; on
the contrary, every event in space-time is overlapped by other events.
There is no reason to suppose that any of the events with which we are
familiar are infinitely complex; on the contrary, everything known
about the world is compatible with the view that every complex event
has a finite number of parts. We do not know that this is the case,
but it is an hypothesis which cannot be refuted and is simpler than
any other possible hypothesis. I shall therefore adopt it as a working
hypothesis in what follows.

When I speak of an event I do not mean anything out of the way.
Seeing a flash of lightning is an event; so is hearing a tire burst,
or smelling a rotten egg, or feeling the coldness of a frog. These
are events that are data in the sense of Chapter XXV; but, on the
principles explained in that chapter, we infer that there are events
which are not data and happen at a distance from our own body. Some of
these are data to other people, others are data to no one. In the case
of the flash of lightning, there is an electro-magnetic disturbance
consisting of events travelling outward from the place where the flash
takes place, and then when this disturbance reaches the eye of a
person or animal that can see, there is a percept, which is causally
continuous with the events between the place of the lightning and the
body of the percipient. Percepts afford the logical premisses for all
inferences to events that are not precepts, wherever such inferences
are logically justifiable. Particular colours and sounds and so on are
events; their causal antecedents in the inanimate world are also events.

If we assume, as I propose to do, that every event has only a finite
number of parts, then every event is composed of a finite number of
events that have no parts. Such events I shall call minimal events.
It will simplify our discussion to assume them, but by a little
circumlocution this assumption could be eliminated. The reader must not
therefore regard it as an essential part of what follows.

A minimal event occupies a finite region in space-time. Let us take
time alone for purposes of illustration. The event in question may
overlap in time with each of two others, although the first of these
others wholly precedes the second; for example, you may hear a long
note on the violin while you hear two short notes on the piano. (It
is not necessary to suppose that these are really minimal events; I
merely want to illustrate what is meant.) I assume that every event
is contemporaneous with events that are not contemporaneous with each
other; this is what is meant by saying that every event lasts for a
finite time, as the reader can easily convince himself if he remembers
that time is wholly relational. If we look away from the world of
physics for a moment, and confine ourselves to the world of one mans
experience, we can easily define an instant in his life. It will be
a group of events, all belonging to his experience, and having the
following two properties: (1) any two of the events overlap; (2) no
event outside the group overlaps with every member of the group. By
a slightly more complicated but essentially similar method, we can
define a point-instant in space-time as a group of events having two
properties analogous to those used just now in defining an instant
in one biography.[13] Thus the points (or point-instants) that
the mathematician needs are not simple, but are structures composed
of events, made up for the convenience of the mathematician. There
will be many points of which a given minimal event is a member;
all these together make up the region of space-time occupied by that
event. Space-time order, as well as space-time points, results from the
relations between events.

     [13] See _The Analysis of Matter_, by the present author,
          chap. xxviii.

A piece of matter, like a space-time point, is to be constructed out of
events, but the construction is considerably more complicated, and in
the end is only an approximation to what the physicist supposes to be
really taking place. There are, at the moment, two somewhat different
views of matter, one appropriate to the study of atomic structure, the
other to the general theory of relativity as affording an explanation
of gravitation. The view appropriate to atomic structure has itself
two forms, one derived from Heisenberg, the other from De Broglie
and Schrdinger. These two forms, it is true, are mathematically
equivalent, but in words they are very different. Heisenberg regards
a piece of matter as a centre from which radiations travel outward;
the radiations are supposed really to occur, but the matter at their
centre is reduced to a mere mathematical fiction. The radiations are,
for example, such as constitute light; they are all avowedly systems
of events, not changes in the conditions or relations of substances.
In the De Broglie-Schrdinger system, matter consists of wave motions.
It is not necessary to the theory to postulate anything about these
wave-motions except their mathematical characteristics, but, obviously,
since they are to explain matters they cannot serve their purpose if
they consist of motions of matter. In this system also, therefore,
we are led to construct matter out of systems of events, which just
happen, and do not happen to matter or to anything else.

Gravitation, as explained by the general theory of relativity, is
reduced to crinkles in space-time. Space-time being, as we have
already seen, a system constructed out of events, the crinkles in it
are also derived from events. There is no reason to suppose that there
is a thing at the place where the crinkle is most crinkly. Thus in
this part of physics, also, matter has ceased to be a thing and has
become merely a mathematical characteristic of the relations between
complicated logical structures composed of events.

It was traditionally a property of substance to be permanent, and to a
considerable extent matter has retained this property in spite of its
loss of substantiality. But its permanence now is only approximate,
not absolute. It is thought that an electron and a proton can meet and
annihilate each other; in the stars this is supposed to be happening
on a large scale.[14] And even while an electron or a proton lasts,
it has a different kind of persistence from that formerly attributed
to matter. A wave in the sea persists for a longer or shorter time:
the waves that I see dashing themselves to pieces on the Cornish coast
may have come all the way from Brazil, but that does not mean that a
thing has travelled across the Atlantic; it means only that a certain
process of change has travelled. And just as a wave in the sea comes
to grief at last on the rocks, so an electron or a proton may come to
grief when it meets some unusual state of affairs.

     [14] See _The Analysis of Matter_, by the present author,
          chap. xxviii.

Thus matter has very definitely come down in the world as a result of
recent physics. It used to be the cause of our sensations: Dr. Johnson
disproved Berkeleys denial of matter by kicking a stone. If he had
known that his foot never touched the stone, and that both were only
complicated systems of wave-motions, he might have been less satisfied
with his refutation. We cannot say that matter is the cause of our
sensations. We can say that the events which cause our sensations
usually belong to the sort of group that physicists regard as material;
but that is a very different thing. Impenetrability used to be a noble
property of matter, a kind of Declaration of Independence; now it is a
merely tautological result of the way in which matter is defined. The
events which are the real stuff of the world are not impenetrable,
since they can overlap in space-time. In a word, matter has become
no more than a convenient shorthand for stating certain causal laws
concerning events.

But if matter has fared badly, mind has fared little better.
The adjective mental is one which is not capable of any exact
significance. There is, it is true, an important group of events,
namely percepts, all of which may be called mental. But it would be
arbitrary to say that there are no mental events except percepts,
and yet it is difficult to find any principle by which we can decide
what other events should be included. Perhaps the most essential
characteristics of mind are introspection and memory. But memory
in some of its forms is, as we have seen, a consequence of the law
of conditioned reflexes, which is at least as much physiological
as psychological, and characterises living tissue rather than
mind. Knowledge, as we have found, is not easy to distinguish from
sensitivity, which is a property possessed by scientific instruments.
Introspection is a form of knowledge, but turns out, on examination, to
be little more than a cautious interpretation of ordinary knowledge.
Where the philosophers child at the Zoo says There is a hippopotamus
over there, the philosopher should reply: There is a coloured pattern
of a certain shape, which may perhaps be connected with a system of
external causes of the sort called a hippopotamus. (I do not live up
to this precept myself.) In saying that there is a coloured pattern,
the philosopher is practising introspection in the only sense that I
can attach to that term, _i.e._ his knowledge-reaction is to an event
situated in his own brain from the standpoint of physical space, and
is consciously avoiding physiological and other inference as far as
possible. Events to which a knowledge-reaction of this sort occurs are
mental; so are, presumably, other events resembling them in certain
respects. But I do not see any way of defining this wider group except
by saying that mental events are events in a living brain, or, better,
in a region combining sensitivity and the law of learned reactions to
a marked extent. This definition has at least the merit of showing that
mentality is an affair of causal laws, not of the quality of single
events, and also that mentality is a matter of degree.

Perhaps it is not unnecessary to repeat, at this point, that events in
the brain are not to be regarded as consisting of motions of bits of
matter. Matter and motion, as we have seen, are logical constructions
using events as their material, and events are therefore something
quite different from matter in motion. I take it that, when we have
a percept, just what we perceive (if we avoid avoidable sources of
error) is an event occupying part of the region which, for physics, is
occupied by the brain. In fact, perception gives us the most concrete
knowledge we possess as to the stuff of the physical world, but what
we perceive is part of the stuff of our brains, not part of the stuff
of tables and chairs, sun, moon, and stars. Suppose we are looking at
a leaf, and we see a green patch. This patch is not out there where
the leaf is, but is an event occupying a certain volume in our brains
during the time that we see the leaf. Seeing the leaf consists of
the existence, in the region occupied by our brain, of a green patch
causally connected with the leaf, or rather with a series of events
emanating from the place in physical space where physics places the
leaf. The percept is one of this series of events, differing from the
others in its effects owing to the peculiarities of the region in
which it occurs--or perhaps it would be more correct to say that the
different effects _are_ the peculiarities of the region.

Thus mind and mental are merely approximate concepts, giving a
convenient shorthand for certain approximate laws. In a completed
science, the word mind and the word matter would both disappear,
and would be replaced by causal laws concerning events, the only
events known to us otherwise than in their mathematical and causal
properties being percepts, which are events situated in the same
region as a brain and having effects of a peculiar sort called
knowledge-reactions.

It will be seen that the view which I am advocating is neither
materialism nor mentalism, but what we call neutral monism. It is
monism in the sense that it regards the world as composed of only one
_kind_ of stuff, namely events; but it is pluralism in the sense that
it admits the existence of a great multiplicity of events, each minimal
event being a logically self-subsistent entity.

There is, however, another question, not quite the same as this, namely
the question as to the relations of psychology and physics. If we knew
more, would psychology be absorbed in physics? or, conversely, would
physics be absorbed in psychology? A man may be a materialist and
yet hold that psychology is an independent science; this is the view
taken by Dr. Broad in his important book on _The Mind and its Place
in Nature_. He holds that a mind is a material structure, but that it
has properties which could not, even theoretically, be inferred from
those of its material constituents. He points out that structures very
often have properties which, in the present state of our knowledge,
cannot be inferred from the properties and relations of their parts.
Water has many properties which we cannot infer from those of hydrogen
and oxygen, even if we suppose ourselves to know the structure of the
molecule of water more completely than we do as yet. Properties of a
whole which cannot, even theoretically, be inferred from the properties
and relations of its parts are called by Dr. Broad emergent
properties. Thus he holds that a mind (or brain) has properties which
are emergent, and to this extent psychology will be independent of
physics and chemistry. The emergent properties of minds will only be
discoverable by observation of minds, not by inference from the laws
of physics and chemistry. This possibility is an important one, and it
will be worth while to consider it.

Our decision to regard a unit of matter as itself not ultimate, but an
assemblage of events, somewhat alters the form of our question as to
emergent properties. We have to ask: Is matter emergent from events?
Is mind emergent from events? If the former, is mind emergent from
matter, or deducible from the properties of matter, or neither? If the
latter, is matter emergent from mind or deducible from the properties
of mind, or neither? Of course, if neither mind nor matter is emergent
from events, these latter questions do not arise.

Let us coin a word, chrono-geography, for the science which begins
with events having space-time relations and does not assume at the
outset that certain strings of them can be treated as persistent
material units or as minds. Then we have to ask ourselves first: can
the science of matter, as it appears in physics and chemistry, be
wholly reduced to chrono-geography? If no, matter is emergent from
events; if yes, it is not emergent.

_Is matter emergent from events?_ In the present state of science it
is difficult to give a decided answer to this question. The notion
of matter, in modern physics, has become absorbed into the notion of
energy. Eddington, in his _Mathematical Theory of Relativity_ shows
that, in virtue of the laws assumed concerning events, there must
be something having the observed properties of matter and energy as
regards conservation. This he calls the material-energy-tensor, and
suggests that it is the reality which we sometimes call matter and
sometimes energy. To this extent, matter has been shown to be not
emergent. But the existence of electrons and protons (to the extent
that they do exist) has not yet been deduced from the general theory
of relativity, though attempts are being made and may at any moment
succeed. If and when these attempts succeed, physics will cease to be
in any degree independent of chrono-geography, but for the present
it remains in part independent. As for chemistry, although we cannot
practically reduce it all to physics, we can see how, theoretically,
this could be done, and I think it is safe to assume that it is not an
ultimately independent science.

The question we have been asking is: could we predict, theoretically,
from the laws of events that there must be material units obeying
the laws which they do in fact obey, or is this a new, logically
independent, fact? In theory we might be able to prove that it is _not_
independent, but it would be very difficult to prove that it _is_. The
present position is, broadly speaking, that the continuous properties
of the physical world can be deduced from chrono-geography, but not the
discontinuous facts, viz. electrons and protons and Plancks quantum.
Thus for the present materiality is practically, though perhaps not
theoretically, an emergent characteristic of certain groups of events.

_Is mind emergent from events?_ This question, as yet, can hardly be
even discussed intelligently, because psychology is not a sufficiently
advanced science. There are, nevertheless, some points to be noted.
Chrono-geography is concerned only with the abstract mathematical
properties of events, and cannot conceivably, unless it is radically
transformed, prove that there are visual events, or auditory events, or
events of any of the kinds that we know by perception. In this sense,
psychology is certainly emergent from chrono-geography and also from
physics, and it is hard to see how it can ever cease to be so. The
reason for this is that our knowledge of data contains features of a
qualitative sort, which cannot be deduced from the merely mathematical
features of the space-time events inferred from data, and yet these
abstract mathematical features are all that we can legitimately infer.

The above argument decides also that mind must be emergent from matter,
if it is a material structure. No amount of physics can ever tell us
all that we do in fact know about our own percepts.

We have still to ask whether we are to regard a mind as a structure of
material units or not. If we do so regard it, we are, so far as mind is
concerned, emergent materialists in view of what we have just decided;
this is the view favoured by Dr. Broad. If we do not so regard it, we
are in no sense materialists. In favour of the materialist view, there
is the fact that, so far as our experience goes, minds only emerge in
connection with certain physical structures, namely living bodies, and
that mental development increases with a certain kind of complexity
of physical structure. We cannot set against this the argument that
minds have peculiar characteristics, for this is quite consistent with
_emergent_ materialism. If we are to refute it, it must be by finding
out what sort of group of events constitutes a mind. It is time to
address ourselves to this question.

_What is a mind?_ It is obvious, to begin with, that a mind must be a
group of mental events, since we have rejected the view that it is a
single simple entity such as the ego was formerly supposed to be. Our
first step, therefore, is to be clear as to what we mean by a mental
event.

We said a few pages ago that: _Mental events are events in a region
combining sensitivity and the law of learned reactions to a marked
extent_. For practical purposes, this means (subject to a proviso to be
explained shortly) that a mental event is any event in a living brain.
We explained that this does not mean that a mental event consists of
matter in motion, which is what an old-fashioned physicist would regard
as the sort of event that happens in a brain. Matter in motion, we have
seen, is not an event in our sense, but a shorthand description of a
very complicated causal process among events of a different sort. But
we must say a few words in justification of our definition.

Let us consider some alternative definitions. A mental event, we might
say, is one which is experienced. When is an event experienced?
We might say: when it has mnemic effects, _i.e._ effects governed
by the law of association. But we saw that this law applies to purely
bodily events such as the contraction of the pupil, with which nothing
mental seems to be connected. Thus if our definition is to serve,
we shall have to define experience differently; we shall have to
say that the mnemic effects must include something that can be called
knowledge. This would suggest the definition: A mental event is
anything that is remembered. But this is too narrow: we only remember
a small proportion of our mental events. We might have regarded
consciousness as the essence of mental events, but this view was
examined and found inadequate in Chapter XX. Moreover, we do not want
our definition to exclude the unconscious.

It is clear that the primary mental events, those about which there can
be no question, are percepts. But percepts have certain peculiar causal
properties, notably that they give rise to knowledge-reactions, and
that they are capable of having mnemic effects which are cognitions.
These causal properties, however, belong to some events which are not
apparently percepts. It seems that any event in the brain may have
these properties. And perhaps we were too hasty in saying that the
contraction of the pupil on hearing a loud noise involves nothing
mental. There may be other mental events connected with a human
body besides those belonging to the central personality. I shall come
back to this possibility presently. Meanwhile, I shall adhere to the
above definition of a mental event, which, as we saw, makes mentality
a matter of degree.

We can now return to the question: What is a mind? There may be mental
events not forming part of the sort of group that we should call a
mind, but there certainly are groups having that kind of unity that
make us call them one mind. There are two marked characteristics of
a mind: First, it is connected with a certain body; secondly, it has
the unity of one experience. The two _prima facie_ diverge in cases
of dual or multiple personality, but I think this is more apparent
than real. These two characteristics are, one physical, the other
psychological. Let us consider each in turn as a possible definition of
what we mean by one mind.

In the physical way, we begin by observing that every mental event
known to us is also part of the history of a living body, and we define
a mind as the group of mental events which form part of the history
of a certain living body. The definition of a living body is chemical,
and the reduction of chemistry to physics is clear in theory, though
in practice the mathematics is too difficult. It is so far a merely
empirical fact that mnemic causation is almost exclusively associated
with matter having a certain chemical structure. But the same may be
said of magnetism. As yet, we cannot deduce the magnetic properties of
iron from what we know of the structure of the atom of iron, but no one
doubts that they could be deduced by a person with sufficient knowledge
and sufficient mathematical skill. In like manner it may be assumed
that mnemic causation is theoretically deducible from the structure of
living matter. If we knew enough, we might be able to infer that some
other possible structure would exhibit mnemic phenomena, perhaps in an
even more marked degree; if so, we might be able to construct Robots
who would be more intelligent than we are.

In the psychological way of defining a mind, it consists of all the
mental events connected with a given mental event by experience,
_i.e._ by mnemic causation, but this definition needs a little
elaboration before it can be regarded as precise. We do not want the
contraction of the pupil to count as a mental event; therefore a
mental event will have to be one which has mnemic effects, not merely
mnemic causes. In that case, however, there cannot be a last mental
event in a mans life, unless we assume that it may have mnemic effects
on his body after death. Perhaps we may avoid this inconvenience by
discovering the _kind_ of event that usually has mnemic effects, though
they may be prevented from occurring by special circumstances. Or we
might maintain that death is gradual, even when it is what is called
instantaneous; in that case the last events in a mans life grow
progressively less mental as life ebbs. Neglecting this point, which is
not very important, we shall define the experience to which a given
mental event belongs as all those mental events which can be reached
from the given event by a mnemic causal chain, which may go backwards
or forwards, or alternately first one and then the other. This may be
conceived on the analogy of an engine shunting at a junction or where
there are many points: any line that can be reached, by however many
shuntings, will count as part of the same experience.

We cannot be sure that all the mental events connected with one body
are connected by links of mnemic causation with each other, and
therefore we cannot be sure that our two definitions of one mind
give the same result. In cases of multiple personality, some at least
of the usual mnemic effects, notably recollection, are absent in the
life of one personality when they have occurred in the life of the
other. But probably both personalities are connected by mnemic chains
with events which occurred before the dissociation took place, so that
there would be only one mind according to our definition. But there
are other possibilities which must be considered. It may be that each
cell in the body has its own mental life, and that only selections from
these mental lives go to make up the life which we regard as ours.
The unconscious might be the mental lives of subordinate parts of
the body, having occasional mnemic effects which we can notice, but
in the main separate from the life of which we are conscious. If
so, the mental events connected with one body will be more numerous
than the events making up its central mind. These, however, are only
speculative possibilities.

I spoke a moment ago of the life of which we are conscious, and
perhaps the reader has been wondering why I have not made more use of
the notion of consciousness. The reason is that I regard it as only
one kind of mnemic effect, and not one entitled to a special place.
To say that I am conscious of an event is to say that I recollect
it, at any rate for a short time after it has happened. To say that I
recollect an event is to say that a certain event is occurring in me
now which is connected by mnemic causation with the event recollected,
and is of the sort that we call a cognition of that event. But
events which I do not recollect may have mnemic effects upon me. This
is the case, not only where we have Freudian suppression, but in all
habits which were learnt long ago and have now become automatic, such
as writing and speaking. The emphasis upon consciousness has made a
mystery of the unconscious, which ought to be in no way surprising.

It does not much matter which of our two definitions of a mind we
adopt. Let us, provisionally, adopt the first definition, so that a
mind is all the mental events which form part of the history of a
certain living body, or perhaps we should rather say a living brain.

We can now tackle the question which is to decide whether we are
emergent materialists or not, namely:

_Is a mind a structure of material units?_

I think it is clear that the answer to this question is in the
negative. Even if a mind consists of all the events in a brain, it
does not consist of bundles of these events grouped as physics groups
them, _i.e._ it does not lump together all the events that make up
one piece of matter in the brain, and then all the events that make
up another, and so on. Mnemic causation is what concerns us most in
studying mind, but this seems to demand a recourse to physics, if we
assume, as seems plausible, that mental mnemic causation is due to
effects upon the brain. This question, however, is still an open one.
If mnemic causation is ultimate, mind is emergent. If not, the question
is more difficult. As we saw earlier, there certainly is knowledge in
psychology which cannot ever form part of physics. But as this point is
important, I shall repeat the argument in different terms.

The difference between physics and psychology is analogous to that
between a postmans knowledge of letters and the knowledge of a
recipient of letters. The postman knows the movements of many letters,
the recipient knows the contents of a few. We may regard the light and
sound waves that go about the world as letters of which the physicist
may know the destination; some few of them are addressed to human
beings, and when read give psychological knowledge. Of course the
analogy is not perfect, because the letters with which the physicist
deals are continually changing during their journeys, as if they were
written in fading ink, which, also, was not quite dry all the time,
but occasionally got smudged with rain. However, the analogy may pass
if not pressed.

It would be possible without altering the detail of previous
discussions, except that of Chapter XXV, to give a different turn
to the argument, and make matter a structure composed of mental
units. I am not quite sure that this is the wrong view. It arises not
unnaturally from the argument as to data contained in Chapter XXV. We
saw that all data are mental events in the narrowest and strictest
sense, since they are percepts. Consequently all verification of causal
laws consists in the occurrence of expected percepts. Consequently any
inference beyond percepts (actual or possible) is incapable of being
empirically tested. We shall therefore be prudent if we regard the
non-mental events of physics as mere auxiliary concepts, not assumed
to have any reality, but only introduced to simplify the laws of
percepts. Thus matter will be a construction built out of percepts, and
our metaphysic will be essentially that of Berkeley. If there are no
non-mental events, causal laws will be very odd; for example, a hidden
dictaphone may record a conversation although it did not exist at the
time, since no one was perceiving it. But although this seems odd, it
is not logically impossible. And it must be conceded that it enables
us to interpret physics with a smaller amount of dubious inductive and
analogical inference than is required if we admit non-mental events.

In spite of the logical merits of this view, I cannot bring myself
to accept it, though I am not sure that my reasons for disliking it
are any better than Dr. Johnsons. I find myself constitutionally
incapable of believing that the sun would not exist on a day when he
was everywhere hidden by clouds, or that the meat in a pie springs into
existence at the moment when the pie is opened. I know the logical
answer to such objections, and _qua logician_ I think the answer a good
one. The logical argument, however, does not even tend to show that
there are _not_ non-mental events; it only tends to show that we have
no right to feel sure of their existence. For my part, I find myself
in fact believing in them in spite of all that can be said to persuade
me that I ought to feel doubtful.

There is an argument, of a sort, against the view we are considering.
I have been assuming that we admit the existence of other people and
their perceptions, but question only the inference from perceptions to
events of a different kind. Now there is no good reason why we should
not carry our logical caution a step further. I cannot verify a theory
by means of another mans perceptions, but only by means of my own.
Therefore the laws of physics can only be verified by me in so far as
they lead to predictions of _my_ percepts. If then, I refuse to admit
non-mental events because they are not verifiable, I ought to refuse
to admit mental events in every one except myself, on the same ground.
Thus I am reduced to what is called solipsism, _i.e._ the theory that
I alone exist. This is a view which is hard to refute, but still harder
to believe. I once received a letter from a philosopher who professed
to be a solipsist, but was surprised that there were no others! Yet
this philosopher was by way of believing that no one else existed. This
shows that solipsism is not really believed even by those who think
they are convinced of its truth.

We may go a step further. The past can only be verified indirectly,
by means of its effects in the future; therefore the type of logical
caution we have been considering should lead us to abstain from
asserting that the past really occurred: we ought to regard it as
consisting of auxiliary concepts convenient in stating the laws
applicable to the future. And since the future, though verifiable if
and when it occurs, is as yet unverified, we ought to suspend judgment
about the future also. If we are not willing to go so far as this,
there seems no reason to draw the line at the precise point where it
was drawn by Berkeley. On these grounds I feel no shame in admitting
the existence of non-mental events such as the laws of physics lead us
to infer. Nevertheless, it is important to realise that other views are
tenable.




CHAPTER XXVII

MANS PLACE IN THE UNIVERSE


In this final chapter, I propose to recapitulate the main conclusions
at which we have arrived, and then to say a few words on the subject of
Mans relation to the universe in so far as philosophy has anything to
teach on this subject without extraneous help.

Popular metaphysics divides the known world into mind and matter, and
a human being into soul and body. Some--the materialists--have said
that matter alone is real and mind is an illusion. Many--the idealists
in the technical sense, or mentalists, as Dr. Broad more appropriately
calls them--have taken the opposite view, that mind alone is real and
matter is an illusion. The view which I have suggested is that both
mind and matter are structures composed of a more primitive stuff which
is neither mental nor material. This view, called neutral monism,
is suggested in Machs _Analysis of Sensations_, developed in William
Jamess _Essays in Radical Empiricism_, and advocated by John Dewey,
as well as by Professor R. B. Parry and other American realists. The
use of the word neutral in this way is due to Dr. H. M. Sheffer,[15]
formerly of Harvard, who is one of the ablest logicians of our time.

     [15] See Holts _Concept of Consciousness_, preface.

Since man is the instrument of his own knowledge, it is necessary to
study him as an instrument before we can appraise the value of what our
senses seem to tell us concerning the world. In Part I we studied man,
within the framework of common-sense beliefs, just as we might study
clocks or thermometers, as an instrument sensitive to certain features
of the environment, since sensitiveness to the environment is obviously
an indispensable condition for knowledge about it.

In Part II we advanced to the study of the physical world. We
found that matter, in modern science, has lost its solidity and
substantiality; it has become a mere ghost haunting the scenes of
its former splendours. In pursuit of something that could be treated
as substantial, physicists analysed ordinary matter into molecules,
molecules into atoms, atoms into electrons and protons. There, for
a few years, analysis found a resting-place. But now electrons and
protons themselves are dissolved into systems of radiations by
Heisenberg, and into systems of waves by Schrdinger--the two theories
amount mathematically to much the same thing. And these are not wild
metaphysical speculations; they are sober mathematical calculations,
accepted by the great majority of experts.

Another department of theoretical physics, the theory of relativity,
has philosophical consequences which are, if possible, even more
important. The substitution of space-time for space and time has
made the category of substance less applicable than formerly, since
the essence of substance was persistence through time, and there is
now no one cosmic time. The result of this is to turn the physical
world into a four-dimensional continuum of events, instead of a
series of three-dimensional states of a world composed of persistent
bits of matter. A second important feature of relativity-theory is
the abolition of force, particularly gravitational force, and the
substitution of differential causal laws having to do only with the
neighbourhood of an event, not with an influence exerted from a
distance, such as gravitation formerly seemed to be.

The modern study of the atom has had two consequences which have
considerably changed the philosophical hearing of physics. On the
one hand, it appears that there are discontinuous changes in nature,
occasions when there is a sudden jump from one state to another without
passing through the intermediate states. (Schrdinger, it is true,
questions the need for assuming discontinuity; but so far his opinion
has not prevailed.) On the other hand, the course of nature is not so
definitely determined by the physical laws at present known as it was
formerly thought to be. We cannot predict when a discontinuous change
will take place in a given atom, though we can predict statistical
averages. It can no longer be said that, given the laws of physics and
the relevant facts about the environment, the future history of an atom
can theoretically be calculated from its present condition. It may be
that this is merely due to the insufficiency of our knowledge, but we
cannot be sure that this is the case. As things stand at present, the
physical world is not so rigidly deterministic as it has been believed
to be during the last 250 years. And in various directions what
formerly appeared as laws governing each separate atom are now found to
be only averages attributable in part to the laws of chance.

From these questions concerning the physical world in itself, we were
led to others concerning the causation of our perceptions, which are
the data upon which our scientific knowledge of physics is based. We
saw that a long causal chain always intervenes between an external
event and the event in us which we regard as perception of the
external event. We cannot therefore suppose that the external event
is exactly what we see or hear; it can, at best, resemble the percept
only in certain structural respects. This fact has caused considerable
confusion in philosophy, partly because philosophers tried to think
better of perception than it deserves, partly because they failed to
have clear ideas on the subject of space. It is customary to treat
space as a characteristic of matter as opposed to mind, but this is
only true of _physical_ space. There is also _perceptual_ space,
which is that in which what we know immediately through the senses is
situated. This space cannot be identified with that of physics. From
the standpoint of physical space, all our percepts are in our heads;
but in perceptual space our percept of our hand is outside our percept
of our head. The failure to keep physical and perceptual space distinct
has been a source of great confusion in philosophy.

In Part III we resumed the study of man, but now as he appears to
himself, not only as he is known to an external observer. We decided,
contrary to the view of the behaviourists, that there are important
facts which cannot be known except when the observer and observed are
the same person. The datum in perception, we decided, is a private fact
which can only be known directly to the percipient; it is a datum for
physics and psychology equally, and must be regarded as both physical
and mental. We decided later that there are inductive grounds, giving
probability but not certainty, in favour of the view that perceptions
are causally connected with events which the percipient does not
experience, which may belong only to the physical world.

The behaviour of human beings is distinguished from that of inanimate
matter by what are called mnemic phenomena, _i.e._ by a certain kind
of effect of past occurrences. This kind of effects is exemplified in
memory, in learning, in the intelligent use of words, and in every
kind of knowledge. But we cannot, on this ground, erect an absolute
barrier between mind and matter. In the first place, inanimate matter,
to some slight extent, shows analogous behaviour--_e.g._ if you unroll
a roll of paper, it will roll itself up again. In the second place, we
find that living bodies display mnemic phenomena to exactly the same
extent to which minds display them. In the third place, if we are to
avoid what I have called mnemic causation, which involves action at
a distance in time, we must say that mnemic phenomena in mental events
are due to the modification of the body by past events. That is to
say, the set of events which constitutes one mans experience is not
causally self-sufficient, but is dependent upon causal laws involving
events which he cannot experience.

On the other hand, our knowledge of the physical world is purely
abstract: we know certain logical characteristics of its structure,
but nothing of its intrinsic character. There is nothing in physics
to prove that the intrinsic character of the physical world differs,
in this or that respect, from that of the mental world. Thus from
both ends, both by the analysis of physics and by the analysis of
psychology, we find that mental and physical events form one causal
whole, which is not known to consist of two different sorts. At
present, we know the laws of the physical world better than those of
the mental world, but that may change. We know the intrinsic character
of the mental world to some extent, but we know absolutely nothing
of the intrinsic character of the physical world. And in view of the
nature of the inferences upon which our knowledge of physics rests, it
seems scarcely possible that we should ever know more than abstract
laws about matter.

In Part IV we considered what philosophy has to say about the universe.
The function of philosophy, according to the view advocated in this
volume, is somewhat different from that which has been assigned to it
by a large and influential school. Take, _e.g._ Kants antinomies.
He argues (1) that space must be infinite, (2) that space cannot be
infinite; and he deduces that space is subjective. The non-Euclideans
refuted the argument that it must be infinite, and Georg Cantor refuted
the argument that it cannot be. Formerly, _a priori_ logic was used to
prove that various hypotheses which looked possible were impossible,
leaving only one possibility, which philosophy therefore pronounced
true. Now _a priori_ logic is used to prove the exact contrary, namely,
that hypotheses which looked impossible are possible. Whereas logic
was formerly counsel for the prosecution, it is now counsel for the
defence. The result is that many more hypotheses are at large than
was formerly the case. Formerly, to revert to the instance of space,
it appeared that experience left only one kind of space to logic, and
logic showed this one kind to be impossible. Now, logic presents many
kinds of space as possible apart from experience, and experience only
partially decides between them. Thus, while our knowledge of what is
has become less than it was formerly supposed to be, our knowledge of
what may be is enormously increased. Instead of being shut in within
narrow walls, of which every nook and cranny could be explored, we find
ourselves in an open world of free possibilities, where much remains
unknown because there is so much to know. The attempt to prescribe
to the universe by means of _a priori_ principles has broken down;
logic, instead of being, as formerly, a bar to possibilities, has
become the great liberator of the imagination, presenting innumerable
alternatives which are closed to unreflective common sense, and leaving
to experience the task of deciding, where decision is possible, between
the many worlds which logic offers for our choice.

Philosophical knowledge, if what we have been saying is correct, does
not differ essentially from scientific knowledge; there is no special
source of wisdom which is open to philosophy but not to science, and
the results obtained by philosophy are not radically different from
those reached in science. Philosophy is distinguished from science only
by being more critical and more general. But when I say that philosophy
is critical, I do not mean that it attempts to criticise knowledge from
outside, for that would be impossible: I mean only that it examines
the various parts of our supposed knowledge to see whether they are
mutually consistent and whether the inferences employed are such as
seem valid to a careful scrutiny. The criticism aimed at is not that
which, without reason, determines to reject, but that which considers
each piece of apparent knowledge on its merits and retains whatever
still appears to be knowledge when this consideration is completed.
That some risk of error remains must be admitted, since human beings
are fallible. Philosophy may claim justly that it diminishes the risk
of error, and that in some cases it renders the risk so small as to be
practically negligible. To do more than this is not possible in a world
where mistakes must occur; and more than this no prudent advocate of
philosophy would claim to have performed.

I want to end with a few words about mans place in the universe. It
has been customary to demand of a philosopher that he should show that
the world is good in certain respects. I cannot admit any duty of this
sort. One might as well demand of an accountant that he should show
a satisfactory balance sheet. It is just as bad to be fraudulently
optimistic in philosophy as in money matters. If the world is good,
by all means let us know it; but if not, let us know that. In any
case, the question of the goodness or badness of the world is one for
science rather than for philosophy. We shall call the world good if
it has certain characteristics that we desire. In the past philosophy
professed to be able to prove that the world had such characteristics,
but it is now fairly evident that the proofs were invalid. It does not,
of course, follow that the world does not have the characteristics in
question; it follows only that philosophy cannot decide the problem.
Take for example the problem of personal immortality. You may believe
this on the ground of revealed religion, but that is a ground which
lies outside philosophy. You may believe it on the ground of the
phenomena investigated by psychical research, but that is science, not
philosophy. In former days, you could believe it on a philosophical
ground, namely, that the soul is a substance and all substances are
indestructible. You will find this argument, sometimes more or less
disguised, in many philosophers. But the notion of substance, in
the sense of a permanent entity with changing states, is no longer
applicable to the world. It may happen, as with the electron, that a
string of events are so interconnected causally that it is practically
convenient to regard them as forming one entity, but where this happens
it is a scientific fact, not a metaphysical necessity. The whole
question of personal immortality, therefore lies outside philosophy,
and it is to be decided, if at all, either by science or by revealed
religion.

I will take up another matter in regard to which what I have said may
have been disappointing to some readers. It is sometimes thought that
philosophy ought to aim at encouraging a good life. Now, of course,
I admit that it should have this effect, but I do not admit that it
should have this as a conscious purpose. To begin with, when we embark
upon the study of philosophy we ought not to assume that we already
know for certain what the good life is; philosophy may conceivably
modify our views as to what is good, in which case it will seem to
the non-philosophical to have had a bad moral effect. That, however,
is a secondary point. The essential thing is that philosophy is part
of the pursuit of knowledge, and that we cannot limit this pursuit by
insisting that the knowledge obtained shall be such as we should have
thought edifying before we obtained it. I think it could be maintained
with truth that _all_ knowledge is edifying, provided we have a right
conception of edification. When this appears to be not the case it is
because we have moral standards based upon ignorance. It may happen by
good fortune that a moral standard based upon ignorance is right, but
if so knowledge will not destroy it; if knowledge can destroy it, it
must be wrong. The conscious purpose of philosophy, therefore, ought
to be solely to _understand_ the world as well as possible, not to
establish this or that proposition which is thought morally desirable.
Those who embark upon philosophy must be prepared to question all
their preconceptions, ethical as well as scientific; if they have a
determination never to surrender certain philosophic beliefs, they are
not in the frame of mind in which philosophy can be profitably pursued.

But although philosophy ought not to have a moral purpose, it ought
to have certain good moral effects. Any disinterested pursuit of
knowledge teaches us the limits of our power, which is salutary; at
the same time, in proportion as we succeed in achieving knowledge, it
teaches the limits of our impotence, which is equally desirable. And
philosophical knowledge, or rather philosophical thought, has certain
special merits not belonging in an equal degree to other intellectual
pursuits. By its generality it enables us to see human passions in
their just proportions, and to realise the absurdity of many quarrels
between individuals, classes, and nations. Philosophy comes as near
as possible for human beings to that large, impartial contemplation of
the universe as a whole which raises us for the moment above our purely
personal destiny. There is a certain asceticism of the intellect which
is good as a part of life, though it cannot be the whole so long as
we have to remain animals engaged in the struggle for existence. The
asceticism of the intellect requires that, while we are engaged in the
pursuit of knowledge, we shall repress all other desires for the sake
of the desire to know. While we are philosophising, the wish to prove
that the world is good, or that the dogmas of this or that sect are
true, must count as weaknesses of the flesh--they are temptations to
be thrust on one side. But we obtain in return something of the joy
which the mystic experiences in harmony with the will of God. This joy
philosophy can give, but only to those who are willing to follow it to
the end, through all its arduous uncertainties.

The world presented for our belief by a philosophy based upon modern
science is in many ways less alien to ourselves than the world of
matter as conceived in former centuries. The events that happen in
our minds are part of the course of nature, and we do not know that
the events which happen elsewhere are of a totally different kind.
The physical world, so far as science can show at present, is perhaps
less rigidly determined by causal laws than it was thought to be;
one might, more or less fancifully, attribute even to the atom a
kind of limited free will. There is no need to think of ourselves as
powerless and small in the grip of vast cosmic forces. All measurement
is conventional, and it would be possible to devise a perfectly
serviceable system of measurement according to which a man would be
larger than the sun. No doubt there are limits to our power, and it
is good that we should recognise the fact. But we cannot say what
the limits are, except in a quite abstract way, such as that we
cannot create energy. From the point of view of human life, it is
not important to be able to _create_ energy; what is important is to
be able to direct energy into this or that channel, and this can do
more and more as our knowledge of science increases. Since men first
began to think, the forces of nature have oppressed them; earthquakes,
floods, pestilences, and famines have filled them with terror. Now at
last, thanks to science, mankind is discovering how to avoid much of
the suffering that such events have hitherto entailed. The mood in
which, as it seems to me the modern man should face the universe is
one of quiet self-respect. The universe as known to science is not in
itself either friendly or hostile to man, but it can be made to act as
a friend if approached with patient knowledge. Where the universe is
concerned, knowledge is the one thing needful. Man, alone of living
things, has shown himself capable of the knowledge required to give
him a certain mastery over his environment. The dangers to man in the
future, or at least in any measurable future, come, not from nature,
but from man himself. Will he use his power wisely? Or will he turn
the energy liberated from the struggle with nature into struggles with
his fellow-men? History, science, and philosophy all make us aware
of the great collective achievements of mankind. It would be well if
every civilised human being had a sense of these achievements and a
realisation of the possibility of greater things to come, with the
indifference which must result as regards the petty squabbles upon
which the passions of individuals and nations are wastefully squandered.

Philosophy should make us know the ends of life, and the elements in
life that have value on their own account. However our freedom may
be limited in the causal sphere, we need admit no limitations to our
freedom in the sphere of values: what we judge good on its own account
we may continue to judge good, without regard to anything but our own
feeling. Philosophy cannot itself determine the ends of life, but it
can free us from the tyranny of prejudice and from distortions due
to a narrow view. Love, beauty, knowledge, and joy of life: these
things retain their lustre however wide our purview. And if philosophy
can help us to feel the value of these things, it will have played
its parts in mans collective work of bringing light into a world of
darkness.




INDEX


  ther or empty space, 107

  Analogy, positive and negative, 271

  _Analysis of Sensations_ (Mach), 292

  _Animal Intelligence_ (Thorndike), 30

  Animal learning, study of, 29 ff.
    Thorndikes laws of, 31 f.
    learned reactions, 35 f.

  _A priori_, causation not regarded as, 150
    knowledge, 249 f., 265
    probability, on Keyness theory, is, 274
    logic, 296

  Aristotle, 226

  Association, principle of, 33 f., 48, 64, 180

  Aston, Dr. F. W., 99

  Atom, theory of the, 98 ff.
    centre from which radiations travel, 157
    philosophical consequences of modern study of the, 293

  Attention, 205


  Bacon, 80

  Behaviourism, its view of man, 70 ff.
    where it breaks down as a final philosophy, 129
    dilemma put to, 133
    its propositions as to thought examined, 169 ff.
    and logic, 263

  _Behaviourism_ (Watson), 22, 31, 33

  Belief, 254, 258 ff.
    definition of, 261

  Beliefs, defects in common, 3 ff.

  Bergson, 71, 73, 198

  Berkeley, 246 f.

  _Bodily Changes in Pain, Hunger, Fear and Rage_ (Cannon), 218

  Body, human, 25, 139

  Bohr, Niels, his addition to the theory of atoms, 101 ff.

  Bradley, monistic view of, 251
    criticism of his argument against relations, 252

  Braithwaite, R. B., 269

  Brentano, 202

  Broad, Dr., 188, 195, 282, 292

  Buddha, 227

  Butler, Samuel, 71


  Cannon, 218

  Cantor, Georg, 296

  Casuistry, 225

  Causation, as an _a priori_ belief, 5, 150
    notion of necessary sequence, 115
    conception of, in science, 144 ff.

  Cause, Kants category of, 248 f.

  Chrono-geography, 283

  Cognition, 61, 202 f., 217

  Conation, 202

  Conception, 203

  Conditioned reflexes, 35

  Confucius, 227

  Conscience, 228

  Consciousness, 60
    William Jamess views on, 210
    two different meanings of the word, 210
    criticism of common sense view of, 211 ff.
    self, 214
    William Jamess views approved, 217
    one kind of mnemic effect, 288

  Continuity in nature, 108

  Correlation, laws of, 117

  _Critique of Practical Reason_ (Kant), 249

  Curiosity, 220


  Dalton, 98

  Data, 266 f., 276

  De Broglie, 278

  Decalogue, the, 227

  Descartes, 9, 162 ff., 237 ff.

  Desire, behaviourist view of, 90 f.
    introspective view of, 221 ff.

  Dewey, John, 292

  Discontinuity in nature, 101, 106, 108

  Dreams, 62, 127, 175, 176, 185, 189, 193

  Dualism of mind and matter, 141, 239

  Ductless glands, the, 218


  Eddington, Professor, 273, 279

  Education, 233

  Einstein, 96, 116, 239, 242, 249

  Electron, 99 ff., 118, 145

  Emergent properties, 282

  Emotions, essential physiological conditions of the, 118
    subject to Conditioning, 119
    generate irrational opinions, 120

  Energy, radiation of, from matter into empty space, 145
    propagation in empty space, 145
    impact on matter in empty space, 146

  _Essays in Radical Empiricism_ (William James), 210, 292

  Ethics, views of the ancients on, 227
    theory that virtue consists in obedience to authority, 227 ff.
    utilitarian theory of, 229 f.
    the concept of good, 230
    mainly social, 233
    the supreme moral rule, 234 f.

  Events, in physics, 110 f.
    string of, 118 f.
    mental, 141, 280 ff.
    structure and mathematical laws of, 157
    minimal, 277
    matter constructed out of, 278

  Experience, effects of, in a reaction to stimulus, 180 ff.


  Familiarity, a stage in memory, 195 f.

  Fear and Rage, 219

  Feeling, as mental occurrence, 202

  Forces, 111, 114, 117, 120 f.

  Form, reaction to, 85 f.

  Freudian unconscious the, 221


  Galileo, 80

  Generalisations, 271 f.

  Geodesic, 112, 117

  Geometry, as empirical as geography, 249 f.

  _Gestaltpsychologie_, 37, 41, 43, 68, 247

  Gravitation, 116 f., 145, 279

  Griffith, Mr. Percy, 118


  Habit-formation, 36

  Habit-memory, 188, 196

  Hegel, 227, 229, 251

  Heisenberg, 96, 105, 278, 293

  Heisenberg-Schrdinger theories of atomic structure, 243

  Heraclitus, 251

  Huc, Monsieur, 232

  Hume, 180, 191, 247 f.


  Images, visual, auditory and tactual, 176
    behaviourist explanation of, 177 f.
    difference between sensations and, 179 ff.
    definition of, 184 f.
    first stage in memory, 195

  Imagination, analysis of, 190 ff.
    essence of, 191
    exceptional gifts of, 193
    and belief, 193 f.
    difference between memory and, 194

  Induction problem of validity of, 14
    as a practice, 80 f.
    principle of, 268 f.
    logical problem of, 269 ff.
    Mr. Keyness examination of, 270 ff.

  Inference, physiological, 13, 80 ff., 135
    syllogistic, 79
    inductive and mathematical, 83 ff.

  Innate ideas, doctrine of, 245

  Interval, space-like and time-like, 110 f.

  Introspection, 10, 11, 12, 172 f., 201 ff.


  James, William, 210, 223.


  Kant, 80, 201, 239, 248, 296

  Keynes Mr., on problems of induction, 269 ff.

  Khler, 37 ff.

  Knowing, as mental occurrence, 202

  Knowledge, as displayed in reactions to environment, 17 ff.
    perceptual, 58 ff.
    behaviourist view of, 88 ff.
    difference between introspective and other, 215
    _a priori_, 249 f.
    limitations on, imposed by structure of language, 264 f.

  Knowledge-reaction, 216, 282


  Language, as a bodily habit, 43 ff.
    psychological side of, 48
    words in an ideal logical, 256 f.
    and things, relation between, 264

  Laws, causal, 144 ff.
    evidence for, 147
    universal characteristics of, 149

  Learning, laws of, 23, 29 ff.
    two ways of, 39
    in infants, 41, 48
    by increase of sensitivity, 95 f.

  Leibniz, 239, 241 f.

  _Le Problme logique de linduction_ (Jean Nicod), 269, 273

  Locke, 244 ff.

  Logic, 263, 296

  Logical atomism, 248


  Mach, 214, 292

  Man, his relation to the Universe, 292, 295, 298 ff.

  Materialism, as a philosophy, 159

  _Mathematical Theory of Relativity_ (Eddington), 283

  Matter, the structure of the atom, 98 ff.
    essence of, 146 f.
    as conceived in modern physics, 157, 293
    old view of, now untenable, 158 ff.
    constructed out of events, 278
    permanence of, only approximate, 279
    possibly a structure of mental units, 290

  Maxwells equations, 107, 145

  Meaning, 52, 71, 82

  Meinong, 202

  Memory, behaviourist theory of, 71 ff.
    its reference to the past, 188 ff.
    feeling of pastness complex, 190
    more fundamental than imagination, 190
    vital difference between imagination and, 194
    Dr. Broads view on reference to the past, 195
    stages of, 195 ff.
    immediate, 196 f.
    true recollection, 197 ff.
    trustworthiness of, 199

  Memory and testimony, 5 ff.

  Mendeleev, 99

  Mental events, 114, 141 f., 280 f.

  Mental occurrences, 201, 212

  _Mentality of Apes_ (Khler), 37 ff., 62

  Mill, J. S., his canons of induction, 269 f.

  Mind and matter, conventional notions of, 141
    distinction between, illusory, 142, 201
    gap between, how filled in, 148
    interaction between, 150
    theory of neutral monism, 206 ff.
    Cartesian dualism, 239
    Leibnizs theory of, 241

  Mind, a cross-section in a stream of physical causation, 150
    modern conception of, 280 ff.
    emergent from events, 284
    definitions of a, 285 ff.

  Minkowski, 239

  _Mneme_ (Semon), 49

  Mnemic effects, 49, 209, 295

  Mnemic occurrences, 49, 180 f.

  Monads, 241

  Monists and pluralists, controversy between, 251 ff.
    pluralism the view of science and common sense, 253

  Moore, Dr. G. E., on notion of good, 230

  Moral issues, 227

  Motion, 119, 163

  Mystics, 229, 264, 300


  Names, 53

  Necessity, anthropomorphic notion of, 115, 117

  Neutral monism, theory of, 206 ff., 210, 282, 292

  Newton, 242

  Nisbet, R. H., on probability, 275


  Object, what happens when we see an, 146 f.

  Objective and subjective study, 30

  Objectivity, 154 f., 169

  Ogden and Richards, Messrs., 52


  Parmenides, monistic view complete in, 251

  Parry, Professor R. B., 292

  Perception, difference between introspection and, 10 f.
    a species of sensitivity, 59, 123
    and inference, 65 f.
    from objective standpoint, 66 ff.
    of external event, analysis of, 123 ff.
    element of subjectivity in, 130 ff.
    and causal laws of physics, 145 ff.
    its relation to the object causal and mathematical, 149
    from introspective standpoint, 201 ff.

  Perceptive knowledge, stages in act of, 18 ff.

  Percepts, 133, 135, 137 ff.

  Perspective, 152

  Philosophy, the business of, 2, 236
    Behaviourism as a, 129 ff.
    Utilitarian, 229 f.
    systems of Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz, 237 ff.
    Locke, Berkeley, and Hume, 244 ff.
    conscious purpose of, 299

  Physics, modern, 97
    causal laws in, 114 ff., 145 ff.
    and perception, 123 ff.
    spatial relations in, 137 ff.
    our knowledge of, 151 ff.
    only mathematical properties of, discoverable, 157
    less deterministic than formerly, 239
    and psychology, 282, 289

  Pictures, as representations, 183

  Plancks Constant, 101 f.

  Plato, 226

  Poetry, 220

  Probability, fundamental in science, 274
    _a priori_ on Mr. Keyness theory, 274
    frequency, theory of, 274 f.

  Psychology, 16, 172, 184
    and physics, 282, 289

  Psychophysical parallelism, 238

  Public good, the, 230

  Publicity, in the case of physical phenomena, 170


  Quantum changes, 106


  Radio-activity, 99, 103

  Reactions, learned, 21, 33, 35, 36, 49, 81

  Realism, naive, 175

  Recognition, two forms of, 196

  Recollection, true, 197 ff.

  Relations, Bradleys argument against, 252
    cause of confusion about, 264

  Relativity, theory of, space-time instead of one cosmic time and
        space, 108
    some results of the, 108 ff.
    events instead of bodies moving, 110
    relations between events, 110 f.
    no forces in the, 111
    philosophical consequences of the, 293

  Right conduct, 230

  Rutherford, Sir E., 99, 101


  Santayana, Mr., 230

  Schiller, Dr. F. C. S., 79

  Schrdinger, 98, 105, 278, 293, 294

  Self-observation, 126, 161 ff.
    basis of Descartess system, 162 ff.
    Dr. Watsons views, 167 ff.
    gives knowledge not part of physics, 175

  Semon, 49, 180

  Sensation, difference between images and, 179
    acoleuthic, 197
    as opposed to perception, 204

  Sensitivity, 59 f., 88, 123, 177

  Sentences, 51, 54, 75, 255, 264

  Sequence, laws of, 116

  Shakespeare, 192

  Sheffer, Dr. H. M., 282, 292

  Sight, compared with touch, 156 f.

  Size, sense of, 153

  Socrates, 226

  Solipsism, 291

  Sommerfeld, 103

  Space, one persistent, abolished in relativity theory, 108
    physical and perceptual, 137 ff., 241 f., 294

  Space-time, in theory of relativity, 108 ff.
    structure of, 145
    point-instant in, 278

  Specious present, 195, 197

  Spinoza, 238, 251

  _Stars and Atoms_ (Eddington), 279

  Statement, definition of a, 260

  Subjectivity, 129, 133, 135, 154 f.

  Substance, 5, 242 ff., 293

  Syllogism, the, 80

  Syntax, influence of, on philosophy, 243
    connection between laws of physics and laws of, 263


  Talking without thinking, 190

  Tendency, quantitative laws of, 144

  Testimony, 11 f., 170

  _The Analysis of Matter_ (Bertrand Russell), 278

  _The Meaning of Meaning_ (Ogden and Richards), 52

  _The Mind and Its Place in Nature_ (Dr. Broad), 76, 188, 282

  Thorndikes provisional laws, 31 ff.

  Thought, 163 ff., 174, 240, 263

  Time, not cosmic, 108 ff., 158

  Touch, compared with sight, 156

  _Treatise on Probability_ (Keynes), 269 ff.

  Truth, 94, 261 f.

  Truth and Falsehood, causes of mystery about, 254
    two questions in, 254 ff.
    meaning of a sentence examined, 255 f.
    grounds on which statements are regarded as true or false, 257
    ultimate test of falsehood, 258
    belief, 258 ff.
    problems of, 259 ff.


  Universals, 53, 203

  Universe, the, philosophy concerned with, 236
    mans relation to, 298 ff.

  Unlearned Equipment, 22

  Utilitarian philosophy, 229 f.


  Vitalists, 25

  Volition, 61


  Watson, Dr. J. B., 10, 21, 22, 31, 33, 35, 36, 37, 70 ff., 126 ff.,
        162, 167 ff., 177, 188, 219, 223, 259

  Waves in empty space, 107 f.

  Whitehead, Dr., 159

  Will, 223 f.

  Willing, as mental occurrence, 202

  _Winds of Doctrine_ (Santayana), 230

  Wish-fulfilment and dread-fulfilment, 194

  Wittgenstein, 264

  Words, purpose of, 11 f.
    as physical occurrences, 44 ff.
    spoken and written, 46 f.
    how acquired by infants, 48 ff.
    meaning of, 52, 256
    relations of, 56
    in an ideal logical language, 256 f.

  World, the physical, nature of our
    knowledge of, 151 ff.
    a four-dimensional continuum of events, 293
    our knowledge of, purely abstract, 295


THE END




[Illustration]

NORTON BOOKS

  Paul Bekker            THE STORY OF MUSIC        $3.50

  Everett Dean Martin    PSYCHOLOGY                 3.00
                         THE MEANING OF A
                           LIBERAL EDUCATION        3.00

  Daniel Gregory Mason   ARTISTIC IDEALS            2.50

  H. A. Overstreet       INFLUENCING HUMAN
                           BEHAVIOR                 3.00
                         A BOOK ABOUT OURSELVES     3.00

  Bertrand Russell       PHILOSOPHY                 3.00

  Thomas E. Tallmadge    THE STORY OF ARCHITECTURE
                           IN AMERICA               3.50

  John B. Watson         BEHAVIORISM                3.00


                        _THE NEW SCIENCE SERIES_
                         EDITED BY C. K. OGDEN

  C. Judson Herrick      FATALISM OR FREEDOM        1.00

  I. A. Richards         SCIENCE AND POETRY         1.00

  Vilhjalmur Stefansson  THE STANDARDIZATION OF
                           ERROR                    1.00

         _Announcements of other volumes in this series, and a
          complete catalogue of Norton Books sent on request_


                     W  W  NORTON & COMPANY, INC.
                     70 Fifth Avenue      New York




Transcribers Notes


Hyphenation, and spelling were made consistent when a predominant
preference was found in the original book; otherwise they were not
changed.

Original text mostly placed commas and periods after closing quotation
marks, but occasionally placed them before closing quotation marks.
This inconsistency has not been changed here.

Simple typographical errors were corrected; unbalanced quotation
marks were remedied when the change was obvious, and otherwise left
unbalanced.

Footnotes have been sequentially renumbered and placed just below
the paragraphs that reference them.

The index was not checked for proper alphabetization or correct page
references.

Page 86: The variables in the equation were printed in italics. To
improve readability, the underscore characters used elsewhere to
indicate italics have been omitted in this case.

Page 207: this is a causal word originally was printed as this a a
causal word; changed here by Transcriber.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PHILOSOPHY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given awayyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

     You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.
    
     You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
        works.
    
     You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
     You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenbergs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundations EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your states laws.

The Foundations business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundations website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



The Project Gutenberg eBook of An essay on the foundations of geometry
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: An essay on the foundations of geometry

Author: Bertrand Russell

Release date: May 17, 2016 [eBook #52091]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Adrian Mastronardi, John Campbell and the
        Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
        (This file was produced from images generously made
        available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN ESSAY ON THE FOUNDATIONS OF GEOMETRY ***

  TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  Bold text is denoted by =equal signs=.

  A superscript is denoted by ^{x}. For example, y^{4} indicates y to
  the power 4.

  A subscript is denoted by {x}. For example, a{ik} indicates the ik-th
  element of array a.

  Algebraic expressions in the original text usually had the variables in
  italic. The italic underscore markup has been removed for readability,
  so for example: _dx_{i}_ = _d__x_{i}_ + _dx_{i}_
  has been changed to: dx{i} = dx{i} + dx{i}

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within
  the text and consultation of external sources.

  More detail can be found at the end of the book.




  THE FOUNDATIONS OF GEOMETRY.




  London: C. J. CLAY AND SONS,

  CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE,
  AVE MARIA LANE.

  Glasgow: 263, ARGYLE STREET.

  [Illustration]

  Leipzig: F. A. BROCKHAUS.
  New York: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.
  Bombay: GEORGE BELL AND SONS.




  AN ESSAY

  ON THE

  FOUNDATIONS OF GEOMETRY

  BY

  BERTRAND A. W. RUSSELL. M.A.

  FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

  CAMBRIDGE:
  AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.

  1897

  [_All Rights reserved._]


  Cambridge:

  PRINTED BY J. AND C. F. CLAY,
  AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.




PREFACE.


The present work is based on a dissertation submitted at the
Fellowship Examination of Trinity College, Cambridge, in the year
1895. Section B of the third chapter is in the main a reprint, with
some serious alterations, of an article in _Mind_ (New Series, No.
17). The substance of the book has been given in the form of lectures
at the Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, and at Bryn Mawr College,
Pennsylvania.

My chief obligation is to Professor Klein. Throughout the first
chapter, I have found his "Lectures on non-Euclidean Geometry"
an invaluable guide; I have accepted from him the division of
Metageometry into three periods, and have found my historical work
much lightened by his references to previous writers. In Logic, I
have learnt most from Mr Bradley, and next to him, from Sigwart and
Dr Bosanquet. On several important points, I have derived useful
suggestions from Professor James's "Principles of Psychology."

My thanks are due to Mr G. F. Stout and Mr A. N. Whitehead for
kindly reading my proofs, and helping me by many useful criticisms.
To Mr Whitehead I owe, also, the inestimable assistance of constant
criticism and suggestion throughout the course of construction,
especially as regards the philosophical importance of projective
Geometry.

  HASLEMERE.

  _May, 1897._




  TO

  JOHN McTAGGART ELLIS McTAGGART

  TO WHOSE DISCOURSE AND FRIENDSHIP IS OWING
  THE EXISTENCE OF THIS BOOK.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.


  INTRODUCTION.

  OUR PROBLEM DEFINED BY ITS RELATIONS TO LOGIC,
  PSYCHOLOGY AND MATHEMATICS.
                                                                    PAGE

  1.  The problem first received a modern form through Kant, who
  connected the _ priori_ with the subjective                         1

  2.  A mental state is subjective, for Psychology, when its immediate
  cause does not lie in the outer world                                2

  3.  A piece of knowledge is _ priori_, for Epistemology, when
  without it knowledge would be impossible                             2

  4.  The subjective and the _ priori_ belong respectively to
  Psychology and to Epistemology. The latter alone will be
  investigated in this essay                                           3

  5.  My test of the _ priori_ will be purely logical: what knowledge
  is necessary for experience?                                         3

  6.  But since the necessary is hypothetical, we must include, in
  the _ priori_, the ground of necessity                              4

  7.  This may be the essential postulate of our science, or the
  element, in the subject-matter, which is necessary to
  experience;                                                          4

  8.  Which, however, are both at bottom the same ground               5

  9.  Forecast of the work                                             5


  CHAPTER I.

  A SHORT HISTORY OF METAGEOMETRY.

  10.  Metageometry began by rejecting the axiom of parallels          7

  11.  Its history may be divided into three periods: the synthetic,
  the metrical and the projective                                      7

  12.  The first period was inaugurated by Gauss,                     10

  13.  Whose suggestions were developed independently by
  Lobatchewsky                                                        10

  14.  And Bolyai                                                     11

  15.  The purpose of all three was to show that the axiom of parallels
  could not be deduced from the others, since its denial did
  not lead to contradictions                                          12

  16.  The second period had a more philosophical aim, and was
  inspired chiefly by Gauss and Herbart                               13

  17.  The first work of this period, that of Riemann, invented two
  new conceptions:                                                    14

  18.  The first, that of a manifold, is a class-conception, containing
  space as a species,                                                 14

  19.  And defined as such that its determinations form a collection
  of magnitudes                                                       15

  20.  The second, the measure of curvature of a manifold, grew out
  of curvature in curves and surfaces                                 16

  21.  By means of Gauss's analytical formula for the curvature of
  surfaces,                                                           19

  22.  Which enables us to define a _constant_ measure of curvature
  of a three-dimensional space without reference to a fourth
  dimension                                                           20

  23.  The main result of Riemann's mathematical work was to
  show that, if magnitudes are independent of place, the
  measure of curvature of space must be constant                      21

  24.  Helmholtz, who was more of a philosopher than a mathematician, 22

  25.  Gave a new but incorrect formulation of the essential axioms,  23

  26.  And deduced the quadratic formula for the infinitesimal arc,
  which Riemann had assumed                                           24

  27.  Beltrami gave Lobatchewsky's planimetry a Euclidean
  interpretation,                                                     25

  28.  Which is analogous to Cayley's theory of distance;             26

  29.  And dealt with _n_-dimensional spaces of constant negative
  curvature                                                           27

  30.  The third period abandons the metrical methods of the second,
  and extrudes the notion of spatial quantity                         27

  31.  Cayley reduced metrical properties to projective properties,
  relative to a certain conic or quadric, the Absolute;               28

  32.  And Klein showed that the Euclidean or non-Euclidean systems
  result, according to the nature of the Absolute;                    29

  33.  Hence Euclidean _space_ appeared to give rise to all the kinds
  of Geometry, and the question, which is true, appeared
  reduced to one of convention                                        30

  34.  But this view is due to a confusion as to the nature of the
  coordinates employed                                                30

  35.  Projective coordinates have been regarded as dependent on
  distance, and thus really metrical                                  31

  36.  But this is not the case, since anharmonic ratio can be
  projectively defined                                                32

  37.  Projective coordinates, being purely descriptive, can give no
  information as to metrical properties, and the reduction of
  metrical to projective properties is purely technical               33

  38.  The true connection of Cayley's measure of distance with
  non-Euclidean Geometry is that suggested by Beltrami's
  Saggio, and worked out by Sir R. Ball,                              36

  39.  Which provides a Euclidean equivalent for every non-Euclidean
  proposition, and so removes the possibility of contradictions
  in Metageometry                                                     38

  40.  Klein's elliptic Geometry has not been proved to have a
  corresponding variety of space                                      39

  41.  The geometrical use of imaginaries, of which Cayley demanded
  a philosophical discussion,                                         41

  42.  Has a merely technical validity,                               42

  43.  And is capable of giving geometrical results only when it
  begins and ends with real points and figures                        45

  44.  We have now seen that projective Geometry is logically prior
  to metrical Geometry, but cannot supersede it                       46

  45.  Sophus Lie has applied projective methods to Helmholtz's
  formulation of the axioms, and has shown the axiom of
  Monodromy to be superfluous                                         46

  46.  Metageometry has gradually grown independent of philosophy,
  but has grown continually more interesting to philosophy            50

  47.  Metrical Geometry has three indispensable axioms,              50

  48.  Which we shall find to be not results, but conditions, of
  measurement,                                                        51

  49.  And which are nearly equivalent to the three axioms of
  projective Geometry                                                 52

  50.  Both sets of axioms are necessitated, not by facts, but by
  logic                                                               52


  CHAPTER II.

  CRITICAL ACCOUNT OF SOME PREVIOUS PHILOSOPHICAL
  THEORIES OF GEOMETRY.

  51.  A criticism of representative modern theories need not begin
  before Kant                                                         54

  52.  Kant's doctrine must be taken, in an argument about Geometry,
  on its purely logical side                                          55

  53.  Kant contends that since Geometry is apodeictic, space must
  be _ priori_ and subjective, while since space is _ priori_
  and subjective, Geometry must be apodeictic                         55

  54.  Metageometry has upset the first line of argument, not the
  second                                                              56

  55.  The second may be attacked by criticizing either the distinction
  of synthetic and analytic judgments, or the first two arguments
  of the metaphysical deduction of space                              57

  56.  Modern Logic regards every judgment as both synthetic and
  analytic,                                                           57

  57.  But leaves the _ priori_, as that which is presupposed in the
  possibility of experience                                           59

  58.  Kant's first two arguments as to space suffice to prove _some_
  form of externality, but not necessarily Euclidean space, a
  necessary condition of experience                                   60

  59.  Among the successors of Kant, Herbart alone advanced the
  theory of Geometry, by influencing Riemann                          62

  60.  Riemann regarded space as a particular kind of manifold, i.e.
  wholly quantitatively                                               63

  61.  He therefore unduly neglected the qualitative adjectives of
  space                                                               64

  62.  His philosophy rests on a vicious disjunction                  65

  63.  His definition of a manifold is obscure,                       66

  64.  And his definition of measurement applies only to space        67

  65.  Though mathematically invaluable, his view of space as a
  manifold is philosophically misleading                              69

  66.  Helmholtz attacked Kant both on the mathematical and on
  the psychological side;                                             70

  67.  But his criterion of apriority is changeable and often
  invalid;                                                            71

  68.  His proof that non-Euclidean spaces are imaginable is
  inconclusive;                                                       72

  69.  And his assertion of the dependence of measurement on rigid
  bodies, which may be taken in three senses,                         74

  70.  Is wholly false if it means that the axiom of Congruence
  actually asserts the existence of rigid bodies,                     75

  71.  Is untrue if it means that the necessary reference of geometrical
  propositions to matter renders pure Geometry empirical,             76

  72.  And is inadequate to his conclusion if it means, what is
  true, that _actual_ measurement involves approximately rigid
  bodies                                                              78

  73.  Geometry deals with an abstract matter, whose physical
  properties are disregarded; and Physics must presuppose
  Geometry                                                            80

  74.  Erdmann accepted the conclusions of Riemann and Helmholtz,     81

  75.  And regarded the axioms as necessarily successive steps in
  classifying space as a species of manifold                          82

  76.  His deduction involves four fallacious assumptions, namely:    82

  77.  That conceptions must be abstracted from a series of
  instances;                                                          83

  78.  That all definition is classification;                         83

  79.  That conceptions of magnitude can be applied to space as
  a whole;                                                            84

  80.  And that if conceptions of magnitude could be so applied, all
  the adjectives of space would result from their application         86

  81.  Erdmann regards Geometry alone as incapable of deciding on
  the truth of the axiom of Congruence,                               86

  82.  Which he affirms to be empirically proved by Mechanics.        88

  83.  The variety and inadequacy of Erdmann's tests of apriority     89

  84.  Invalidate his final conclusions on the theory of Geometry     90

  85.  Lotze has discussed two questions in the theory of Geometry:   93

  86.  (1) He regards the possibility of non-Euclidean spaces as
  suggested by the subjectivity of space,                             93

  87.  And rejects it owing to a mathematical misunderstanding,       96

  88.  Having missed the most important sense of their possibility,   96

  89.  Which is that they fulfil the logical conditions to which any
  form of externality must conform                                    97

  90.  (2) He attacks the mathematical procedure of Metageometry      98

  91.  The attack begins with a question-begging definition of
  parallels                                                           99

  92.  Lotze maintains that all apparent departures from Euclid
  could be physically explained, a view which really makes
  Euclid empirical                                                    99

  93.  His criticism of Helmholtz's analogies rests wholly on
    mathematical mistakes                                            101

  94.  His proof that space must have three dimensions rests on
  neglect of different orders of infinity                            104

  95.  He attacks non-Euclidean spaces on the mistaken ground
  that they are not homogeneous                                      107

  96.  Lotze's objections fall under four heads                      108

  97.  Two other semi-philosophical objections may be urged,         109

  98.  One of which, the absence of similarity, has been made the
  basis of attack by Delbuf,                                        110

  99.  But does not form a valid ground of objection                 111

  100.  Recent French speculation on the foundations of Geometry
  has suggested few new views                                        112

  101.  All homogeneous spaces are _ priori_ possible, and the
  decision between them is empirical                                 114


  CHAPTER III.

  SECTION A. THE AXIOMS OF PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY.

  102.  Projective Geometry does not deal with magnitude, and
  applies to all spaces alike                                        117

  103.  It will be found wholly _ priori_                           117

  104.  Its axioms have not yet been formulated philosophically      118

  105.  Coordinates, in projective Geometry, are not spatial
  magnitudes, but convenient names for points                        118

  106.  The possibility of distinguishing various points is an axiom 119

  107.  The qualitative relations between points, dealt with by
  projective Geometry, are presupposed by the quantitative
  treatment                                                          119

  108.  The only qualitative relation between two points is the
  straight line, and all straight lines are qualitatively
  similar                                                            120

  109.  Hence follows, by extension, the principle of projective
  transformation                                                     121

  110.  By which figures qualitatively indistinguishable from a
  given figure are obtained                                          122

  111.  Anharmonic ratio may and must be descriptively defined       122

  112.  The quadrilateral construction is essential to the
  projective definition of points,                                   123

  113.  And can be projectively defined,                             124

  114.  By the general principle of projective transformation        126

  115.  The principle of duality is the mathematical form of a
  philosophical circle,                                              127

  116.  Which is an inevitable consequence of the relativity of
  space, and makes any definition of the point contradictory         128

  117.  We define the point as that which is spatial, but contains
  no space, whence other definitions follow                          128

  118.  What is meant by qualitative equivalence in Geometry?        129

  119.  Two pairs of points on one straight line, or two pairs of
  straight lines through one point, are qualitatively equivalent     129

  120.  This explains why _four_ collinear points are needed, to give
  an intrinsic relation by which the fourth can be descriptively
  defined when the first three are given                             130

  121.  Any two projectively related figures are qualitatively
  equivalent, i.e. differ in no non-quantitative conceptual
  property                                                           131

  122.  Three axioms are used by projective Geometry,                132

  123.  And are required for qualitative spatial comparison,         132

  124.  Which involves the homogeneity, relativity and passivity
  of space                                                           133

  125.  The conception of a form of externality,                     134

  126.  Being a creature of the intellect, can be dealt with by
  pure mathematics                                                   134

  127.  The resulting doctrine of extension will be, for the moment,
  hypothetical                                                       135

  128.  But is rendered assertorical by the necessity, for
  experience, of some form of externality                            136

  129.  Any such form must be relational                             136

  130.  And homogeneous                                              137

  131.  And the relations constituting it must appear infinitely
  divisible                                                          137

  132.  It must have a finite integral number of dimensions,         139

  133.  Owing to its passivity and homogeneity                       140

  134.  And to the systematic unity of the world                     140

  135.  A one-dimensional form alone would not suffice for
  experience                                                         141

  136.  Since its elements would be immovably fixed in a series      142

  137.  Two positions have a relation independent of other
  positions,                                                         143

  138.  Since positions are wholly defined by mutually independent
  relations                                                          143

  139.  Hence projective Geometry is wholly _ priori_,              146

  140.  Though metrical Geometry contains an empirical element       146


  SECTION B. THE AXIOMS OF METRICAL GEOMETRY.

  141.  Metrical Geometry is distinct from projective, but has the
  same fundamental postulate                                         147

  142.  It introduces the new idea of motion, and has three
  _ priori_ axioms                                                  148


  I. _The Axiom of Free Mobility._

  143.  Measurement requires a criterion of spatial equality         149

  144.  Which is given by superposition, and involves the axiom
  of Free Mobility                                                   150

  145.  The denial of this axiom involves an action of empty
  space on things                                                    151

  146.  There is a mathematically possible alternative to the axiom, 152

  147.  Which, however, is logically and philosophically untenable   153

  148.  Though Free Mobility is _ priori_, actual measurement is
  empirical                                                          154

  149.  Some objections remain to be answered, concerning--          154

  150.  (1) The comparison of volumes and of Kant's symmetrical
  objects                                                            154

  151.  (2) The measurement of time, where congruence is impossible  156

  152.  (3) The immediate perception of spatial magnitude; and       157

  153.  (4) The Geometry of non-congruent surfaces                   158

  154.  Free Mobility includes Helmholtz's Monodromy                 159

  155.  Free Mobility involves the relativity of space               159

  156.  From which, reciprocally, it can be deduced                  160

  157.  Our axiom is therefore _ priori_ in a double sense          160


  II. _The Axiom of Dimensions._

  158.  Space must have a finite integral number of dimensions       161

  159.  But the restriction to three is empirical                    162

  160.  The general axiom follows from the relativity of position    162

  161.  The limitation to three dimensions, unlike most empirical
  knowledge, is accurate and certain                                 163


  III. _The Axiom of Distance._

  162.  The axiom of distance corresponds, here, to that of the
  straight line in projective Geometry                               164

  163.  The possibility of spatial measurement involves a magnitude
  uniquely determined by two points,                                 164

  164.  Since two points must have some relation, and the passivity
  of space proves this to be independent of external reference       165

  165.  There can be only one such relation                          166

  166.  This must be measured by a curve joining the two points,     166

  167.  And the curve must be uniquely determined by the two
  points                                                             167

  168.  Spherical Geometry contains an exception to this axiom,      168

  169.  Which, however, is not quite equivalent to Euclid's          168

  170.  The exception is due to the fact that two points, in
  spherical space, may have an external relation unaltered by
  motion,                                                            169

  171.  Which, however, being a relation of linear magnitude,
  presupposes the possibility of linear magnitude                    170

  172.  A relation between two points must be a line joining them    170

  173.  Conversely, the existence of a unique line between two
  points can be deduced from the nature of a form of
  externality,                                                       171

  174.  And necessarily leads to distance, when quantity is applied
  to it                                                              172

  175.  Hence the axiom of distance, also, is _ priori_ in a double
  sense                                                              172

  176.  No metrical coordinate system can be set up without the
  straight line                                                      174

  177.  No axioms besides the above three are necessary to metrical
  Geometry                                                           175

  178.  But these three are necessary to the direct measurement
  of any continuum                                                   176

  179.  Two philosophical questions remain for a final chapter       177


  CHAPTER IV.

  PHILOSOPHICAL CONSEQUENCES.

  180.  What is the relation to experience of a form of externality
  in general?                                                        178

  181.  This form is the class-conception, containing every possible
  intuition of externality; and some such intuition is
  necessary to experience                                            178

  182.  What relation does this view bear to Kant's?                 179

  183.  It is less psychological, since it does not discuss whether
  space is given in sensation,                                       180

  184.  And maintains that not only space, but any form of
  externality which renders experience possible, must be given in
  sense-perception                                                   181

  185.  Externality should mean, not externality to the Self, but
  the mutual externality of presented things                         181

  186.  Would this be unknowable without a given form of
  externality?                                                       182

  187.  Bradley has proved that space and time preclude the
  existence of mere particulars,                                     182

  188.  And that knowledge requires the _This_ to be neither simple
  nor self-subsistent                                                183

  189.  To prove that experience requires a form of externality, I
  assume that all knowledge requires the recognition of identity in
  difference                                                         184

  190.  Such recognition involves time                               184

  191.  And some other form giving simultaneous diversity            185

  192.  The above argument has not deduced sense-perception from
  the categories, but has shown the former, unless it contains
  a certain element, to be unintelligible to the latter              186

  193.  How to account for the realization of this element, is a
  question for metaphysics                                           187

  194.  What are we to do with the contradictions in space?          188

  195.  Three contradictions will be discussed in what follows       188

  196.  (1) The antinomy of the Point proves the relativity of
  space,                                                             189

  197.  And shows that Geometry must have some reference to
  matter,                                                            190

  198.  By which means it is made to refer to spatial order, not
  to empty space                                                     191

  199.  The causal properties of matter are irrelevant to Geometry,
  which must regard it as composed of unextended atoms,
  by which points are replaced                                       191

  200.  (2) The circle in defining straight lines and planes is
  overcome by the same reference to matter                           192

  201.  (3) The antinomy that space is relational and yet more
  than relational,                                                   193

  202.  Seems to depend on the confusion of empty space with
  spatial order                                                      193

  203.  Kant regarded empty space as the subject-matter of Geometry, 194

  204.  But the arguments of the Aesthetic are inconclusive on this
  point,                                                             195

  205.  And are upset by the mathematical antinomies, which prove
  that spatial order should be the subject-matter of Geometry        196

  206.  The apparent thinghood of space is a psychological illusion,
  due to the fact that spatial relations are immediately given       196

  207.  The apparent divisibility of spatial relations is either an
  illusion, arising out of empty space, or the expression of the
 possibility of quantitatively different spatial relations           197

  208.  Externality is not a relation, but an aspect of relations.
  Spatial order, owing to its reference to matter, is a real
  relation                                                           198

  209.  Conclusion                                                   199




INTRODUCTION.

OUR PROBLEM DEFINED BY ITS RELATIONS TO LOGIC, PSYCHOLOGY AND
MATHEMATICS.


=1.= Geometry, throughout the 17th and 18th centuries, remained, in the
war against empiricism, an impregnable fortress of the idealists.
Those who held--as was generally held on the Continent--that certain
knowledge, independent of experience, was possible about the real
world, had only to point to Geometry: none but a madman, they said,
would throw doubt on its validity, and none but a fool would deny its
objective reference. The English Empiricists, in this matter, had,
therefore, a somewhat difficult task; either they had to ignore the
problem, or if, like Hume and Mill, they ventured on the assault,
they were driven into the apparently paradoxical assertion that
Geometry, at bottom, had no certainty of a different _kind_ from that
of Mechanics--only the perpetual presence of spatial impressions,
they said, made our experience of the truth of the axioms so wide as
to seem absolute certainty.

Here, however, as in many other instances, merciless logic drove
these philosophers, whether they would or no, into glaring opposition
to the common sense of their day. It was only through Kant, the
creator of modern Epistemology, that the geometrical problem
received a modern form. He reduced the question to the following
hypotheticals: If Geometry has apodeictic certainty, its matter,
_i.e._ space, must be _ priori_, and as such must be purely
subjective; and conversely, if space is purely subjective, Geometry
must have apodeictic certainty. The latter hypothetical has more
weight with Kant, indeed it is ineradicably bound up with his whole
Epistemology; nevertheless it has, I think, much less force than
the former. Let us accept, however, for the moment, the Kantian
formulation, and endeavour to give precision to the terms _ priori_
and _subjective_.

=2.= One of the great difficulties, throughout this controversy,
is the extremely variable use to which these words, as well as
the word _empirical_, are put by different authors. To Kant, who
was nothing of a psychologist, _ priori_ and _subjective_ were
almost interchangeable terms[1]; in modern usage there is, on the
whole, a tendency to confine the word _subjective_ to Psychology,
leaving _ priori_ to do duty for Epistemology. If we accept this
differentiation, we may set up, corresponding to the problems of
these two sciences, the following provisional definitions: _ priori_
applies to any piece of knowledge which, though perhaps elicited by
experience, is _logically_ presupposed in experience: _subjective_
applies to any mental state whose immediate cause lies, not in the
external world, but within the limits of the subject. The latter
definition, of course, is framed exclusively for Psychology: from the
point of view of physical Science all mental states are subjective.
But for a Science whose matter, strictly speaking, is _only_ mental
states, we require, if we are to use the word to any purpose,
some differentia among mental states, as a mark of a more special
subjectivity on the part of those to which this term is applied.

Now the only mental states whose immediate causes lie in the external
world are _sensations_. A pure sensation is, of course, an impossible
abstraction--we are never wholly passive under the action of an
external stimulus--but for the purposes of Psychology the abstraction
is a useful one. Whatever, then, is not sensation, we shall, in
Psychology, call subjective. It is in sensation alone that we are
directly affected by the external world, and only here does it give
us direct information about itself.

=3.= Let us now consider the epistemological question, as to the sort
of knowledge which can be called _ priori_. Here we have nothing to
do--in the first instance, at any rate--with the cause or genesis of
a piece of knowledge; we accept knowledge as a datum to be analysed
and classified. Such analysis will reveal a formal and a material
element in knowledge. The formal element will consist of postulates
which are required to make knowledge possible at all, and of all
that can be deduced from these postulates; the material element, on
the other hand, will consist of all that comes to fill in the form
given by the formal postulates--all that is contingent or dependent
on experience, all that might have been otherwise without rendering
knowledge impossible. We shall then call the formal element _
priori_, the material element empirical.

=4.= Now what is the connection between the subjective and the _
priori_? It is a connection, obviously--if it exists at all--from the
outside, _i.e._ not deducible directly from the nature of either,
but provable--if it can be proved--only by a general view of the
conditions of both. The question, what knowledge is _ priori_, must,
on the above definition, depend on a logical analysis of knowledge,
by which the conditions of possible experience may be revealed; but
the question, what elements of a cognitive state are subjective, is
to be investigated by pure Psychology, which has to determine what,
in our perceptions, belongs to sensation, and what is the work of
thought or of association. Since, then, these two questions belong
to different sciences, and can be settled independently, will it not
be wise to conduct the two investigations separately? To decree that
the _ priori_ shall always be subjective, seems dangerous, when we
reflect that such a view places our results, as to the _ priori_, at
the mercy of empirical psychology. How serious this danger is, the
controversy as to Kant's pure intuition sufficiently shows.

=5.= I shall, therefore, throughout the present Essay, use the
word _ priori_ without any psychological implication. My test of
apriority will be purely logical: Would experience be impossible, if
a certain axiom or postulate were denied? Or, in a more restricted
sense, which gives apriority only within a particular science: Would
experience as to the subject-matter of that science be impossible,
without a certain axiom or postulate? My results also, therefore,
will be purely logical. If Psychology declares that some things,
which I have declared _ priori_, are not subjective, then, failing
an error of detail in my proofs, the connection of the _ priori_ and
the subjective, so far as those things are concerned, must be given
up. There will be no discussion, accordingly, throughout this Essay,
of the relation of the _ priori_ to the subjective--a relation which
cannot determine what pieces of knowledge are _ priori_, but rather
depends on that determination, and belongs, in any case, rather to
Metaphysics than to Epistemology.

=6.= As I have ventured to use the word _ priori_ in a slightly
unconventional sense, I will give a few elucidatory remarks of a
general nature.

The _ priori_, since Kant at any rate, has generally stood for the
necessary or apodeictic element in knowledge. But modern logic has
shown that necessary propositions are always, in one aspect at least,
hypothetical. There may be, and usually is, an implication that the
connection, of which necessity is predicated, has some existence,
but still, necessity always points beyond itself to a _ground_ of
necessity, and asserts this ground rather than the actual connection.
As Bradley points out, "arsenic poisons" remains true, even if it
is poisoning no one. If, therefore, the _ priori_ in knowledge be
primarily the necessary, it must be the necessary on some hypothesis,
and the _ground_ of necessity must be included as _ priori_. But
the ground of necessity is, so far as the necessary connection in
question can show, a mere fact, a merely categorical judgment. Hence
necessity alone is an insufficient criterion of apriority.

To supplement this criterion, we must supply the hypothesis or
ground, on which alone the necessity holds, and this ground will
vary from one science to another, and even, with the progress of
knowledge, in the same science at different times. For as knowledge
becomes more developed and articulate, more and more necessary
connections are perceived, and the merely categorical truths, though
they remain the foundation of apodeictic judgments, diminish in
relative number. Nevertheless, in a fairly advanced science such as
Geometry, we can, I think, pretty completely supply the appropriate
ground, and establish, within the limits of the isolated science, the
distinction between the necessary and the merely assertorical.

=7.= There are two grounds, I think, on which necessity may be sought
within any science. These may be (very roughly) distinguished as
the ground which Kant seeks in the _Prolegomena_, and that which
he seeks in the _Pure Reason_. We may start from the existence of
our science as a fact, and analyse the reasoning employed with a
view to discovering the fundamental postulate on which its logical
possibility depends; in this case, the postulate, and all which
follows from it alone, will be _ priori_. Or we may accept the
existence of the subject-matter of our science as our basis of fact,
and deduce dogmatically whatever principles we can from the essential
nature of this subject-matter. In this latter case, however, it is
not the whole empirical nature of the subject-matter, as revealed by
the subsequent researches of our science, which forms our ground; for
if it were, the whole science would, of course, be _ priori_. Rather
it is that element, in the subject-matter, which makes _possible_
the branch of experience dealt with by the science in question[2].
The importance of this distinction will appear more clearly as we
proceed[3].

=8.= These two grounds of necessity, in ultimate analysis, fall
together. The _methods_ of investigation in the two cases differ
widely, but the _results_ cannot differ. For in the first case, by
analysis of the science, we discover the postulate on which alone
its reasonings are possible. Now if reasoning in the science is
impossible without some postulate, this postulate must be essential
to experience of the subject-matter of the science, and thus we
get the second ground. Nevertheless, the two methods are useful as
supplementing one another, and the first, as starting from the actual
science, is the safest and easiest method of investigation, though
the second seems the more convincing for exposition.

=9.= The course of my argument, therefore, will be as follows: In
the first chapter, as a preliminary to the logical analysis of
Geometry, I shall give a brief history of the rise and development
of non-Euclidean systems. The second chapter will prepare the ground
for a constructive theory of Geometry, by a criticism of some
previous philosophical views; in this chapter, I shall endeavour
to exhibit such views as partly true, partly false, and so to
establish, by preliminary polemics, the truth of such parts of my own
theory as are to be found in former writers. A large part of this
theory, however, cannot be so introduced, since the whole field of
projective Geometry, so far as I am aware, has been hitherto unknown
to philosophers. Passing, in the third chapter, from criticism to
construction, I shall deal first with projective Geometry. This, I
shall maintain, is necessarily true of any form of externality, and
is, since some such form is necessary to experience, completely _
priori_. In metrical Geometry, however, which I shall next consider,
the axioms will fall into two classes: (1) Those common to Euclidean
and non-Euclidean spaces. These will be found, on the one hand,
essential to the possibility of measurement in any continuum, and
on the other hand, necessary properties of any form of externality
with more than one dimension. They will, therefore, be declared
_ priori_. (2) Those axioms which distinguish Euclidean from
non-Euclidean spaces. These will be regarded as wholly empirical.
The axiom that the number of dimensions is three, however, though
empirical, will be declared, since small errors are here impossible,
exactly and certainly true of our actual world; while the two
remaining axioms, which determine the value of the space-constant,
will be regarded as only approximately known, and certain only
within the errors of observation[4]. The fourth chapter, finally,
will endeavour to prove, what was assumed in Chapter III., that some
form of externality is necessary to experience, and will conclude by
exhibiting the logical impossibility, if knowledge of such a form is
to be freed from contradictions, of wholly abstracting this knowledge
from all reference to the matter contained in the form.

I shall hope to have touched, with this discussion, on all the main
points relating to the Foundations of Geometry.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Cf. Erdmann, Axiome der Geometrie, p. 111: "Fr Kant sind
Aprioritt und ausschliessliche Subjectivitt allerdings
Wechselbegriffe."

[2] I use "experience" here in the widest possible sense, the sense
in which the word is used by Bradley.

[3] Where the branch of experience in question is essential to all
experience, the resulting apriority may be regarded as absolute;
where it is necessary only to some special science, as relative to
that science.

[4] I have given no account of these empirical proofs, as they seem
to be constituted by the whole body of physical science. Everything
in physical science, from the law of gravitation to the building of
bridges, from the spectroscope to the art of navigation, would be
profoundly modified by any considerable inaccuracy in the hypothesis
that our actual space is Euclidean. The observed truth of physical
science, therefore, constitutes overwhelming empirical evidence that
this hypothesis is very approximately correct, even if not rigidly
true.




CHAPTER I.

A SHORT HISTORY OF METAGEOMETRY.


=10.= When a long established system is attacked, it usually happens
that the attack begins only at a single point, where the weakness of
the established doctrine is peculiarly evident. But criticism, when
once invited, is apt to extend much further than the most daring, at
first, would have wished.

      "First cut the liquefaction, what comes last,
      But Fichte's clever cut at God himself?"

So it has been with Geometry. The liquefaction of Euclidean orthodoxy
is the axiom of parallels, and it was by the refusal to admit this
axiom without proof that Metageometry began. The first effort in
this direction, that of Legendre[5], was inspired by the hope of
deducing this axiom from the others--a hope which, as we now know,
was doomed to inevitable failure. Parallels are defined by Legendre
as lines in the same plane, such that, if a third line cut them, it
makes the sum of the interior and opposite angles equal to two right
angles. He proves without difficulty that such lines would not meet,
but is unable to prove that non-parallel lines in a plane must meet.
Similarly he can prove that the sum of the angles of a triangle
cannot exceed two right angles, and that if any one triangle has a
sum equal to two right angles, all triangles have the same sum; but
he is unable to prove the existence of this one triangle.

=11.= Thus Legendre's attempt broke down; but mere failure could
prove nothing. A bolder method, suggested by Gauss, was carried out
by Lobatchewsky and Bolyai[6]. If the axiom of parallels is logically
deducible from the others, we shall, by denying it and maintaining
the rest, be led to contradictions. These three mathematicians,
accordingly, attacked the problem indirectly: they denied the axiom
of parallels, and yet obtained a logically consistent Geometry. They
inferred that the axiom was logically independent of the others, and
essential to the Euclidean system. Their works, being all inspired by
this motive, may be distinguished as forming the first period in the
development of Metageometry.

The second period, inaugurated by Riemann, had a much deeper import:
it was largely philosophical in its aims and constructive in its
methods. It aimed at no less than a logical analysis of all the
essential axioms of Geometry, and regarded space as a particular
case of the more general conception of a _manifold_. Taking its
stand on the methods of analytical metrical Geometry, it established
two non-Euclidean systems, the first that of Lobatchewsky, the
second--in which the axiom of the straight line, in Euclid's form,
was also denied--a new variety, by analogy called spherical. The
leading conception in this period is the _measure of curvature_, a
term invented by Gauss, but applied by him only to surfaces. Gauss
had shown that free mobility on surfaces was only possible when the
measure of curvature was constant; Riemann and Helmholtz extended
this proposition to _n_ dimensions, and made it the fundamental
property of space.

In the third period, which begins with Cayley, the philosophical
motive, which had moved the first pioneers, is less apparent, and
is replaced by a more technical and mathematical spirit. This
period is chiefly distinguished from the second, in a mathematical
point of view, by its method, which is projective instead of
metrical. The leading mathematical conception here is the Absolute
(_Grundgebild_), a figure by relation to which all metrical
properties become projective. Cayley's work, which was very brief,
and attracted little attention, has been perfected and elaborated by
F. Klein, and through him has found general acceptance. Klein has
added to the two kinds of non-Euclidean Geometry already known, a
third, which he calls elliptic; this third kind closely resembles
Helmholtz's spherical Geometry, but is distinguished by the important
difference that, in it, two straight lines meet in only one point[7].
The distinctive mark of the spaces represented by both is that,
like the surface of a sphere, they are finite but unbounded. The
reduction of metrical to projective properties, as will be proved
hereafter, has only a technical importance; at the same time,
projective Geometry is able to deal directly with those purely
descriptive or qualitative properties of space which are common to
Euclid and Metageometry alike. The third period has, therefore, great
philosophical importance, while its method has, mathematically, much
greater beauty and unity than that of the second; it is able to
treat all kinds of space at once, so that every symbolic proposition
is, according to the meaning given to the symbols, a proposition
in whichever Geometry we choose. This has the advantage of proving
that further research cannot lead to contradictions in non-Euclidean
systems, unless it at the same moment reveals contradictions in
Euclid. These systems, therefore, are logically as sound as that of
Euclid himself.

After this brief sketch of the characteristics of the three periods,
I will proceed to a more detailed account. It will be my aim to
avoid, as far as possible, all technical mathematics, and bring
into relief only those fundamental points in the mathematical
development, which seem of logical or philosophical importance.


First Period.

=12.= The originator of the whole system, _Gauss_, does not appear,
as regards strictly non-Euclidean Geometry, in any of his hitherto
published papers, to have given more than results; his proofs remain
unknown to us. Nevertheless he was the first to investigate the
consequences of denying the axiom of parallels[8], and in his letters
he communicated these consequences to some of his friends, among whom
was Wolfgang Bolyai. The first mention of the subject in his letters
occurs when he was only 18; four years later, in 1799, writing to
W. Bolyai, he enunciates the important theorem that, in hyperbolic
Geometry, there is a maximum to the area of a triangle. From later
writings it appears that he had worked out a system nearly, if not
quite, as complete as those of Lobatchewsky and Bolyai[9].

It is important to remember, however, that Gauss's work on curvature,
which _was_ published, laid the foundation for the whole method of
the second period, and was undertaken, according to Riemann and
Helmholtz[10], with a view to an (unpublished) investigation of the
foundations of Geometry. His work in this direction will, owing to
its method, be better treated of under the second period, but it is
interesting to observe that he stood, like many pioneers, at the head
of two tendencies which afterwards diverged.

=13.= _Lobatchewsky_, a professor in the University of Kasan, first
published his results, in their native Russian, in the proceedings
of that learned body for the years 1829-1830. Owing to this double
obscurity of language and place, they attracted little attention,
until he translated them into French[11] and German[12]: even then,
they do not appear to have obtained the notice they deserved, until,
in 1868, Beltrami unearthed the article in Crelle, and made it the
theme of a brilliant interpretation.

In the introduction to his little German book, Lobatchewsky laments
the slight interest shown in his writings by his compatriots, and the
inattention of mathematicians, since Legendre's abortive attempt, to
the difficulties in the theory of parallels. The body of the work
begins with the enunciation of several important propositions which
hold good in the system proposed as well as in Euclid: of these, some
are in any case independent of the axiom of parallels, while others
are rendered so by substituting, for the word "parallel," the phrase
"not intersecting, however far produced." Then follows a definition,
intentionally framed so as to contradict Euclid's: With respect to
a given straight line, all others in the same plane may be divided
into two classes, those which cut the given straight line, and those
which do not cut it; a line which is the limit between the two
classes is called _parallel_ to the given straight line. It follows
that, from any external point, two parallels can be drawn, one in
each direction. From this starting-point, by the Euclidean synthetic
method, a series of propositions are deduced; the most important of
these is, that in a triangle the sum of the angles is always less
than, or always equal to two right angles, while in the latter case
the whole system becomes orthodox. A certain analogy with spherical
Geometry--whose meaning and extent will appear later--is also proved,
consisting roughly in the substitution of hyperbolic for circular
functions.

=14.= Very similar is the system of _Johann Bolyai_, so similar,
indeed, as to make the independence of the two works, though a
well-authenticated fact, seem all but incredible. Johann Bolyai
first published his results in 1832, in an appendix to a work by his
father Wolfgang, entitled; "Appendix, scientiam spatii absolute veram
exhibens: a veritate aut falsitate Axiomatis XI. Euclidei (a priori
haud unquam decidenda) independentem; adjecta ad casum falsitatis,
quadratura circuli geometrica." Gauss, whose bosom friend he became
at college and remained through life, was, as we have seen, the
inspirer of Wolfgang Bolyai, and used to say that the latter was the
only man who appreciated his philosophical speculations on the axioms
of Geometry; nevertheless, Wolfgang appears to have left to his son
Johann the detailed working out of the hyperbolic system. The works
of both the Bolyai are very rare, and their method and results are
known to me only through the renderings of Frischauf and Halsted[13].
Both as to method and as to results, the system is very similar to
Lobatchewsky's, so that neither need detain us here. Only the initial
postulates, which are more explicit than Lobatchewsky's, demand a
brief attention. Frischauf's introduction, which has a philosophical
and Newtonian air, begins by setting forth that Geometry deals with
absolute (empty) space, obtained by abstracting from the bodies in
it, that two figures are called congruent when they differ only in
position, and that the axiom of Congruence is indispensable in all
determination of spatial magnitudes. Congruence was to refer to
geometrical bodies, with none of the properties of ordinary bodies
except impenetrability (Erdmann, Axiome der Geometrie, p. 26). A
straight line is defined as determined by two of its points[14],
and a plane as determined by three. These premisses, with a slight
exception as to the straight line, we shall hereafter find essential
to every Geometry. I have drawn attention to them, as it is often
supposed that non-Euclideans deny the axiom of Congruence, which,
here and elsewhere, is never the case. The stress laid on this axiom
by Bolyai is probably due to the influence of Gauss, whose work on
the curvature of surfaces laid the foundation for the use made of
congruence by Helmholtz.

=15.= It is important to remember that, throughout the period we have
just reviewed, the purpose of hyperbolic Geometry is indirect: not
the truth of the latter, but the logical independence of the axiom
of parallels from the rest, is the guiding motive of the work. If,
by denying the axiom of parallels while retaining the rest, we can
obtain a system free from logical contradictions, it follows that
the axiom of parallels cannot be implicitly contained in the others.
If this be so, attempts to dispense with the axiom, like Legendre's,
cannot be successful; Euclid must stand or fall with the suspected
axiom. Of course, it remained possible that, by further development,
latent contradictions might have been revealed in these systems. This
possibility, however, was removed by the more direct and constructive
work of the second period, to which we must now turn our attention.


Second Period.

=16.= The work of Lobatchewsky and Bolyai remained, for nearly a
quarter of a century, without issue--indeed, the investigations
of Riemann and Helmholtz, when they came, appear to have been
inspired, not by these men, but rather by Gauss[15] and Herbart. We
find, accordingly, very great difference, both of aim and method,
between the first period and the second. The former, beginning
with a criticism of one point in Euclid's system, preserved his
synthetic method, while it threw over one of his axioms. The latter,
on the contrary, being guided by a philosophical rather than a
mathematical spirit, endeavoured to classify the conception of
space as a species of a more general conception: it treated space
algebraically, and the properties it gave to space were expressed
in terms, not of intuition, but of algebra. The aim of Riemann and
Helmholtz was to show, by the exhibition of logically possible
alternatives, the empirical nature of the received axioms. For this
purpose, they conceived space as a particular case of a manifold,
and showed that various relations of magnitude (_Massverhltnisse_)
were mathematically possible in an extended manifold. Their
philosophy, which seems to me not always irreproachable, will be
discussed in Chapter II.; here, while it is important to remember
the philosophical motive of Riemann and Helmholtz, we shall confine
our attention to the mathematical side of their work. In so doing,
while we shall, I fear, somewhat maim the system of their thoughts,
we shall secure a closer unity of subject, and a more compact
account of the purely mathematical development. But there is, in my
opinion, a further reason for separating their philosophy from their
mathematics. While their philosophical purpose was, to prove that all
the axioms of Geometry are empirical, and that a different content of
our experience might have changed them all, the unintended result of
their mathematical work was, if I am not mistaken, to afford material
for an _ priori_ proof of certain axioms. These axioms, though they
believed them to be unnecessary, were always introduced in their
mathematical works, before laying the foundations of non-Euclidean
systems. I shall contend, in Chapter III., that this retention was
logically inevitable, and was not merely due, as they supposed, to a
desire for conformity with experience. If I am right in this, there
is a divergence between Riemann and Helmholtz the philosophers, and
Riemann and Helmholtz the mathematicians. This divergence makes it
the more desirable to trace the mathematical development apart from
the accompanying philosophy.

=17.= _Riemann's_ epoch-making work, "_Ueber die Hypothesen, welche
der Geometrie zu Grande liegen_[16]", was written, and read to a
small circle, in 1854; owing, however, to some changes which he
desired to make in it, it remained unpublished till 1867, when it
was published by his executors. The two fundamental conceptions, on
whose invention rests the historic importance of this dissertation,
are that of a _manifold_, and that of the _measure of curvature_
of a manifold. The former conception serves a mainly philosophical
purpose, and is designed, principally, to exhibit space as an
instance of a more general conception. On this aspect of the
manifold, I shall have much to say in Chapter II.; its mathematical
aspect, which alone concerns us here, is less complicated and less
fruitful of controversy. The latter conception also serves a double
purpose, but its mathematical use is the more prominent. We will
consider these two conceptions successively.

=18.= (1) _Conception of a manifold[17]._ The general purpose of
Riemann's dissertation is, to exhibit the axioms as successive steps
in the classification of the species space. The axioms of Geometry,
like the marks of a scholastic definition, appear as successive
determinations of class-conceptions, ending with Euclidean space.
We have thus, from the analytical point of view, about as logical
and precise a formulation as can be desired--a formulation in which,
from its classificatory character, we seem certain of having nothing
superfluous or redundant, and obtain the axioms explicitly in the
most desirable form, namely as adjectives of the conception of
space. At the same time, it is a pity that Riemann, in accordance
with the metrical bias of his time, regarded space as primarily a
magnitude[18], or assemblage of magnitudes, in which the main problem
consists in assigning quantities to the different elements or points,
without regard to the qualitative nature of the quantities assigned.
Considerable obscurity thus arises as to the whole nature of
magnitude[19]. This view of Geometry underlies the definition of the
manifold, as the general conception of which space forms a special
case. This definition, which is not very clear, may be rendered as
follows.

=19.= Conceptions of magnitude, according to Riemann, are possible
there only, where we have a general conception, capable of various
determinations (_Bestimmungsweisen_). The various determinations of
such a conception together form a _manifold_, which is continuous
or discrete, according as the passage from one determination to
another is continuous or discrete. Particular bits of a manifold, or
quanta, can be compared by counting when discrete, and by measurement
when continuous. "Measurement consists in a superposition of the
magnitudes to be compared. If this be absent, magnitudes can only be
compared when one is part of another, and then only the more or less,
not the how much, can be decided" (p. 256). We thus reach the general
conception of a manifold of several dimensions, of which space and
colours are mentioned as special cases.

To the absence of this conception Riemann attributes the "obscurity"
which, on the subject of the axioms, "lasted from Euclid to
Legendre" (p. 254). And Riemann certainly has succeeded, from an
algebraic point of view, in exhibiting, far more clearly than any
of his predecessors, the axioms which distinguish spatial quantity
from other quantities with which mathematics is conversant. But
by the assumption, from the start, that space can be regarded as
a quantity, he has been led to state the problem as: What sort of
magnitude is space? rather than: What must space be in order that
we may be able to regard it as a magnitude at all? He does not
realise, either--indeed in his day there were few who realized--that
an elaborate Geometry is possible which does not deal with space
as a quantity at all. His definition of space as a species of
manifold, therefore, though for analytical purposes it defines, most
satisfactorily, the nature of spatial magnitudes, leaves obscure the
true ground for this nature, which lies in the nature of space as a
system of relations, and is anterior to the possibility of regarding
it as a system of magnitudes at all.

But to proceed with the mathematical development of Riemann's
ideas. We have seen that he declared measurement to consist in
a superposition of the magnitudes to be compared. But in order
that this may be a possible means of determining magnitudes, he
continues, these magnitudes must be independent of their position
in the manifold (p. 259). This can occur, he says, in several ways,
as the simplest of which, he assumes that the lengths of lines are
independent of their position. One would be glad to know what other
ways are possible: for my part, I am unable to imagine any other
hypothesis on which magnitude would be independent of place. Setting
this aside, however, the problem, owing to the fact that measurement
consists in superposition, becomes identical with the determination
of the most general manifold in which magnitudes are independent of
place. This brings us to Riemann's other fundamental conception,
which seems to me even more fruitful than that of a manifold.

=20.= (2) _Measure of curvature._ This conception is due to Gauss,
but was applied by him only to surfaces; the novelty in Riemann's
dissertation was its extension to a manifold of _n_ dimensions.
This extension, however, is rather briefly and obscurely expressed,
and has been further obscured by Helmholtz's attempts at popular
exposition. The term _curvature_, also, is misleading, so that
the phrase has been the source of more misunderstanding, even
among mathematicians, than any other in Pangeometry. It is often
forgotten, in spite of Helmholtz's explicit statement[20], that the
"measure of curvature" of an _n_-dimensional manifold is a purely
analytical expression, which has only a symbolic affinity to ordinary
curvature. As applied to three-dimensional space, the implication
of a four-dimensional "plane" space is wholly misleading; I shall,
therefore, generally use the term space-constant instead[21].
Nevertheless, as the conception grew, historically, out of that of
curvature, I will give a very brief exposition of the historical
development of theories of curvature.

Just as the notion of _length_ was originally derived from the
straight line, and extended to other curves by dividing them into
infinitesimal straight lines, so the notion of _curvature_ was
derived from the circle, and extended to other curves by dividing
them into infinitesimal circular arcs. Curvature may be regarded,
originally, as a measure of the amount by which a curve departs from
a straight line; in a circle, which is similar throughout, this
amount is evidently constant, and is measured by the reciprocal
of the radius. But in all other curves, the amount of curvature
varies from point to point, so that it cannot be measured without
infinitesimals. The measure which at once suggests itself is, the
curvature of the circle most nearly coinciding with the curve at the
point considered. Since a circle is determined by three points, this
circle will pass through three consecutive points of the curve. We
have thus defined the curvature of any curve, plane or tortuous; for,
since any three points lie in a plane, such a circle can always be
described.

If we now pass to a surface, what we want is, by analogy, a measure
of its departure from a plane. The curvature, as above defined, has
become indeterminate, for through any point of the surface we can
draw an infinite number of arcs, which will not, in general, all
have the same curvature. Let us, then, draw all the geodesics joining
the point in question to neighbouring points of the surface in all
directions. Since these arcs form a singly infinite manifold, there
will be among them, if they have not all the same curvature, one arc
of maximum, and one of minimum curvature[22]. The product of these
maximum and minimum curvatures is called the _measure of curvature_
of the surface at the point under consideration. To illustrate by a
few simple examples: on a sphere, the curvatures of all such lines
are equal to the reciprocal of the radius of the sphere, hence the
measure of curvature everywhere is the square of the reciprocal
of the radius of the sphere. On any surface, such as a cone or
a cylinder, on which straight lines can be drawn, these have no
curvature, so that the measure of curvature is everywhere zero--this
is the case, in particular, with the plane. In general, however, the
measure of curvature of a surface varies from point to point.

Gauss, the inventor of this conception[23], proved that, in order
that two surfaces may be developable upon each other--_i.e._ may
be such that one can be bent into the shape of the other without
stretching or tearing--it is necessary that the two surfaces should
have equal measures of curvature at corresponding points. When
this is the case, every figure which is possible on the one is, in
general, possible on the other, and the two have practically the same
Geometry[24]. As a corollary, it follows that a necessary condition,
for the free mobility of figures on any surface, is the constancy
of the measure of curvature[25]. This condition was proved to be
sufficient, as well as necessary, by Minding[26].

=21.= So far, all has been plain sailing--we have been dealing with
purely geometrical ideas in a purely geometrical manner--but we have
not, as yet, found any sense of the measure of curvature, in which it
can be extended to space, still less to an _n_-dimensional manifold.
For this purpose, we must examine Gauss's method, which enables us to
determine the measure of curvature of a surface at any point as an
inherent property, quite independent of any reference to the third
dimension.

The method of determining the measure of curvature from within is,
briefly, as follows: If any point on the surface be determined by two
coordinates, _u_, _v_, then small arcs of the surface are given by
the formula

    ds^{2} = Edu^{2} + 2Fdu dv + Gdv^{2},

where _E_, _F_, _G_ are, in general, functions of _u_, _v_.[27]
From this formula alone, without reference to any space outside the
surface, we can determine the measure of curvature at the point _u_,
_v_, as a function of _E_, _F_, _G_ and their differentials with
respect to _u_ and _v_. Thus we may regard the measure of curvature
of a surface as an inherent property, and the above geometrical
definition, which involved a reference to the third dimension, may
be dropped. But at this point a caution is necessary. It will appear
in Chap. III. ( 176), that it is logically impossible to set up a
precise coordinate system, in which the coordinates represent spatial
magnitudes, without the axiom of Free Mobility, and this axiom, as we
have just seen, holds on surfaces only when the measure of curvature
is constant. Hence our definition of the measure of curvature will
only be _really_ free from reference to the third dimension, when we
are dealing with a surface of constant measure of curvature--a point
which Riemann entirely overlooks. This caution, however, applies
only in space, and if we take the coordinate system as presupposed
in the conception of a manifold, we may neglect the caution
altogether--while remembering that the possibility of a coordinate
system in space involves axioms to be investigated later. We can thus
see how a meaning might be found, without reference to any higher
dimension, for a constant measure of curvature of three-dimensional
space, or for any measure of curvature of an _n_-dimensional manifold
in general.

=22.= Such a meaning is supplied by Riemann's dissertation, to which,
after this long digression, we can now return. We may define a
continuous manifold as any continuum of elements, such that a single
element is defined by _n_ continuously variable magnitudes. This
definition does not really include space, for coordinates in space do
not define a point, but its relations to the origin, which is itself
arbitrary. It includes, however, the analytical conception of space
with which Riemann deals, and may, therefore, be allowed to stand for
the moment. Riemann then assumes that the difference--or distance,
as it may be loosely called--between any two elements is comparable,
as regards magnitude, to the difference between any other two. He
assumes further, what it is Helmholtz's merit to have proved, that
the difference _ds_ between two consecutive elements can be expressed
as the square root of a quadratic function of the differences of the
coordinates: _i.e._

    ds^{2} = {1}^{n} {1}^{n} a{ik} dx{i}.dx{k},

where the coefficients _a{ik}_ are, in general, functions of the
coordinates _x{1} x{2} ... x{n}_.[28] The question is: How are
we to obtain a definition of the measure of curvature out of this
formula? It is noticeable, in the first place, that, just as in a
surface we found an infinite number of _radii_ of curvature at a
point, so in a manifold of three or more dimensions we must find an
infinite number of _measures_ of curvature at a point, one for every
two-dimensional manifold passing through the point, and contained
in the higher manifold. What we have first to do, therefore, is to
define such two-dimensional manifolds. They must consist, as we saw
on the surface, of a singly infinite series of geodesics through the
point. Now a geodesic is completely determined by one point and its
direction at that point, or by one point and the next consecutive
point. Hence a geodesic through the point considered is determined
by the ratios of the increments of coordinates, _dx{1} dx{2} ...
dx{n}_. Suppose we have two such geodesics, in which the _i_th
increments are respectively _dx{i}_ and _dx{i}_. Then all the
geodesics given by

    dx{i} = dx{i} + dx{i}

[Illustration]

form a singly infinite series, since they contain one parameter,
namely : . Such a series of geodesics, therefore, must form a
two-dimensional manifold, with a measure of curvature in the ordinary
Gaussian sense. This measure of curvature can be determined from
the above formula for the elementary arc, by the help of Gauss's
general formula alluded to above. We thus obtain an infinite number
of measures of curvature at a point, but from n.(n - 1)/2 of these,
the rest can be deduced (Riemann, Gesammelte Werke, p. 262). When all
the measures of curvature at a point are constant, and equal to all
the measures of curvature at any other point, we get what Riemann
calls a manifold of constant curvature. In such a manifold free
mobility is possible, and positions do not differ intrinsically from
one another. If _a_ be the measure of curvature, the formula for the
arc becomes, in this case,

    ds^{2} = dx^{2}/(1 + a/4 x^{2})^{2}.

In this case only, as I pointed out above, can the term "measure of
curvature" be properly applied to space without reference to a higher
dimension, since free mobility is logically indispensable to the
existence of quantitative or metrical Geometry.

=23.= The mathematical result of Riemann's dissertation may be summed
up as follows. Assuming it possible to apply magnitude to space,
_i.e._ to determine its elements and figures by means of algebraical
quantities, it follows that space can be brought under the conception
of a manifold, as a system of quantitatively determinable elements.
Owing, however, to the peculiar nature of spatial measurement, the
quantitative determination of space demands that magnitudes shall
be independent of place--in so far as this is not the case, our
measurement will be necessarily inaccurate. If we now assume, as
the quantitative relation of distance between two elements, the
square root of a quadratic function of the coordinates--a formula
subsequently proved by Helmholtz and Lie--then it follows, since
magnitudes are to be independent of place, that space must, within
the limits of observation, have a constant measure of curvature,
or must, in other words, be homogeneous in all its parts. In the
infinitesimal, Riemann says (p. 267), observation could not detect
a departure from constancy on the part of the measure of curvature;
but he makes no attempt to show how Geometry could remain possible
under such circumstances, and the only Geometry he has constructed
is based entirely on Free Mobility. I shall endeavour to prove, in
Chapter III., that any metrical Geometry, which should endeavour to
dispense with this axiom, would be logically impossible. At present
I will only point out that Riemann, in spite of his desire to prove
that all the axioms can be dispensed with, has nevertheless, in his
mathematical work, retained three fundamental axioms, namely, Free
Mobility, the finite integral number of dimensions, and the axiom
that two points have a unique relation, namely distance. These, as we
shall see hereafter, are retained, in actual mathematical work, by
all metrical Metageometers, even when they believe, like Riemann and
Helmholtz, that no axioms are philosophically indispensable.

=24.= _Helmholtz_, the historically nearest follower of Riemann, was
guided by a similar empirical philosophy, and arrived independently
at a very similar method of formulating the axioms. Although
Helmholtz published nothing on the subject until after Riemann's
death, he had then only just seen Riemann's dissertation (which was
published posthumously), and had worked out his results, so far as
they were then completed, in entire independence both of Riemann
and of Lobatchewsky. Helmholtz is by far the most widely read of all
writers on Metageometry, and his writings, almost alone, represent
to philosophers the modern mathematical standpoint on this subject.
But his importance is much greater, in this domain, as a philosopher
than as a mathematician; almost his only original mathematical
result, as regards Geometry, is his proof of Riemann's formula for
the infinitesimal arc, and even this proof was far from rigid, until
Lie reformed it by his method of continuous groups. In this chapter,
therefore, only two of his writings need occupy us, namely the two
articles in the _Wissenschaftliche Abhandlungen_, Vol. II., entitled
respectively "Ueber die thatschlichen Grundlagen der Geometrie,"
1866 (p. 610 ff.), and "Ueber die Thatsachen, die der Geometrie zum
Grunde liegen," 1868 (p. 618 ff.).

=25.= In the first of these, which is chiefly philosophical,
Helmholtz gives hints of his then uncompleted mathematical work,
but in the main contents himself with a statement of results. He
announces that he will prove Riemann's quadratic formula for the
infinitesimal arc; but for this purpose, he says, we have to _start_
with Congruence, since without it spatial measurement is impossible.
Nevertheless, he maintains that Congruence is proved by experience.
How we could, without the help of measurement, discover lapses
from Congruence, is a point which he leaves undiscussed. He then
enunciates the four axioms which he considers essential to Geometry,
as follows:

(1) _As regards continuity and dimensions._ In a space of _n_
dimensions, a point is uniquely determined by the measurement of _n_
continuous variables (coordinates).

(2) _As regards the existence of moveable rigid bodies._ Between the
2_n_ coordinates of any point-pair of a rigid body, there exists
an equation which is the same for all congruent point-pairs. By
considering a sufficient number of point-pairs, we get more equations
than unknown quantities: this gives us a method of determining the
form of these equations, so as to make it possible for them all to be
satisfied.

(3) _As regards free mobility._ Every point can pass freely and
continuously from one position to another. From (2) and (3) it
follows, that if two systems _A_ and _B_ can be brought into
congruence in any one position, this is also possible in every other
position.

(4) _As regards independence of rotation in rigid bodies_
(Monodromy). If (_n_ - 1) points of a body remain fixed, so that every
other point can only describe a certain curve, then that curve is
closed.

These axioms, says Helmholtz, suffice to give, with the axiom of
three dimensions, the Euclidean and non-Euclidean systems as the only
alternatives. That they _suffice_, mathematically, cannot be denied,
but they seem, in some respects, to go too far. In the first place,
there is no necessity to make the axiom of Congruence apply to actual
rigid bodies--on this subject I have enlarged in Chapter II.[29]
Again, Free Mobility, as distinct from Congruence, hardly needs to
be specially formulated: what barrier could empty space offer to a
point's progress? The axiom is involved in the homogeneity of space,
which is the same thing as the axiom of Congruence. Monodromy, also,
has been severely criticized; not only is it evident that it might
have been included in Congruence, but even from the purely analytical
point of view, Sophus Lie has proved it to be superfluous[30]. Thus
the axiom of Congruence, rightly formulated, includes Helmholtz's
third and fourth axioms and part of his second axiom. All the
four, or rather, as much of them as is relevant to Geometry, are
consequences, as we shall see hereafter, of the one fundamental
principle of the relativity of position.

=26.= The second article, which is mainly mathematical, supplies
the promised proof of the arc-formula, which is Helmholtz's most
important contribution to Geometry. Riemann had _assumed_ this
formula, as the simplest of a number of alternatives: Helmholtz
proved it to be a necessary consequence of his axioms. The present
paper begins with a short repetition of the first, including the
statement of the axioms, to which, at the end of the paper, two more
are added, (5) that space has three dimensions, and (6) that space is
infinite. It is supposed in the text, as also in the first paper,
that the measure of curvature cannot be negative, and, consequently,
that an infinite space must be Euclidean. This error in both papers
is corrected in notes, added after the appearance of Beltrami's paper
on negative curvature. It is a sample of the slightly unprofessional
nature of Helmholtz's mathematical work on this subject, which
elicits from Klein the following remarks[31]: "Helmholtz is not a
mathematician by profession, but a physicist and physiologist....
From this non-mathematical quality of Helmholtz, it follows naturally
that he does not treat the mathematical portion of his work with the
thoroughness which one would demand of a mathematician by trade (_von
Fach_)." He tells us himself that it was the physiological study of
vision which led him to the question of the axioms, and it is as a
physicist that he makes his axioms refer to actual rigid bodies.
Accordingly, we find errors in his mathematics, such as the axiom
of Monodromy, and the assumption that the measure of curvature must
be positive. Nevertheless, the proof of Riemann's arc-formula is
extremely able, and has, on the whole, been substantiated by Lie's
more thorough investigations.

=27.= Helmholtz's other writings on Geometry are almost wholly
philosophical, and will be discussed at length in Chapter II. For the
present, we may pass to the only other important writer of the second
period, _Beltrami_. As his work is purely mathematical, and contains
few controverted points, it need not, despite its great importance,
detain us long.

The "Saggio di Interpretazione della Geometria non-Euclidea[32],"
which is principally confined to two dimensions, interprets
Lobatchewsky's results by the characteristic method of the second
period. It shows, by a development of the work of Gauss and
Minding[33], that all the propositions in plane Geometry, which
Lobatchewsky had set forth, hold, within ordinary Euclidean space,
on surfaces of constant negative curvature. It is strange, as Klein
points out[34], that this interpretation, which was known to Riemann
and perhaps even to Gauss, should have remained so long without
explicit statement. This is the more strange, as Lobatchewsky's
"Gomtrie Imaginaire" had appeared in Crelle, Vol. XVII.[35],
and Minding's article, from which the interpretation follows at
once, had appeared in Crelle, Vol. XIX. Minding had shewn that the
Geometry of surfaces of constant negative curvature, in particular
as regards geodesic triangles, could be deduced from that of the
sphere by giving the radius a purely imaginary value _ia_[36]. This
result, as we have seen, had also been obtained by Lobatchewsky for
his Geometry, and yet it took thirty years for the connection to be
brought to general notice.

=28.= In Beltrami's Saggio, straight lines are, of course, replaced
by geodesics; his coordinates are obtained through a point-by-point
correspondence with an auxiliary plane, in which straight lines
correspond to geodesics on the surface. Thus geodesics have linear
equations, and are always uniquely determined by two points.
Distances on the surface, however, are not equal to distances on
the plane; thus while the surface is infinite, the corresponding
portion of the plane is contained within a certain finite circle.
The distance of two points on the surface is a certain function of
the coordinates, not the ordinary function of elementary Geometry.
These relations of plane and surface are important in connection with
Cayley's theory of distance, which we shall have to consider next.
If we were to define distance on the plane as that function of the
coordinates which gives the corresponding distance on the surface, we
should obtain what Klein calls "a plane with a hyperbolic system of
measurement (_Massbestimmung_)" in which Cayley's theory of distance
would hold. It is evident, however, that the ordinary notion of
distance has been presupposed in setting up the coordinate system, so
that we do not really get alternative Geometries on one and the same
plane. The bearing of these remarks will appear more fully when we
come to consider Cayley and Klein.

=29.= The value of Beltrami's Saggio, in his own eyes, lies in
the intelligible Euclidean sense which it gives to Lobatchewsky's
planimetry: the corresponding system of Solid Geometry, since it has
no meaning for Euclidean space, is barely mentioned in this work.
In a second paper[37], however, almost contemporaneous with the
first, he proceeds to consider the general theory of _n_-dimensional
manifolds of constant negative curvature. This paper is greatly
influenced by Riemann's dissertation; it begins with the formula
for the linear element, and proves from this first, that Congruence
holds for such spaces, and next, that they have, according to
Riemann's definition, a constant negative measure of curvature. (It
is instructive to observe, that both in this and in the former Essay,
great stress is laid on the necessity of the Axiom of Congruence.)

This work has less philosophical interest than the former, since it
does little more than repeat, in a general form, the results which
the Saggio had obtained for two dimensions--results which sink,
when extended to _n_ dimensions, to the level of mere mathematical
constructions. Nevertheless, the paper is important, both as a
restoration of negative curvature, which had been overlooked
by Helmholtz, and as an analytical treatment of Lobatchewsky's
results--a treatment which, together with the Saggio, at last
restored to them the prominence they deserved.


Third Period.

=30.= The third period differs radically, alike in its methods and
aims, and in the underlying philosophical ideas, from the period
which it replaced. Whereas everything, in the second period, turned
on measurement, with its apparatus of Congruence, Free Mobility,
Rigid Bodies, and the rest, these vanish completely in the third
period, which, swinging to the opposite extreme, regards quantity
as a perfectly irrelevant category in Geometry, and dispenses with
congruence and the method of superposition. The ideas of this period,
unfortunately, have found no exponent so philosophical as Riemann or
Helmholtz, but have been set forth only by technical mathematicians.
Moreover the change of fundamental ideas, which is immense, has
not brought about an equally great change in actual procedure; for
though spatial quantity is no longer a part of projective Geometry,
quantity is still employed, and we still have equations, algebraic
transformations, and so on. This is apt to give rise to confusion,
especially in the mind of the student, who fails to realise that the
quantities used, so far as the propositions are really projective,
are mere names for points, and not, as in metrical Geometry, actual
spatial magnitudes.

Nevertheless, the fundamental difference between this period
and the former must strike any one at once. Whereas Riemann
and Helmholtz dealt with metrical ideas, and took, as their
foundations, the measure of curvature and the formula for the linear
element--both purely metrical--the new method is erected on the
formulae for transformation of coordinates required to express a
given collineation. It begins by reducing all so-called metrical
notions--distance, angle, etc.--to projective forms, and obtains,
from this reduction, a methodological unity and simplicity before
impossible. This reduction depends, however, except where the
space-constant is negative, upon imaginary figures--in Euclid, the
circular points at infinity; it is moreover purely symbolic and
analytical, and must be regarded as philosophically irrelevant.
As the question concerning the import of this reduction is of
fundamental importance to our theory of Geometry, and as Cayley, in
his Presidential Address to the British Association in 1883, formally
challenged philosophers to discuss the use of imaginaries, on which
it depends, I will treat this question at some length. But first let
us see how, as a matter of mathematics, the reduction is effected.

=31.= We shall find, throughout this period, that almost
every important proposition, though misleading in its obvious
interpretation, has nevertheless, when rightly interpreted, a wide
philosophical bearing. So it is with the work of _Cayley_, the
pioneer of the projective method.

The projective formula for angles, in Euclidean Geometry, was first
obtained by Laguerre, in 1853. This formula had, however, a perfectly
Euclidean character, and it was left for Cayley to generalize
it so as to include both angles and distances in Euclidean and
non-Euclidean systems alike[38].

_Cayley_ was, to the last, a staunch supporter of Euclidean
_space_, though he believed that non-Euclidean _Geometries_ could
be applied, within Euclidean space, by a change in the definition
of distance[39]. He has thus, in spite of his Euclidean orthodoxy,
provided the believers in the possibility of non-Euclidean spaces
with one of their most powerful weapons. In his "Sixth Memoir upon
Quantics" (1859), he set himself the task of "establishing the notion
of distance upon purely descriptive principles." He showed that, with
the ordinary notion of distance, it can be rendered projective by
reference to the circular points and the line at infinity, and that
the same is true of angles[40]. Not content with this, he suggested
a new definition of distance, as the inverse sine or cosine of a
certain function of the coordinates; with this definition, the
properties usually known as metrical become projective properties,
having reference to a certain conic, called by Cayley the Absolute.
(The circular points are, analytically, a degenerate conic, so that
ordinary Geometry forms a particular case of the above.) He proves
that, when the Absolute is an _imaginary_ conic, the Geometry so
obtained for two dimensions is spherical Geometry. The correspondence
with Lobatchewsky, in the case where the Absolute is _real_, is not
worked out: indeed there is, throughout, no evidence of acquaintance
with non-Euclidean systems. The importance of the memoir, to Cayley,
lies entirely in its proof that metrical is only a branch of
descriptive Geometry.

=32.= The connection of Cayley's Theory of Distance with Metageometry
was first pointed out by Klein[41]. Klein showed in detail that, if
the Absolute be real, we get Lobatchewsky's (hyperbolic) system; if
it be imaginary, we get either spherical Geometry or a new system,
analogous to that of Helmholtz, called by Klein elliptic; if the
Absolute be an imaginary point-pair, we get parabolic Geometry, and
if, in particular, the point-pair be the circular points, we get
ordinary Euclid. In elliptic Geometry, two straight lines in the same
plane meet in only one point, not two as in Helmholtz's system. The
distinction between the two kinds of Geometry is difficult, and will
be discussed later.

=33.= Since these systems are all obtained from a Euclidean plane,
by a mere alteration in the definition of distance, Cayley and
Klein tend to regard the whole question as one, not of the nature
of space, but of the definition of distance. Since this definition,
on their view, is perfectly arbitrary, the philosophical problem
vanishes--Euclidean _space_ is left in undisputed possession, and
the only problem remaining is one of convention and mathematical
convenience[42]. This view has been forcibly expressed by Poincar:
"What ought one to think," he says, "of this question: Is the
Euclidean Geometry true? The question is nonsense." Geometrical
axioms, according to him, are mere conventions: they are "definitions
in disguise[43]." Thus Klein blames Beltrami for regarding his
auxiliary plane as merely auxiliary, and remarks that, if he had
known Cayley's Memoir, he would have seen the relation between
the plane and the pseudosphere to be far more intimate than he
supposed[44]. A view which removes the problem entirely from the
arena of philosophy demands, plainly, a full discussion. To this
discussion we will now proceed.

=34.= The view in question has arisen, it would seem, from a natural
confusion as to the nature of the coordinates employed. Those who
hold the view have not adequately realised, I believe, that their
coordinates are not _spatial_ quantities, as in metrical Geometry,
but mere conventional signs, by which different points can be
distinctly designated. There is no reason, therefore, until we
already have metrical Geometry, for regarding one function of the
coordinates as a better expression of distance than another, so
long as the fundamental addition-equation[45] is preserved. Hence,
if our coordinates are regarded as adequate for all Geometry, an
indeterminateness arises in the expression of distance, which can
only be avoided by a convention. But projective coordinates--so our
argument will contend--though perfectly adequate for all projective
properties, and entirely free from any metrical presupposition, are
inadequate to express metrical properties, just because they have
no metrical presupposition. Thus where metrical properties are in
question, Beltrami remains justified as against Klein; the reduction
of metrical to projective properties is only apparent, though
the independence of these last, as against metrical Geometry, is
perfectly real.

=35.= But what are projective coordinates, and how are they
introduced? This question was not touched upon in Cayley's Memoir,
and it seemed, therefore, as if a logical error were involved in
using coordinates to define distance. For coordinates, in all
previous systems, had been deduced from distance; to use any existing
coordinate system in defining distance was, accordingly, to incur
a vicious circle. Cayley mentions this difficulty in a note, where
he only remarks, however, that he had regarded his coordinates
as numbers arbitrarily assigned, on some system not further
investigated, to different points. The difficulty has been treated at
length by Sir R. Ball (Theory of the Content, Trans. R. I. A. 1889),
who urges that if the values of our coordinates already involve the
usual measure of distance, then to give a new definition, while
retaining the usual coordinates, is to incur a contradiction. He
says (op. cit. p. 1): "In the study of non-Euclidean Geometry I have
often felt a difficulty which has, I know, been shared by others. In
that theory it seems as if we try to replace our ordinary notion of
distance between two points by the logarithm of a certain anharmonic
ratio[46]. But this ratio itself involves the notion of distance
measured in the ordinary way. How, then, can we supersede our old
notion of distance by the non-Euclidean notion, inasmuch as the very
definition of the latter involves the former?"

=36.= This objection is valid, we must admit, so long as anharmonic
ratio is defined in the ordinary metrical manner. It would be
valid, for example, against any attempt to found a new definition
of distance on Cremona's account of anharmonic ratio[47], in
which it appears as a metrical property unaltered by projective
transformation. If a logical error is to be avoided, in fact, all
reference to spatial magnitude of any kind must be avoided; for all
spatial magnitude, as will be shown hereafter[48], is logically
dependent on the fundamental magnitude of distance. Anharmonic
ratio and coordinates must alike be defined by purely descriptive
properties, if the use afterwards made of them is to be free from
metrical presuppositions, and therefore from the objections of Sir R.
Ball.

Such a definition has been satisfactorily given by Klein[49],
who appeals, for the purpose, to v. Staudt's quadrilateral
construction[50]. By this construction, which I have reproduced in
outline in Chapter III. Section A,  112 ff., we obtain a purely
descriptive definition of harmonic and anharmonic ratio, and, given
a pair of points, we can obtain the harmonic conjugate to any
third point on the same straight line. On this construction, the
introduction of projective coordinates is based. Starting with any
three points on a straight line, we assign to them arbitrarily the
numbers 0, 1, . We then find the harmonic conjugate to the first
with respect to 1, , and assign to it the number 2. The object of
assigning this number rather than any other, is to obtain the value
-1 for the anharmonic ratio of the four numbers corresponding to the
four points[51]. We then find the harmonic conjugate to the point
1, with respect to 2, , and assign to it the number 3; and so on.
Klein has shown that by this construction, we can obtain any number
of points, and can construct a point corresponding to any given
number, fractional or negative. Moreover, when two sets of four
points have the same anharmonic ratio, descriptively defined[52],
the corresponding numbers also have the same anharmonic ratio. By
introducing such a numerical system on two straight lines, or on
three, we obtain the coordinates of any point in a plane, or in
space. By this construction, which is of fundamental importance
to projective Geometry, the logical error, upon which Sir R. Ball
bases his criticism, is satisfactorily avoided. Our coordinates
are introduced by a purely descriptive method, and involve no
presupposition whatever as to the measurement of distance.

=37.= With this coordinate system, then, to define distance as a
certain function of the coordinates is not to be guilty of a vicious
circle. But it by no means follows that the definition of distance is
arbitrary. All reference to distance has been hitherto excluded, to
avoid metrical ideas; but when distance is introduced, metrical ideas
inevitably reappear, and we have to remember that our coordinates
give no information, _prim facie_, as to any of these metrical
ideas. It is open to us, of course, if we choose, to continue to
exclude distance in the ordinary sense, as the quantity of a finite
straight line, and to define the _word_ distance in any way we
please. But the conception, for which the word has hitherto stood,
will then require a new name, and the only result will be a confusion
between the _apparent_ meaning of our propositions, to those who
retain the associations belonging to the old sense of the word, and
the _real_ meaning, resulting from the new sense in which the word is
used.

This confusion, I believe, has actually occurred, in the case of
those who regard the question between Euclid and Metageometry as
one of the definition of distance. Distance is a quantitative
relation, and as such presupposes identity of quality. But projective
Geometry deals only with quality--for which reason it is called
descriptive--and cannot distinguish between two figures which are
qualitatively alike. Now the meaning of qualitative likeness,
in Geometry, is the possibility of mutual transformation by a
collineation[53]. Any two pairs of points on the same straight line,
therefore, are qualitatively alike; their only qualitative relation
is the straight line, which both pairs have in common; and it is
exactly the qualitative identity of the relations of the two pairs,
which enables the difference of their relations to be exhaustively
dealt with by quantity, as a difference of distance. But where
quantity is excluded, any two pairs of points on the same straight
line appear as alike, and even any two sets of three: for any three
points on a straight line can be projectively transformed into any
other three. It is only with _four_ points in a line that we acquire
a projective property distinguishing them from other sets of four,
and this property is anharmonic ratio, descriptively defined. The
projective Geometer, therefore, sees no reason to give a name to the
relation between two points, in so far as this relation is anything
over and above the unlimited straight line on which they lie; and
when he introduces the notion of distance, he defines it, in the
only way in which projective principles allow him to define it, as a
relation between _four_ points. As he nevertheless wishes the word
to give him the power of distinguishing between different _pairs_
of points, he agrees to take two out of the four points as fixed.
In this way, the only variables in distance are the two remaining
points, and distance appears, therefore, as a function of _two_
variables, namely the coordinates of the two variable points. When we
have further defined our function so that distance may be additive,
we have a function with many of the properties of distance in the
ordinary sense. This function, therefore, the projective Geometer
regards as the only proper definition of distance.

We can see, in fact, from the manner in which our projective
coordinates were introduced, that _some_ function of these
coordinates must express distance in the ordinary sense. For
they were introduced serially, so that, as we proceeded from the
zero-point towards the infinity-point, our coordinates continually
grew. To every point, a definite coordinate corresponded: to the
distance between two variable points, therefore, as a function
dependent on no other variables, must correspond some definite
function of the coordinates, since these are themselves functions of
their points. The function discussed above, therefore, must certainly
include distance in the ordinary sense.

But the arbitrary and conventional nature of distance, as maintained
by Poincar and Klein, arises from the fact that the two fixed
points, required to determine our distance in the projective sense,
may be arbitrarily chosen, and although, when our choice is once
made, any two points have a definite distance, yet, according as we
make that choice, distance will become a different function of the
two variable points. The ambiguity thus introduced is unavoidable on
projective principles; but are we to conclude, from this, that it
is really unavoidable? Must we not rather conclude that projective
Geometry cannot adequately deal with distance? If _A_, _B_, _C_, be
three different points on a line, there must be _some_ difference
between the relation of _A_ to _B_ and of _A_ to _C_, for otherwise,
owing to the qualitative identity of all points, _B_ and _C_ could
not be distinguished. But such a difference involves a relation,
between _A_ and _B_, which is independent of other points on the
line; for unless we have such a relation, the other points cannot
be distinguished as different. Before we can distinguish the two
fixed points, therefore, from which the projective definition
starts, we must already suppose some relation, between any two
points on our line, in which they are independent of other points;
and this relation is distance in the ordinary sense[54]. When we
have measured this quantitative relation by the ordinary methods
of metrical Geometry, we can proceed to decide what base-points
must be chosen, on our line, in order that the projective function
discussed above may have the same value as ordinary distance. But
the choice of these base-points, when we are discussing distance
in the ordinary sense, is not arbitrary, and their introduction is
only a technical device. Distance, in the ordinary sense, remains
a relation between _two_ points, not between _four_; and it is the
failure to perceive that the projective sense differs from, and
cannot supersede, the ordinary sense, which has given rise to the
views of Klein and Poincar. The question is not one of convention,
but of the irreducible metrical properties of space. To sum up:
Quantities, as used in projective Geometry, do not stand for spatial
magnitudes, but are conventional symbols for purely qualitative
spatial relations. But distance, _qu_ quantity, presupposes identity
of quality, as the condition of quantitative comparison. Distance in
the ordinary sense is, in short, that quantitative relation, between
two points on a line, by which their difference from other points
can be defined. The projective definition, however, being unable to
distinguish a collection of less than four points from any other on
the same straight line, makes distance depend on two other points
besides those whose relation it defines. No name remains, therefore,
for distance in the ordinary sense, and many projective Geometers,
having abolished the name, believe the thing to be abolished also,
and are inclined to deny that _two_ points have a unique relation at
all. This confusion, in projective Geometry, shows the importance of
a name, and should make us chary of allowing new meanings to obscure
one of the fundamental properties of space.

=38.= It remains to discuss the manner in which non-Euclidean
Geometries result from the projective definition of distance, as also
the true interpretation to be given to this view of Metageometry. It
is to be observed that the projective methods which follow Cayley
deal throughout with a Euclidean plane, on which they introduce
different measures of distance. Hence arises, in any interpretation
of these methods, an apparent subordination of the non-Euclidean
spaces, as though these were less self-subsistent than Euclid's.
This subordination is not intended in what follows; on the contrary,
the correlation with Euclidean space is regarded as valuable,
first, because Euclidean space has been longer studied and is more
familiar, but secondly, because this correlation proves, when truly
interpreted, that the other spaces are self-subsistent. We may
confine ourselves chiefly, in discussing this interpretation, to
distances measured along a single straight line. But we must be
careful to remember that the metrical definition of distance--which,
according to the view here advocated, is the only adequate
definition--is the same in Euclidean and in non-Euclidean spaces; to
argue in its favour is not, therefore, to argue in favour of Euclid.

The projective scheme of coordinates consists of a series of numbers,
of which each represents a certain anharmonic ratio and denotes one
and only one point, and which increase uniformly with the distance
from a fixed origin, until they become infinite on reaching a certain
point. Now Cayley showed that, in Euclidean Geometry, distance may
be expressed as the limit of the logarithm of the anharmonic ratio
of the two points and the (coincident) points at infinity on their
straight line; while, if we assumed that the points at infinity were
distinct, we obtained the formula for distance in hyperbolic or
spherical Geometry, according as these points were real or imaginary.
Hence it follows that, with the projective definition of distance,
we shall obtain precisely the formulae of hyperbolic, parabolic or
spherical Geometry, according as we choose the point, to which the
value + is assigned, at a finite, infinite or imaginary distance
(in the ordinary sense) from the point to which we assign the value
0. Our straight line remains, all the while, an ordinary Euclidean
straight line. But we have seen that the projective definition of
distance fits with the true definition only when the two fixed
points to which it refers are suitably chosen. Now the ordinary
meaning of distance is required in non-Euclidean as in Euclidean
Geometries--indeed, it is only in metrical properties that these
Geometries differ. Hence our _Euclidean_ straight line, though it
may serve to illustrate other Geometries than Euclid's, can only be
dealt with correctly by Euclid. Where we give a different definition
of distance from Euclid's, we are still in the domain of purely
projective properties, and derive no information as to the metrical
properties of our straight line. But the importance, to Metageometry,
of this new interpretation, lies in the fact that, having
independently established the metrical formulae of non-Euclidean
spaces, we find, as in Beltrami's Saggio, that these spaces can
be related, by a homographic correspondence, with the points of
Euclidean space; and that this can be effected in such a manner as
to give, for the distance between two points of our non-Euclidean
space, the hyperbolic or spherical measure of distance for the
corresponding points of Euclidean space.

=39.= On the whole, then, a modification of Sir R. Ball's view,
which is practically a generalized statement of Beltrami's method,
seems the most tenable. He imagines what, with Grassmann, he calls
a Content, _i.e._ a perfectly general three-dimensional manifold,
and then correlates its elements, one by one, with points in
Euclidean space. Thus every element of the Content acquires, as its
coordinates, the ordinary Euclidean coordinates of the corresponding
point in Euclidean space. By means of this correlation, our
calculations, though they refer to the Content, are carried on, as in
Beltrami's Saggio, in ordinary Euclidean space. Thus the confusion
disappears, but with it, the supposed Euclidean interpretation also
disappears. Sir R. Ball's Content, if it is to be a space at all,
must be a space radically different from Euclid's[55]; to speak, as
Klein does, of ordinary planes with hyperbolic or elliptic measures
of distance, is either to incur a contradiction, or to forego any
metrical meaning of distance. Instead of ordinary planes, we have
surfaces like Beltrami's, of constant measure of curvature; instead
of Euclid's space, we have hyperbolic or spherical space. At the
same time, it remains true that we can, by Klein's method, give a
Euclidean meaning to every symbolic proposition in non-Euclidean
Geometry. For by substituting, for distance, the logarithm above
alluded to, we obtain, from the non-Euclidean result, a result which
follows from the ordinary Euclidean axioms. This correspondence
removes, once for all, the possibility of a lurking contradiction in
Metageometry, since, to a proposition in the one, corresponds one
and only one proposition in the other, and contradictory results in
one system, therefore, would correspond to contradictory results in
the other. Hence Metageometry cannot lead to contradictions, unless
Euclidean Geometry, at the same moment, leads to corresponding
contradictions. Thus the Euclidean plane with hyperbolic or elliptic
measure of distance, though either contradictory or not metrical
as an independent notion, has, as a help in the interpretation of
non-Euclidean results, a very high degree of utility.

=40.= We have still to discuss Klein's third kind of non-Euclidean
Geometry, which he calls elliptic. The difference between this and
spherical Geometry is difficult to grasp, but it may be illustrated
by a simpler example. A plane, as every one knows, can be wrapped,
without stretching, on a cylinder, and straight lines in the plane
become, by this operation, geodesics on the cylinder. The Geometries
of the plane and the cylinder, therefore, have much in common.
But since the generating circle of the cylinder, which is one of
its geodesics, is finite, only a portion of the plane is used up
in wrapping it once round the cylinder. Hence, if we endeavour to
establish a point-to-point correspondence between the plane and the
cylinder, we shall find an infinite series of points on the plane
for a single point on the cylinder. Thus it happens that geodesics,
though on the plane they have only one point in common, may on
the cylinder have an infinite number of intersections. Somewhat
similar to this is the relation between the spherical and elliptic
Geometries. To any one point in elliptic space, two points correspond
in spherical space. Thus geodesics, which in spherical space may have
two points in common, can never, in elliptic space, have more than
one intersection.

But Klein's method can only prove that elliptic Geometry holds of
the ordinary Euclidean plane with elliptic measure of distance.
Klein has made great endeavours to enforce the distinction between
the spherical and elliptic Geometries[56], but it is not immediately
evident that the latter, as distinct from the former, is valid.

In the first place, Klein's elliptic Geometry, which arises as
one of the alternative metrical systems on a Euclidean plane or
in a Euclidean space, does not by itself suffice, if the above
discussion has been correct, to prove the possibility of an elliptic
space, _i.e._ of a space having a point-to-point correspondence
with the Euclidean space, and having as the ordinary distance
between two of its points the elliptic definition of the distance
between corresponding points of the Euclidean space. To prove this
possibility, we must adopt the direct method of Newcomb (Crelle's
Journal, Vol. 83). Now in the first place Newcomb has not proved that
his postulates are self-consistent; he has only failed to prove that
they are contradictory[57]. This would leave elliptic space in the
same position in which Lobatchewsky and Bolyai left hyperbolic space.
But further there seems to be, at first sight, in _two_-dimensional
elliptic space, a positive contradiction. To explain this, however,
some account of the peculiarities of the elliptic plane will be
necessary.

[Illustration]

The elliptic plane, regarded as a figure in three-dimensional
elliptic space, is what is called a double surface[58], _i.e._ as
Newcomb says (_loc. cit._ p. 298): "The two sides of a complete plane
are not distinct, as in a Euclidean surface.... If ... a being should
travel to distance 2_D_, he would, on his return, find himself on
the opposite surface to that on which he started, and would have
to repeat his journey in order to return to his original position
without leaving the surface." Now if we imagine a _two_-dimensional
elliptic space, the distinction between the sides of a plane becomes
unmeaning, since it only acquires significance by reference to the
third dimension. Nevertheless, some such distinction would be forced
upon us. Suppose, for example, that we took a small circle provided
with an arrow, as in the figure, and moved this circle once round the
universe. Then the sense of the arrow would be reversed. We should
thus be forced, either to regard the new position as distinct from
the former, which transforms our plane into a spherical plane, or to
attribute the reversal of the arrow to the action of a motion which
restores our circle to its original place. It is to be observed that
nothing short of moving round the universe would suffice to reverse
the sense of the arrow. This reversal _seems_ like an action of
empty space, which would force us to regard the points which, from a
three-dimensional point of view, are coincident though opposite, as
really distinct, and so reduce the elliptic to the spherical plane.
But motion, not space, really causes the change, and the elliptic
plane is therefore not proved to be impossible. The question is not,
however, of any great philosophic importance.

=41.= In connection with the reduction of metrical to projective
Geometry, we have one more topic for discussion. This is the
geometrical use of imaginaries, by means of which, except in the
case of hyperbolic space, the reduction is effected. I have already
contended, on other grounds, that this reduction, in spite of its
immense technical importance, and in spite of the complete logical
freedom of projective Geometry from metrical ideas, is _purely_
technical, and is not philosophically valid. The same conclusion will
appear, if we take up Cayley's challenge at the British Association,
in his Presidential Address of 1883.

In this address, Professor Cayley devoted most of his time to
non-Euclidean systems. Non-Euclidean _spaces_, he declared, seemed to
him mistaken _ priori_[59]; but non-Euclidean _Geometries_, here as
in his mathematical works, were accepted as flowing from a change in
the definition of distance. This view has been already discussed, and
need not, therefore, be further criticised here. What I wish to speak
about, is the question with which Cayley himself opened his address,
namely, the geometrical use and meaning of imaginary quantities. From
the manner in which he spoke of this question, it becomes imperative
to treat it somewhat at length. For he said (pp. 8-9):

"... The notion which is the really fundamental one (and I cannot
too strongly emphasize the assertion) underlying and pervading the
whole notion of modern analysis and Geometry, [is] that of imaginary
magnitude in analysis, and of imaginary space (or space as the _locus
in quo_ of imaginary points and figures) in Geometry: I use in each
case the word imaginary as including real.... Say even the conclusion
were that the notion belongs to mere technical mathematics, or has
reference to nonentities in regard to which no science is possible,
still it seems to me that (as a subject of philosophical discussion)
the notion ought not to be thus ignored; it should at least be shown
that there is a right to ignore it."

=42.= This right it is now my purpose to demonstrate. But for fear
non-mathematicians should miss the point of Cayley's remark (which
has sometimes been erroneously supposed to refer to non-Euclidean
spaces), I may as well explain, at the outset, that this question
is radically distinct from, and only indirectly connected with, the
validity or import of Metageometry. An imaginary quantity is one
which involves -1: its most general form is _a_ + -1_b_ where _a_
and _b_ are real; Cayley uses the word imaginary so as to include
real, in order to cover the special case where _b_ = 0. It will
be convenient, in what follows, to exclude this wider meaning,
and assume that _b_ is not zero. An imaginary point is one whose
coordinates involve -1, _i.e._ whose coordinates are imaginary
quantities. An imaginary curve is one whose points are imaginary--or,
in some special uses, one whose equation contains imaginary
coefficients. The mathematical subtleties to which this notion leads
need not be here discussed; the reader who is interested in them will
find an excellent elementary account of their geometrical uses in
Klein's Nicht-Euklid, II. pp. 38-46. But for our present purpose, we
may confine ourselves to imaginary points. If these are found to have
a merely technical import, and to be destitute of any philosophical
meaning, then the same will hold of any collection of imaginary
points, _i.e._ of any imaginary curve or surface.

That the notion of imaginary points is of supreme importance in
Geometry, will be seen by any one who reflects that the circular
points are imaginary, and that the reduction of metrical to
projective Geometry, which is one of Cayley's greatest achievements,
depends on these points. But to discuss adequately their
philosophical import is difficult to me, since I am unacquainted with
any satisfactory philosophy of imaginaries in pure Algebra. I will
therefore adopt the most favourable hypothesis, and assume that no
objection can be successfully urged against this use. Even on this
hypothesis, I think, no case can be made out for imaginary points in
Geometry.

In the first place, we must exclude, from the imaginary points
considered, those whose coordinates are only imaginary with certain
special systems of coordinates. For example, if one of a point's
coordinates be the tangent from it to a sphere, this coordinate will
be imaginary for any point inside the sphere, and yet the point is
perfectly real. A point, then, is only to be called imaginary, when,
whatever real system of coordinates we adopt, one or more of the
quantities expressing these coordinates remains imaginary. For this
purpose, it is mathematically sufficient to suppose our coordinates
Cartesian--a point whose Cartesian coordinates are imaginary, is a
true imaginary point in the above sense.

To discuss the meaning of such a point, it is necessary to consider
briefly the fundamental nature of the correspondence between a
point and its coordinates. Assuming that elementary Geometry has
proved--what I think it does satisfactorily prove--that spatial
relations are susceptible of quantitative measurement, then a given
point will have, with a suitable system of coordinates, in a space
of _n_ dimensions, _n_ quantitative relations to the fixed spatial
figure forming the axes of coordinates, and these _n_ quantitative
relations will, under certain reservations, be unique--_i.e._, no
other point will have the same quantities assigned to it. (With many
possible coordinate systems, this latter condition is not realized:
but for that very reason they are inconvenient, and employed only in
special problems.) Thus given a coordinate system, and given any set
of quantities, these quantities, _if they determine a point at all_,
determine it uniquely. But, by a natural extension of the method, the
above reservation is dropped, and it is assumed that to _every_ set
of quantities some point must correspond. For this assumption there
seems to me no vestige of evidence. As well might a postman assume
that, because every house in a street is uniquely determined by its
number, therefore there must be a house for every imaginable number.
We must know, in fact, that a given set of quantities can be the
coordinates of some point in space, before it is legitimate to give
any spatial significance to these quantities: and this knowledge,
obviously, cannot be derived from operations with coordinates alone,
on pain of a vicious circle. We must, to return to the above analogy,
know the number of houses in Piccadilly, before we know whether a
given number has a corresponding house or not; and arithmetic alone,
however subtly employed, will never give us this information.

Thus the distinction which is important is, not the distinction
between real and imaginary quantities, but between quantities to
which points correspond and quantities to which no points correspond.
We can conventionally agree to denote real points by imaginary
coordinates, as in the Gaussian method of denoting by the single
quantity (_a_ + -1_b_) the point whose ordinary coordinates are
_a_, _b_. But this does not touch Cayley's meaning. Cayley means
that it is of great utility in mathematics to regard, as points
with a real existence in space, the assumed spatial correlates of
quantities which, with the coordinate system employed, have no
correlates in every-day space; and that this utility is supposed,
by many mathematicians, to indicate the validity of so fruitful an
assumption. To fix our ideas, let us consider Cartesian axes in
three-dimensional Euclidean space. Then it appears, by inspection,
that a point may be situated at any distance to right or left of any
of the three coordinate planes; taking this distance as a coordinate,
therefore, it appears that real points correspond to all quantities
from - to +. The same appears for the other two coordinates;
and since elementary Geometry proves their variations mutually
independent, we know that one and only one real point corresponds
to any three real quantities. But we also know, from the exhaustive
method pursued, that all space is covered by the range of these three
variable quantities: a fresh set of quantities, therefore, such as is
introduced by the use of imaginaries, possesses no spatial correlate,
and can be supposed to possess one only by a convenient fiction.

=43.= The fact that the fiction _is_ convenient, however, may
be thought to indicate that it is more than a fiction. But this
presumption, I think, can be easily explained away. For all the
fruitful uses of imaginaries, in Geometry, are those which begin
and end with real quantities, and use imaginaries only for the
intermediate steps. Now in all such cases, we have a real spatial
interpretation at the beginning and end of our argument, where alone
the spatial interpretation is important: in the intermediate links,
we are dealing in a purely algebraical manner with purely algebraical
quantities, and may perform any operations which are algebraically
permissible. If the quantities with which we end are capable of
spatial interpretation, then, and only then, our result may be
regarded as geometrical. To use geometrical language, in any other
case, is only a convenient help to the imagination. To speak, for
example, of projective properties which refer to the circular points,
is a mere _memoria technica_ for purely algebraical properties;
the circular points are not to be found in space, but only in the
auxiliary quantities by which geometrical equations are transformed.
That no contradictions arise from the geometrical interpretation of
imaginaries, is not wonderful: for they are interpreted solely by the
rules of Algebra, which we may admit as valid in their application
to imaginaries. The perception of space being wholly absent,
Algebra rules supreme, and no inconsistency can arise. Wherever,
for a moment, we allow our ordinary spatial notions to intrude, the
grossest absurdities do arise--every one can see that a circle, being
a closed curve, cannot get to infinity. The metaphysician, who should
invent anything so preposterous as the circular points, would be
hooted from the field. But the mathematician may steal the horse with
impunity.

Finally, then, only a knowledge of space, not a knowledge of Algebra,
can assure us that any given set of quantities will have a spatial
correlate, and in the absence of such a correlate, operations with
these quantities have no geometrical import. This is the case with
imaginaries in Cayley's sense, and their use in Geometry, great as
are its technical advantages, and rigid as is its technical validity,
is wholly destitute of philosophical importance.

=44.= We have now, I think, discussed most of the questions
concerning the scope and validity of the projective method. We
have seen that it is independent of all metrical presuppositions,
and that its use of coordinates does not involve the assumption
that spatial magnitudes are measured or expressed by them. We have
seen that it is able to deal, by its own methods alone, with the
question of the qualitative likeness of geometrical figures, which
is logically prior to any comparison as to quantity, since quantity
presupposes qualitative likeness. We have seen also that, so far as
its legitimate use extends, it applies equally to all homogeneous
spaces, and that its criterion of an independently possible
space--the determination of a straight line by two points[60]--is
not subject to the qualifications and limitations which belong, as
we have seen in the case of the cylinder, to the metrical criterion
of constant curvature. But we have also seen that, when projective
Geometry endeavours to grapple with spatial magnitude, and bring
distance and the measurement of angles beneath its sway, its success,
though technically valid and important, is philosophically an
apparent success only. Metrical Geometry, therefore, if quantity is
to be applied to space at all, remains a separate, though logically
subsequent branch of Mathematics.

=45.= It only remains to say a few words about _Sophus Lie_. As a
mathematician, as the inventor of a new and immensely powerful method
of analysis, he cannot be too highly praised. Geometry is only one
of the numerous subjects to which his theory of continuous groups
applies, but its application to Geometry has made a revolution in
method, and has rendered possible, in such problems as Helmholtz's, a
treatment infinitely more precise and exhaustive than any which was
possible before.

The general definition of a group is as follows: If we have any
number of independent variables _x{1}x{2}...x{n}_, and
any series of transformations of these into new variables--the
transformations being defined by equations of specified forms,
with parameters varying from one transformation to another--then
the series of transformations form a _group_, if the successive
application of any two is equivalent to a single member of the
original series of transformations. The group is _continuous_, when
we can pass, by infinitesimal gradations within the group, from any
one of the transformations to any other.

Now, in Geometry, the result of two successive motions or
collineations of a figure can always be obtained by a single motion
or collineation, and any motion or collineation can be built up
of a series of infinitesimal motions or collineations. Moreover
the analytical expression of either is a certain transformation
of the coordinates of all the points of the figure[61]. Hence the
transformations determining a motion or a collineation are such
as to form a continuous group. But the question of the projective
equivalence of two figures, to which all projective Geometry is
reducible, must always be dealt with by a collineation; and the
question of the equality of two figures, to which all metrical
Geometry is reducible, must always be decided by a motion such as
to cause superposition; hence the whole subject of Geometry may
be regarded as a theory of the continuous groups which define all
possible collineations and motions.

Now Sophus Lie has developed, at great length, the purely analytical
theory of groups; he has therefore, by this method of formulating
the problem, a very powerful weapon ready for the attack. In two
papers "On the foundations of Geometry[62]," undertaken at Klein's
urgent request, he takes premisses which roughly correspond to those
of Helmholtz, omitting Monodromy, and applies the theory of groups to
the deduction of their consequences[63]. Helmholtz's work, he says,
can hardly be looked upon as _proving_ its conclusions, and indeed
the more searching analysis of the group-theory reveals several
possibilities unknown to Helmholtz. Nevertheless, as a pioneer,
devoid of Lie's machinery, Helmholtz deserves, I think, more praise
than Lie is willing to give him[64].

Lie's method is perfectly exhaustive; omitting the premiss of
Monodromy, the others show that a body has six degrees of freedom,
_i.e._ that the group giving all possible motions of a body will
have six independent members; if we keep one point fixed, the
number of independent members is reduced to three. He then, from
his general theory, enumerates all the groups which satisfy this
condition. In order that such a group should give possible motions,
it is necessary, by Helmholtz's second axiom, that it should leave
invariant some function of the coordinates of any two points. This
eliminates several of the groups previously enumerated, each of which
he discusses in turn. He is thus led to the following results:

I. _In two dimensions_, if free mobility is to hold _universally_,
there are no groups satisfying Helmholtz's first three axioms, except
those which give the ordinary Euclidean and non-Euclidean motions;
but if it is to hold only _within a certain region_, there is also
a possible group in which the curve described by any point in a
rotation is not closed, but an equiangular spiral. To exclude this
possibility, Helmholtz's axiom of Monodromy is required.

II. _In three dimensions_, the results go still more against
Helmholtz. Assuming free mobility only _within a certain region_, we
have to distinguish two cases: _Either_ free mobility holds, within
that region, absolutely without exception, _i.e._ when one point is
held fast, _every_ other point within the region can move freely
over a surface: in this case the axiom of Monodromy is unnecessary,
and the first three axioms suffice to define our group as that of
Euclidean and non-Euclidean motions. _Or_ free mobility, within the
specified region, holds only of every point _of general position_,
while the points of a certain line, when one point is fixed, are only
able to move on that line, not on a surface: when this is the case,
other groups are possible, and can only be excluded by Helmholtz's
fourth axiom.

Having now stated the purely mathematical results of Lie's
investigations, we may return to philosophical considerations, by
which Helmholtz's work was mainly motived. It becomes obvious,
not only that exceptions within a certain region, but also that
limitation to a certain region, of the axiom of Free Mobility,
are philosophically quite impossible and inconceivable. How can a
certain line, or a certain surface, form an impassable barrier in
space, or have any mobility different in kind from that of all other
lines or surfaces? The notion cannot, in philosophy, be permitted
for a moment, since it destroys that most fundamental of all the
axioms, the homogeneity of space. We not only may, therefore, but
must take Helmholtz's axiom of Free Mobility in its very strictest
sense; the axiom of Monodromy thus becomes mathematically, as well
as philosophically, superfluous. This is, from a philosophical
standpoint, the most important of Lie's results.

=46.= I have now come to the end of my history of Metageometry.
It has not been my aim to give an exhaustive account of even the
important works on the subject--in the third period, especially, the
names of Poincar, Pasch, Cremona, Veronese, and others who might be
mentioned, would have cried shame upon me, had I had any such object.
But I have tried to set forth, as clearly as I could, the principles
at work in the various periods, the motives and results of successive
theories. We have seen how the philosophical motive, at first
predominant, has been gradually extruded by the purely mathematical
and technical spirit of most recent Geometers. At first, to discredit
the Transcendental Aesthetic seemed, to Metageometers, as important
as to advance their science; but from the works of Cayley, Klein
or Lie, no reader could gather that Kant had ever lived. We have
also seen, however, that as the interest _in_ philosophy waned, the
interest _for_ philosophy increased: as the mathematical results
shook themselves free from philosophical controversies, they
assumed gradually a stable form, from which further development,
we may reasonably hope, will take the form of growth, rather than
transformation. The same gradual development out of philosophy might,
I believe, be traced in the infancy of most branches of mathematics;
when philosophical motives cease to operate, this is, in general, a
sign that the stage of uncertainty as to premisses is past, so that
the future belongs entirely to mathematical technique. When this
stable stage has been attained, it is time for Philosophy to borrow
of Science, accepting its final premisses as those imposed by a real
necessity of fact or logic.

=47.= Now in discussing the systems of Metageometry, we have found
two kinds, radically distinct and subject to different axioms. The
historically prior kind, which deals with metrical ideas, discusses,
to begin with, the conditions of Free Mobility, which is essential to
all measurement of space. It finds the analytical expression of these
conditions in the existence of a space-constant, or constant measure
of curvature, which is equivalent to the homogeneity of space. This
is its first axiom.

Its second axiom states that space has a finite integral number of
dimensions, _i.e._ in metrical terms, that the position of a point,
relative to any other figure in space, is uniquely determined by a
finite number of spatial magnitudes, called coordinates.

The third axiom of metrical Geometry may be called, to distinguish it
from the corresponding projective axiom, the axiom of distance. There
exists one relation, it says, between any two points, which can be
preserved unaltered in a combined motion of both points, and which,
in any motion of a system as one rigid body, is always unaltered.
This relation we call distance.

The above statement of the three essential axioms of metrical
Geometry is taken from Helmholtz as amended by Lie. Lie's own
statement of the axioms, as quoted above, has been too much
influenced by projective methods to give a historically correct
rendering of the spirit of the second period; Helmholtz's statement,
on the other hand, requires, as Lie has shewn, very considerable
modifications. The above compromise may, therefore, I hope be taken
as accepting Lie's corrections while retaining Helmholtz's spirit.

=48.= But metrical Geometry, though it is historically prior, is
logically subsequent to projective Geometry. For projective Geometry
deals directly with that qualitative likeness, which the judgment of
quantitative comparison requires as its basis. Now the above three
axioms of metrical Geometry, as we shall see in Chapter III. Section
B, do not presuppose measurement, but are, on the contrary, the
conditions presupposed by measurement. Without these axioms, which
are common to all three spaces, measurement would be impossible;
with them, so I shall contend, measurement is able, though only
empirically, to decide approximately which of the three spaces is
valid of our actual world. But if these three axioms themselves
express, not results, but conditions, of measurement, must they not
be equivalent to the statement of that qualitative likeness on which
quantitative comparison depends? And if so, must we not expect to
find the same axioms, though perhaps under a different form, in
projective Geometry?

=49.= This expectation will not be disappointed. The above three
axioms, as we shall see hereafter, are one and all philosophically
equivalent to the homogeneity of space, and this in turn is
equivalent to the axioms of projective Geometry. The axioms of
projective Geometry, in fact, may be roughly stated thus:

I. Space is continuous and infinitely divisible; the zero of
extension, resulting from infinite division, is called a Point. All
points are qualitatively similar, and distinguished by the mere fact
that they lie outside one another.

II. Any two points determine a unique figure, the straight line;
two straight lines, like two points, are qualitatively similar, and
distinguished by the mere fact that they are mutually external.

III. Three points not in one straight line determine a unique figure,
the plane, and four points not in one plane determine a figure of
three dimensions. This process may, so far as can be seen _ priori_,
be continued, without in any way interfering with the possibility
of projective Geometry, to five or to _n_ points. But projective
Geometry requires, as an axiom, that the process should stop with
some positive integral number of points, after which, any fresh point
is contained in the figure determined by those already given. If the
process stops with (_n_ + 1) points, our space is said to have _n_
dimensions.

These three axioms, it will be seen, are the equivalents of the
three axioms of metrical Geometry[65], expressed without reference
to quantity. We shall find them to be deducible, as before, from
the homogeneity of space, or, more generally still, from the
possibility of experiencing externality. They will therefore appear
as _ priori_, as essential to the existence of any Geometry and to
experience of an external world as such.

=50.= That some logical necessity is involved in these axioms might,
I think, be inferred as probable, from their historical development
alone. For the systems of Metageometry have not, in general, been set
up as more likely to fit facts than the system of Euclid; with the
exception of Zllner, for example, I know of no one who has regarded
the fourth dimension as required to explain phenomena. As regards the
space-constant again, though a _small_ space-constant is regarded
as empirically possible, it is not usually regarded as probable;
and the finite space-constants, with which Metageometry is equally
conversant, are not usually thought even possible, as explanations
of empirical fact[66]. Thus the motive has been throughout not one
of fact, but one of logic. Does not this give a strong presumption,
that those axioms which are retained, are retained because they are
logically indispensable? If this be so, the axioms common to Euclid
and Metageometry will be _ priori_, while those peculiar to Euclid
will be empirical. After a criticism of some differing theories of
Geometry, I shall proceed, in Chapters III. and IV., to the proof and
consequences of this thesis, which will form the remainder of the
present work.

FOOTNOTES:

[5] V. Mmoires de l'Acadmie royale des Sciences de l'lnstitut de
France, T. XII. 1833, for a full statement of his results, with
references to former writings.

[6] This bolder method, it appears, had been suggested, nearly a
century earlier, by an Italian, Saccheri. His work, which seems to
have remained completely unknown until Beltrami rediscovered it in
1889, is called "Euclides ab omni naevo vindicatus, etc." Mediolani,
1733. (See Veronese, Grundzge der Geometrie, German translation,
Leipzig, 1894, p. 636.) His results included spherical as well as
hyperbolic space; but they alarmed him to such an extent that he
devoted the last half of his book to disproving them.

[7] Klein's first account of elliptic Geometry, as a result of
Cayley's projective theory of distance, appeared in two articles
entitled "Ueber die sogenannte Nicht-Euklidische Geometrie, I,
II," Math. Annalen 4, 6 (1871-2). It was afterwards independently
discovered by Newcomb, in an article entitled "Elementary Theorems
relating to the geometry of a space of three dimensions, and of
uniform positive curvature in the fourth dimension," Crelle's
Journal fr die reine und angewandte Mathematik, Vol. 83 (1877). For
an account of the mathematical controversies concerning elliptic
Geometry, see Klein's "Vorlesungen ber Nicht-Euklidische Geometrie,"
Gttingen 1893, I. p. 284 ff. A bibliography of the relevant
literature up to the year 1878 was given by Halsted in the American
Journal of Mathematics, Vols. 1, 2.

[8] Veronese (op. cit. p. 638) denies the priority of Gauss in the
invention of a non-Euclidean system, though he admits him to have
been the first to regard the axiom of parallels as indemonstrable.
His grounds for the former assertion seem scarcely adequate: on the
evidence against it, see Klein, Nicht-Euklid, I. pp. 171-174.

[9] V. Briefwechsel mit Schumacher, Bd. II. p. 268.

[10] f. Helmholtz, Wiss. Abh. II. p. 611.

[11] Crelle's Journal, 1837.

[12] Theorie der Parallellinien, Berlin, 1840. Republished, Berlin,
1887. Translated by Halsted, Austin, Texas, U.S.A. 4th edition, 1892.

[13] Frischauf, Absolute Geometrie, nach Johann Bolyai, Leipzig,
1872. Halsted, The Science Absolute of Space, translated from the
Latin, 4th edition, Austin, Texas, U.S.A. 1896.

[14] Both Lobatchewsky and Bolyai, as Veronese remarks, start rather
from the point-pair than from distance. See Frischauf, Absolute
Geometrie, Anhang.

[15] Compare Stallo, Concepts of Modern Physics, p. 248.

[16] Gesammelte Werke, pp. 255-268.

[17] On the history of this word, see Stallo, Concepts of Modern
Physics, p. 258. It was used by Kant, and adapted by Herbart to
almost the same meaning as it bears in Riemann. Herbart, however,
also uses the word _Reihenform_ to express a similar idea. See
Psychologie als Wissenschaft, I.  100 and II.  139, where Riemann's
analogy with colours is also suggested.

[18] Compare Erdmann's "Grssenbegriff vom Raum."

[19] Compare Veronese, op. cit. p. 642: "Riemann ist in seiner
Definition des Begriffs Grsse dunkel." See also Veronese's whole
following criticism.

[20] Vortrge und Reden, Vol. II. p. 18.

[21] Cf. Klein, Nicht-Euklid, I. p. 160.

[22] Since we are considering the curvature at a point, we are only
concerned with the first infinitesimal elements of the geodesics that
start from such a point.

[23] Disquisitiones generales circa superficies curvas, Werke, Bd.
IV. SS. 219-258, 1827.

[24] Nevertheless, the Geometries of different surfaces of equal
curvature are liable to important differences. For example, the
cylinder is a surface of zero curvature, but since its lines of
curvature in one direction are finite, its Geometry coincides with
that of the plane only for lengths smaller than the circumference of
its generating circle (see Veronese, op. cit. p. 644). Two geodesics
on a cylinder may meet in many points. For surfaces of zero curvature
on which this is not possible, the identity with the plane may
be allowed to stand. Otherwise, the identity extends only to the
properties of figures not exceeding a certain size.

[25] For we may consider two different parts of the same surface as
corresponding parts of different surfaces; the above proposition then
shows that a figure can be reproduced in one part when it has been
drawn in another, if the measures of curvature correspond in the two
parts.

[26] Crelle, Vols, XIX., XX., 1839-40.

[27] In this formula, _u_, _v_ may be the lengths of lines, or the
angles between lines, drawn on the surface, and having thus no
necessary reference to a third dimension.

[28] In what follows, I have given rather Klein's exposition of
Riemann, than Riemann's own account. The former is much clearer
and fuller, and not substantially different in any way. V. Klein,
Nicht-Euklid, I. pp. 206 ff.

[29] See  69-73.

[30] Grundlagen der Geometrie, I. and II., Leipziger Berichte, 1890;
v. end of present chapter,  45.

[31] Nicht-Euklid, I. pp. 258-9.

[32] Giornale di Matematiche, Vol. VI., 1868. Translated into
French by J. Hoel in the "Annales Scientifiques de l'cole Normale
Suprieure," Vol. VI. 1869.

[33] Crelle's Journal, Vols. XIX. XX., 1839-40.

[34] Nicht-Euklid, I. p. 190.

[35] This article is more trigonometrical and analytical than the
German book, and therefore makes the above interpretation peculiarly
evident.

[36] Such surfaces are by no means particularly remote. One of them,
for example, is formed by the revolution of the common Tractrix

    x = asin ,    y = a(log tan /2 + cos ).

[37] "Teoria fondamentale degli spazii di curvatura costanta," Annali
di Matematica, II. Vol. 2, 1868-9. Also translated by J. Hoel, _loc.
cit._

[38] See Klein, Nicht-Euklid, I. p. 47 ff., and the references there
given.

[39] See quotation below, from his British Association Address.

[40] Compare the opening sentence, due to Cayley, of Salmon's Higher
Plane Curves.

[41] V. Nicht-Euklid, I. Chaps. I. and II.

[42] See p. 9 of Cayley's address to the Brit. Ass. 1883. Also a
quotation from Klein in Erdmann's Axiome der Geometrie, p. 124 note.

[43] Nature, Vol. XLV. p. 407.

[44] Nicht-Euklid, I. p. 200.

[45] I.e. the equation _AB_ + _BC_ = _AC_, for three points in one
straight line.

[46] The formula substituted by Klein for Cayley's inverse sine or
cosine. The two are equivalent, but Klein's is mathematically much
the more convenient.

[47] Elements of Projective Geometry, Second Edition, Oxford, 1893,
Chap. IX.

[48] Chap. III. Section B.

[49] See Nicht-Euklid, I. p. 338 ff.

[50] See his Geometrie der Lage,  8, Harmonische Gebilde.

[51] The anharmonic ratio of four numbers, _p_, _q_, _r_, _s_, is
defined as

    (p - q).(r - s) / (p - r).(q - s).

[52] _I.e._ as transformable into each other by a collineation. See
Chap. III. Sec. A,  110.

[53] See Chap. III. Sec. A.

[54] It follows from this, that the reduction of metrical to
projective properties, even when, as in hyperbolic Geometry, the
Absolute is real, is only apparent, and has a merely technical
validity.

[55] Sir R. Ball does not regard his non-Euclidean content as a
possible space (_v. op. cit._ p. 151). In this important point I
disagree with his interpretation, holding such a content to be a
space as possible, _ priori_, as Euclid's, and perhaps actually true
within the margin due to errors of observation.

[56] See Nicht-Euklid, I. p. 97 ff. and p. 292 ff.

[57] Newcomb says (_loc. cit._ p. 293): "The system here set forth is
founded on the following three postulates.

"1. I assume that space is triply extended, unbounded, without
properties dependent either on position or direction, and possessing
such planeness in its smallest parts that both the postulates of the
Euclidean Geometry, and our common conceptions of the relations of
the parts of space are true for every indefinitely small region in
space.

"2. I assume that this space is affected with such curvature that a
right line shall always return into itself at the end of a finite and
real distance 2_D_ without losing, in any part of its course, that
symmetry with respect to space on all sides of it which constitutes
the fundamental property of our conception of it.

"3. I assume that if two right lines emanate from the same point,
making the indefinitely small angle _a_ with each other, their
distance apart at the distance _r_ from the point of intersection
will be given by the equation

    s = 2aD/ sin r/2D.

The right line thus has this property in common with the Euclidean
right line that two such lines intersect only in a single point.
It may be that the number of points in which two such lines can
intersect admit of being determined from the laws of curvature,
but not being able so to determine it, I assume as a postulate the
fundamental property of the Euclidean right line."

It is plain that in the absence of the determination spoken of, the
possibility of elliptic space is not established. It may be possible,
for example, to prove that, in a space where there is a maximum to
distance, there must be an infinite number of straight lines joining
two points of maximum distance. In this event, elliptic space would
become impossible.

[58] For an elucidation of this term, see Klein, Nicht-Euklid, I. p.
99 ff.

[59] Cf. p. 9 of Report: "My own view is that Euclid's twelfth axiom,
in Playfair's form of it, does not need demonstration, but is part
of our notion of space, of the physical space of our experience,
but which is the representation lying at the bottom of all external
experience."

[60] The exception to this axiom, in spherical space, presupposes
metrical Geometry, and does not destroy the validity of the axiom for
projective Geometry. See Chap. III. Sec. B,  171.

[61] Mathematicians of Lie's school have a habit, at first somewhat
confusing, of speaking of motions of space instead of motions of
bodies, as though space as a whole could move. All that is meant is,
of course, the equivalent motion of the coordinate axes, _i.e._ a
change of axes in the usual elementary sense.

[62] "Ueber die Grundlagen der Geometrie," Leipziger Berichte, 1890.
The problem of these two papers is really metrical, since it is
concerned, not with collineations in general, but with motions. The
problem, however, is dealt with by the projective method, motions
being regarded as collineations which leave the Absolute unchanged.
It seemed impossible, therefore, to discuss Lie's work, until some
account had been given of the projective method.

[63] Lie's premisses, to be accurate, are the following:

Let

    x{1} = f(x, y, z, a{1}, a{2}...)
    x{2} = (x, y, z, a{1}, a{2}...)
    x{3} = (x, y, z, a{1}, a{2}...)

give an infinite family of real transformations of space, as to which
we make the following hypotheses:

A. The functions f, , , are _analytical_ functions of

    x, y, z, a{1}, a{2}....

B. Two points x{1}y{1}z{1}, x{2}y{2}z{2} possess an
invariant, _i.e._

    (x{1}, y{1}, z{1}, x{2}, y{2}, z{2}) =
        (x{1}, y{1}, z{1}, x{2}, y{2}, z{2})

where x{1}..., x{2}..., are the transformed coordinates of
the two points.

C. Free Mobility: _i.e._, any point can be moved into any other
position; when one point is fixed, any other point of general
position can take up ^{2} positions; when two points are fixed, any
other of general position can take up ^{1} positions; when three, no
motion is possible--these limitations being results of the equations
given by the invariant .

[64] On this point, cf. Klein, Hhere Geometrie, Gttingen, 1893, II.
pp. 225-244, especially pp. 230-1.

[65] Axiom II. of the metrical triad corresponds to Axiom III. of the
projective, and _vice vers_.

[66] Cf. Helmholtz, Wiss. Abh. Vol. II. p. 640, note: "Die Bearbeiter
der Nicht-Euklidischen Geometrie (haben) deren objective Wahrheit nie
behauptet."




CHAPTER II.

CRITICAL ACCOUNT OF SOME PREVIOUS PHILOSOPHICAL THEORIES OF GEOMETRY.


=51.= We have now traced the mathematical development of the theory
of geometrical axioms, from the first revolt against Euclid to the
present day. We may hope, therefore, to have at our command the
technical knowledge required for the philosophy of the subject. The
importance of Geometry, in the theories of knowledge which have
arisen in the past, can scarcely be exaggerated. In Descartes, we
find the whole theory of method dominated by analytical Geometry, of
whose fruitfulness he was justly proud. In Spinoza, the paramount
influence of Geometry is too obvious to require comment. Among
mathematicians, Newton's belief in absolute space was long supreme,
and is still responsible for the current formulation of the laws of
motion. Against this belief on the one hand, and against Leibnitz's
theory of space on the other, and not, as Caird has pointed out[67],
against Hume's empiricism, was directed that keystone of the Critical
Philosophy, the Kantian doctrine of space. Thus Geometry has been,
throughout, of supreme importance in the theory of knowledge.

But in a criticism of representative modern theories of Geometry,
which is designed to be, not a history of the subject, but an
introduction to, and defence of, the views of the author, it will
not be necessary to discuss any more ancient theory than that of
Kant. Kant's views on this subject, true or false, have so dominated
subsequent thought, that whether they were accepted or rejected,
they seemed equally potent in forming the opinions, and the manner of
exposition, of almost all later writers.


Kant.

=52.= It is not my purpose, in this chapter, to add to the voluminous
literature of Kantian criticism, but only to discuss the bearing of
Metageometry on the argument of the Transcendental Aesthetic, and
the aspect under which this argument must be viewed in a discussion
of Geometry[68]. On this point several misunderstandings seem to me
to have had wide prevalence, both among friends and foes, and these
misunderstandings I shall endeavour, if I can, to remove.

In the first place, what does Kant's doctrine mean for Geometry?
Obviously not the aspect of the doctrine which has been attacked by
psychologists, the "Kantian machine-shop" as James calls it--at any
rate, if this can be clearly separated from the logical aspect. The
question whether space is given in sensation, or whether, as Kant
maintained, it is given by an intuition to which no external matter
corresponds, may for the present be disregarded. If, indeed, we
held the view which seems crudely to sum up the standpoint of the
Critique, the view that all certain knowledge is self-knowledge,
then we should be committed, if we had decided that Geometry was
apodeictic, to the view that space is subjective. But even then, the
psychological question could only arise when the epistemological
question had been solved, and could not, therefore, be taken into
account in our first investigation. The question before us is
precisely the question whether, or how far, Geometry is apodeictic,
and for the moment we have only to investigate this question, without
fear of psychological consequences.

=53.= Now on this question, as on almost all questions in the
Aesthetic or the Analytic, Kant's argument is twofold. On the one
hand, he says, Geometry is known to have apodeictic certainty:
therefore space must be _ priori_ and subjective. On the other hand,
it follows, from grounds independent of Geometry, that space is
subjective and _ priori_; therefore Geometry must have apodeictic
certainty. These two arguments are not clearly distinguished in the
Aesthetic, but a little analysis, I think, will disentangle them.
Thus in the first edition, the first two arguments deduce, from
non-geometrical grounds, the apriority of space; the third deduces
the apodeictic certainty of Geometry, and maintains, conversely,
that no other view can account for this certainty[69]; the last two
arguments only maintain that space is an intuition, not a concept.
In the second edition, the double argument is clearer, the apriority
of space being proved independently of Geometry in the metaphysical
deduction, and deduced from the certainty of Geometry, as the only
possible explanation of this, in the transcendental deduction. In the
Prolegomena, the latter argument alone is used, but in the Critique
both are employed.

=54.= Now it must be admitted, I think, that Metageometry has
destroyed the legitimacy of the argument from Geometry to space; we
can no longer affirm, on purely geometrical grounds, the apodeictic
certainty of Euclid. But unless Metageometry has done more than
this--unless it has proved, what I believe it alone cannot prove,
that Euclid has _not_ apodeictic certainty--then Kant's other line
of argument retains what force it may ever have had. The actual
space we know, it may say, is admittedly Euclidean, and is proved,
without any reference to Geometry, to be _ priori_; _hence_ Euclid
has apodeictic certainty, and non-Euclid stands condemned. To this
it is no answer to urge, with the Metageometers, that non-Euclidean
systems are _logically_ self-consistent; for Kant is careful to argue
that geometrical reasoning, by virtue of our intuition of space, is
synthetic, and cannot, though _ priori_, be upheld by the principle
of contradiction alone[70]. Unless non-Euclideans can prove, what
they have certainly failed to prove up to the present, that we can
frame an _intuition_ of non-Euclidean spaces, Kant's position cannot
be upset by Metageometry alone, but must also be attacked, if it is
to be successfully attacked, on its purely philosophical side.

=55.= For such an attack, two roads lie open: either we may disprove
the first two arguments of the Aesthetic, or we may criticize, from
the standpoint of general logic, the Kantian doctrine of synthetic
_ priori_ judgments and their connection with subjectivity. Both
these attacks, I believe, could be conducted with some success;
but if we are to disprove the apodeictic certainty of Geometry,
one or other is essential, and both, I believe, will be found only
partially successful. It will be my aim to prove, in discussing
these two lines of attack, (1) that the distinction of synthetic and
analytic judgments is untenable, and further, that the principle of
contradiction can only give fruitful results on the assumption that
experience in general, or, in a particular science, some special
branch of experience, is to be formally possible; (2) that the first
two arguments of the Transcendental Aesthetic suffice to prove,
not Euclidean space, but _some_ form of externality--which may be
sensational or intuitional, but not merely conceptual--a necessary
prerequisite of experience of an external world. In the third and
fourth chapters, I shall contend, as a result of these conclusions,
that those axioms, which Euclid and Metageometry have in common,
coincide with those properties of any form of externality which are
deducible, by the principle of contradiction, from the possibility of
experience of an external world. These properties, then, may be said,
though not quite in the Kantian sense, to be _ priori_ properties of
space, and as to these, I think, a modified Kantian position may be
maintained. But the question of the subjective or objective nature
of space may be left wholly out of account during the course of this
discussion, which will gain by dealing exclusively with logical, as
opposed to psychological points of view.

=56.= (1) _Kant's logical position._ The doctrine of synthetic and
analytic judgments--at any rate if this is taken as the corner-stone
of Epistemology--has been so completely rejected by most modern
logicians[71], that it would demand little attention here, but
for the fact that an enthusiastic French Kantian, M. Renouvier,
has recently appealed to it, with perfect confidence, on the very
question of Geometry[72]. And it must be owned, with M. Renouvier,
that if such judgments existed, in the Kantian sense, non-Euclidean
Geometry, which makes no appeal to intuition, could have nothing to
say against them. M. Renouvier's contention, therefore, forces us
briefly to review the arguments against Kant's doctrine, and briefly
to discuss what logical canon is to replace it.

Every judgment--so modern logic contends--is both synthetic and
analytic; it combines parts into a whole, and analyses a whole into
parts[73]. If this be so, the distinction of analysis and synthesis,
whatever may be its importance in pure Logic, can have no value in
Epistemology. But such a doctrine, it must be observed, allows full
scope to the principle of contradiction: this criterion, since all
judgments, in one aspect at least, are analytic, is applicable to
all judgments alike. On the other hand, the whole which is analysed
must be supposed already given, before the parts can be mutually
contradictory: for only by connection in a given whole can two parts
or adjectives be incompatible. Thus the principle of contradiction
remains barren until we already have some judgments, and even some
inference: for the parts may be regarded, to some extent, as an
inference from the whole, or _vice vers_. When once the arch of
knowledge is constructed, the parts support one another, and the
principle of contradiction is the keystone: but until the arch is
built, the keystone remains suspended, unsupported and unsupporting,
in the empty air. In other words, knowledge once existent can be
analysed, but knowledge which should have to win every inch of the
way against a critical scepticism, could never begin, and could never
attain that circular condition in which alone it can stand.

But Kant's doctrine, if true, is designed to restrain a critical
scepticism even where it might be effective. Certain fundamental
propositions, he says, are not deducible from logic, _i.e._
their contradictories are not self-contradictory; they combine a
subject and predicate which cannot, in any purely logical way,
be shewn to have any connection, and yet these judgments have
apodeictic certainty. But concerning such judgments, Kant is
generally careful not to rely upon the mere subjective conviction
that they are undeniable: he proves, with every precaution, that
without them experience would be impossible. Experience consists
in the combination of terms which formal logic leaves apart, and
presupposes, therefore, certain judgments by which a framework is
made for bringing such terms together. Without these judgments--so
Kant contends--all synthesis and all experience would be impossible.
If, therefore, the detail of the Kantian reasoning be sound, his
results may be obtained by the principle of contradiction _plus_ the
possibility of experience, as well as by his distinction of synthetic
and analytic judgments.

Logic, at the present day, arrogates to itself at once a wider and a
narrower sphere than Kant allowed to it. Wider, because it believes
itself capable of condemning any false principle or postulate;
narrower, because it believes that its law of contradiction,
without a given whole or a given hypothesis, is powerless, and
that two terms, _per se_, though they may be different, cannot be
contradictories, but acquire this relation only by combination
in a whole about which something is known, or by connection with
a postulate which, for some reason, must be preserved. Thus no
judgment, _per se_, is either analytic or synthetic, for the
severance of a judgment from its context robs it of its vitality, and
makes it not truly a judgment at all. But in its proper context it
is neither purely synthetic nor purely analytic; for while it is the
further determination of a given whole, and thus in so far analytic,
it also involves the emergence of _new_ relations within this whole,
and is so far synthetic.

=57.= We may retain, however, a distinction roughly corresponding to
the Kantian _ priori_ and _ posteriori_, though less rigid, and
more liable to change with the degree of organisation of knowledge.
Kant usually endeavoured to prove, as observed above, that his
synthetic _ priori_ propositions were necessary prerequisites of
experience; now although we cannot retain the term synthetic, we
can retain the term _ priori_, for those assumptions, or those
postulates, from which alone the possibility of experience follows.
Whatever can be deduced from these postulates, without the aid of the
matter of experience, will also, of course, be _ priori_. From the
standpoint of general logic, the laws of thought and the categories,
with the indispensable conditions of their applicability, will be
alone _ priori_; but from the standpoint of any special science,
we may call _ priori_ whatever renders possible the experience
which forms the subject-matter of our science. In Geometry, to
particularize, we may call _ priori_ whatever renders possible
experience of externality as such.

It is to be observed that this use of the term is at once more
rationalistic and less precise than that of Kant. Kant would seem
to have supposed himself immediately aware, by inspection, that
some knowledge was apodeictic, and its subject-matter, therefore,
_ priori_: but he did not always deduce its apriority from any
further principle. Here, however, it is to be shown, before admitting
apriority, that the falsehood of the judgment in question would not
be effected by a mere change in the _matter_ of experience, but only
by a change which should render some branch of experience formally
impossible, _i.e._ inaccessible to our methods of cognition. The
above use is also less precise, for it varies according to the
specialization of the experience we are assuming possible, and with
every progress of knowledge some new connection is perceived, two
previously isolated judgments are brought into logical relation, and
the _ priori_ may thus, at any moment, enlarge its sphere, as more
is found deducible from fundamental postulates.

=58.= (2) _Kant's arguments for the apriority of space._ Having now
discussed the logical canon to be used as regards the _ priori_, we
may proceed to test Kant's arguments as regards space. The argument
from Geometry, as remarked above, is upset by Metageometry, at least
so far as those properties are concerned, which belong to Euclid
but not to non-Euclidean spaces; as regards the common properties
of both kinds of space, we cannot decide on their apriority till we
have discussed the consequences of denying them, which will be done
in Chapter III. As regards the two arguments which prove that space
is an intuition, not a concept, they would call for much discussion
in a special criticism of Kant, but here they may be passed by
with the obvious comment that infinite homogeneous Euclidean space
is a concept, not an intuition--a concept invented to explain an
intuition, it is true, but still a pure concept[74]. And it is this
pure concept which, in all discussions of Geometry, is primarily to
be dealt with; the intuition need only be referred to where it throws
light on the functions or the nature of the concept. The second
of Kant's arguments, that we can imagine empty space, though not
the absence of space, is false if it means a space without matter
anywhere, and irrelevant if it merely means a space between matters
and regarded as empty[75]. The only argument of importance, then,
is the first argument. But I must insist, at the outset, that our
problem is purely logical, and that all psychological implications
must be excluded to the utmost possible extent. Moreover, as will be
proved in Chapter IV., the proper function of space is to distinguish
between different presented things, not between the Self and the
object of sensation or perception. The argument then becomes the
following: consciousness of a world of mutually external things
demands, in presentations, a cognitive but non-inferential element
leading to the discrimination of the objects presented. This element
must be non-inferential, for from whatever number or combination of
presentations, which did not of themselves demand diversity in their
objects, I could never be led to infer the mutual externality of
their objects. Kant says: "In order that sensations may be ascribed
to something external to me ... and similarly in order that I may
be able to present them as outside and beside one another, ... the
presentation of space must be already present." But this goes rather
too far: in the first place, the question should be only as to the
mutual externality of presented things, not as to their externality
to the Self[76]; and in the second place, things will appear mutually
external if I have the presentation of _any_ form of externality,
whether Euclidean or non-Euclidean. Whatever may be true of the
_psychological_ scope of this argument--whose validity is here
irrelevant--the _logical_ scope extends, not to Euclidean space, but
only to any form of externality which could exist intuitively, and
permit knowledge, in beings with our laws of thought, of a world of
diverse but interrelated things.

Moreover externality, to render the scope of the argument wholly
logical, must not be left with a sensational or intuitional meaning,
though it must be supposed given in sensation or intuition. It must
mean, in this argument, the fact of Otherness[77], the fact of being
different from some other thing: it must involve the distinction
between different things, and must be that element, in a cognitive
state, which leads us to discriminate constituent parts in its
object. So much, then, would appear to result from Kant's argument,
that experience of diverse but interrelated things demands, as a
necessary prerequisite, some sensational or intuitional element, in
perception, by which we are led to attribute complexity to objects
of perception[78]; that this element, in its isolation may be called
a form of externality; and that those properties of this form, if
any such be found, which can be deduced from its mere function of
rendering experience of interrelated diversity possible, are to
be regarded as _ priori_. What these properties are, and how the
various lines of argument here suggested converge to a single result,
we shall see in Chapters III. and IV.

=59.= In the philosophers who followed Kant, Metaphysics, for the
most part, so predominated over Epistemology, that little was added
to the theory of Geometry. What was added, came indirectly from
the one philosopher who stood out against the purely ontological
speculations of his time, namely _Herbart_. Herbart's actual views on
Geometry, which are to be found chiefly in the first section of his
_Synechologie_, are not of any great value, and have borne no great
fruit in the development of the subject. But his psychological theory
of space, his construction of extension out of series of points, his
comparison of space with the tone and colour-series, his general
preference for the discrete above the continuous, and finally his
belief in the great importance of classifying space with other forms
of series (_Reihenformen_[79]), gave rise to many of Riemann's
epoch-making speculations, and encouraged the attempt to explain the
nature of space by its analytical and quantitative aspect alone[80].
Through his influence on Riemann, he acquired, indirectly, a great
importance in geometrical philosophy. To Riemann's dissertation,
which we have already discussed in its mathematical aspect, we must
now return, considering, this time, only its philosophical views.


Riemann.

=60.= The aim of Riemann's dissertation, as we saw in Chapter I.,
was to define space as a species of manifold, _i.e._ as a particular
kind of collection of magnitudes. It was thus assumed, to begin with,
that spatial figures could be regarded as magnitudes, and the axioms
which emerged, accordingly, determined only the particular place of
these among the many algebraically possible varieties of magnitudes.
The resulting formulation of the axioms--while, from the mathematical
standpoint of metrical Geometry, it was almost wholly laudable--must,
from the standpoint of philosophy, be regarded, in my opinion, as a
_petitio principii_. For when we have arrived at regarding spatial
figures as magnitudes, we have already traversed the most difficult
part of the ground. The axioms of metrical Geometry--and it is
metrical Geometry, exclusively, which is considered in Riemann's
Essay--will appear, in Chapter III., to be divisible into two
classes. Of these, the first class--which contains the axioms common
to Euclid and Metageometry, the only axioms seriously discussed by
Riemann--are not the results of measurement, nor of any conception
of magnitude, but are conditions to be fulfilled before measurement
becomes possible. The second class only--those which express the
difference between Euclidean and non-Euclidean spaces--can be
deduced as results of measurement or of conceptions of magnitude.
As regards the first class, on the contrary, we shall see that
the relativity of position--by which space is distinguished from
all other known manifolds, except time--leads logically to the
necessity of three of the most distinctive axioms of Geometry, and
yet this relativity cannot be called a deduction from conceptions of
magnitude. In analytical Geometry, owing to the fact that coordinate
systems start from points, and hence build up lines and surfaces, it
is easy to suppose that points can be given independently of lines
and of each other, and thus the relativity of position is lost sight
of. The error thus suggested by mathematics was probably reinforced
by Herbart's theory of space, which, by its serial character, as
we have seen, appeared to him to facilitate a construction out of
successive points, and to which Riemann acknowledges his indebtedness
both in his Dissertation and elsewhere. The same error reappears
in Helmholtz, in whom it is probably due wholly to the methods of
analytical Geometry. It is a striking fact that, throughout the
writings of these two men, there is not, so far as I know, one
allusion to the relativity of position, that property of space
from which, as our next chapter will shew, the richest quarry of
consequences can be extracted. This is not a result of any conception
of magnitude, but follows from the nature of our space-intuition; yet
no one, surely, could call it empirical, since it is bound up in the
very possibility of locating things _there_ as opposed to _here_.

=61.= Indeed we can see, from a purely logical consideration of
the judgment of quantity, that Riemann's manner of approaching the
problem can never, by legitimate methods, attain to a philosophically
sound formulation of the axioms. For quantity is a result of
comparison of two qualitatively similar objects, and the judgment of
quantity neglects altogether the qualitative aspect of the objects
compared. Hence a knowledge of the essential properties of space can
never be obtained from judgments of quantity, which neglect these
properties, while they yet presuppose them. As well might one hope
to learn the nature of man from a census. Moreover, the judgment of
quantity is the result of comparison, and therefore presupposes
the possibility of comparison. To know whether, or by what means,
comparison is possible, we must know the qualities of the things
compared and of the medium in which comparison is effected; while to
know that _quantitative_ comparison is possible, we must know that
there is a qualitative identity between the things compared, which
again involves a previous qualitative knowledge. When spatial figures
have once been reduced to quantity, their quality has already been
neglected, as known and similar to the quality of other figures. To
hope, therefore, for the qualities of space, from a comparison of its
expression as pure quantity with other pure quantities, is an error
natural to an analytical geometer, but an error, none the less, from
which there is no return to the qualitative basis of spatial quantity.

=62.= We must entirely dissent, therefore, from the disjunction which
underlies Riemann's philosophy of space. Either the axioms must be
consequences of general conceptions of magnitude, he thinks, or
else they can only be proved by experience (p. 255). Whatever _can_
be derived from general conceptions of magnitude, we may retort,
cannot be an _ priori_ adjective of space: for all the necessary
adjectives of space are presupposed in any judgment of spatial
quantity, and cannot, therefore, be consequences of such a judgment.
Riemann's disjunction, accordingly, since one of its alternatives is
obviously impossible, really begs the question. In formulating the
axioms of metrical Geometry, our question should be: What axioms,
_i.e._ what adjectives of space, must be presupposed, in order that
quantitative comparison of the parts of space may be possible at
all? And only when we have determined these conditions, which are
_ priori_ necessary to any quantitative science of space, does the
second question arise: what inferences can we draw, as to space,
from the observed results of this quantitative science, _i.e._ of
this measurement of spatial figures? The conditions of measurement
themselves, though not results of any conception of magnitude, will
be _ priori_, if it can be shown that, without them, experience of
externality would be impossible.

After this initial protest against Riemann's general philosophical
position, let us proceed to examine, in detail, his use of the notion
of a manifold.

=63.= In the first place there is, if I am not mistaken, considerable
obscurity in the definition of a manifold, of which an almost verbal
rendering was given in Chapter I. What is meant, to begin with, by
a general conception capable of various determinations? Does not
this property belong to all conceptions? It affords, certainly,
a basis for counting, but if continuous quantity is to arise, we
must, surely, have some less discrete formulation. It might afford
a basis, for example, for the distinction of points in projective
Geometry, but projective Geometry has nothing to do with quantity.
Something more fluid and flexible than a conception, one would think,
is necessary as the basis of continua. Then, again, what is meant by
a quantum of a manifold? In space, the answer is obvious: what is
meant is a piece of volume. But how about Riemann's other continuous
manifold, colour? Does a quantum of colour mean a single line in the
spectrum, or a band of finite thickness? In either case, what are
the magnitudes to be compared? And how is superposition necessary,
or even possible? A colour is fixed by its position in the spectrum:
two lines in the same spectrum cannot be superposed, and two lines in
different spectra need not be--their positions in their respective
spectra suffice, or even, roughly, their immediate sense-quality. The
fact is, Riemann had space in his mind from the start, and many of
the properties, which he enunciates as belonging to all manifolds,
belong, as a matter of fact, only to space. It is far from clear what
the magnitudes are which the various determinations make possible.
Do these magnitudes measure the elements of the manifold, or the
relations between elements? This is surely a very fundamental point,
but it is one which Riemann never touches on. In the former case,
the superposition which he speaks of becomes unnecessary, since the
magnitude is inherent in the element considered. We do not require
superposition to measure quantities corresponding to different tones
or colours; these can be discovered by analysis of single tones or
colours. With space, on the other hand, if we seek for elements,
we can find none except points, and no analysis of a point will
find magnitudes inherent in it--such magnitudes are a fiction of
coordinate Geometry. The magnitudes which space deals with, as we
shall see in Chapter III., are relations between points, and it is
for this reason that superposition is essential to space-measurement.
There is no inherent quality in a single point, as there is in a
single colour, by which it can be quantitatively distinguished from
another. Thus the conception of a manifold, as defined by Riemann,
either does not include colours, or does not involve superposition as
the only means of measurement. From this dilemma there is no escape.

=64.= But if "measurement _consists_ in a superposition of the
magnitudes compared" (p. 256), does it not follow immediately that
measurement is logically possible _only_ where such superposition
leaves the magnitudes unchanged? And therefore that measurement, as
above defined, involves, as an _ priori_ condition, that magnitudes
are unchanged by motion? This consequence is not drawn by Riemann;
indeed he proceeds immediately (pp. 256-7) to consider what he calls
a general portion of the doctrine of magnitude (_Grssenlehre_),
independent of measurement. But how is any doctrine of magnitude
possible, in which the magnitudes cannot be measured? The reason
of the confusion is, that Riemann's definition of measurement is
applicable to no single manifold except space, since it depends
on the noteworthy property that what we measure in Geometry is
not points, but relations between points, and the latter, though
not the former, may of course be unaltered by motion. Let us try,
in illustration, to apply Riemann's definition of measurement to
colours. We must remember that motion, in dealing with the colour
manifold, means--not motion in space but--motion in the colour
manifold itself. Now since every point of the colour manifold is
completely determined by three magnitudes, which are given in fact,
and cannot be arbitrarily chosen, it is plain that measurement
by superposition--involving, as it does, motion, and therefore
change in these determining magnitudes--is totally out of the
question. The superposition of one colour on another, as a means
of measurement, is sheer nonsense. And yet measurement is possible
in the colour-manifold, by means of Helmholtz's law of mixture
(_Mischungsgesetz_); but the measurement is of every separate
element, not of the relations between elements, and is thus radically
different from space-measurement[81]. The elements are not, like
points in space, qualitatively alike, and distinguished by the
mere fact of their mutual externality. What we have, in colours, is
three fundamental qualitatively distinct elements, out of certain
proportions of which we can build up all the other elements of the
manifold--each of the resulting elements having the same combination
of qualitative diversity and similarity as the three original
elements. But in space, what could we make of such a procedure? Given
three points, how are we to combine them in certain proportions? The
phrase is meaningless. If some one makes the obvious retort, that we
have to combine lines, not points, my rejoinder is equally obvious.
To begin with, lines are not elements. Metaphysically, space has _no_
elements, being, as the sequel will show, mere relations between
non-spatial elements. Mathematically, this fact exhibits itself in
the self-contradictory notion of the point, or zero magnitude in
space, as the limit in our vain search for spatial elements. But
even if we allow the line to pass as the spatial element, what does
the combination of three lines in definite proportions give us? It
gives us, simply, the coordinates of a _point_. Here again we see a
great difference between the colour and space-manifolds. In colours,
the combination of magnitudes gives a new magnitude of the same
kind; in space, it defines, not a magnitude at all, but a would-be
element of a different kind from the defining magnitudes. In the
tone-manifold, we should find still different conditions. Here, no
one of the measuring magnitudes can vanish without the tone vanishing
too, and all three are so bound up together, in the single resulting
sensation, that none can exist without a finite quantity of the
others. They are all qualitatively different, both from each other,
and from any possible tone, being constituents of it, as mass and
velocity are constituents of momentum. All these different conditions
require to be examined, before a manifold can be completely defined;
and until we have conducted such an examination in detail, we cannot
pronounce as to the _ priori_ or empirical nature of the laws of the
manifold. As regards space, I have attempted such an examination in
the third and fourth chapters of this Essay.

=65.= I do not wish to deny, however, the great value of the
conception of space as a manifold. On the contrary, this conception
seems to have become essential to any treatment of the question.
I only wish to urge that the purely algebraical treatment of any
manifold, important as it may be in deducing fresh consequences from
known premisses, tends rather to conceal than to make clear the
basis of the premisses themselves, and is therefore misleading in a
philosophical investigation. For mathematics, where quantity reigns
supreme, Riemann's conception has proved itself abundantly fruitful;
for philosophy, on the contrary, where quantity appears rather as
a cloak to conceal the qualities it abstracts from, the conception
seems to me more productive of error and confusion than of sound
doctrine.

We are thus brought back to the point from which we started, namely,
the falsity of Riemann's initial disjunction, and the consequent
fallacy in his proof of the empirical nature of the axioms. His
philosophy is chiefly vitiated, to my mind, by this fallacy, and
by the uncritical assumption that a metrical coordinate system can
be set up independently of any axioms as to space-measurement[82].
Riemann has failed to observe, what I have endeavoured to prove in
the next chapter, that, unless space had a strictly constant measure
of curvature, Geometry would become impossible; also that the absence
of constant measure of curvature involves absolute position, which is
an absurdity. Hence he is led to the conclusion that all geometrical
axioms are empirical, and may not hold in the infinitesimal, where
observation is impossible. Thus he says (p. 267): "Now the empirical
conceptions, on which spatial measurements are based, the conceptions
of the rigid body and the light-ray, appear to lose their validity
in the infinitesimal: it is therefore quite conceivable that
the relations of spatial magnitudes in the infinitesimal do not
correspond to the presuppositions of Geometry, and this would, in
fact, have to be assumed, as soon as it would enable us to explain
the phenomena more simply." From this conclusion I must entirely
dissent. In very large spaces, there might be a departure from
Euclid; for they depend upon the axiom of parallels, which is not
contained in the axiom of Free Mobility; but in the infinitesimal,
departures from Euclid could only be due to the absence of Free
Mobility, which, as I hope my third chapter will show, is once for
all impossible.


Helmholtz.

=66.= Helmholtz, like Riemann, was important both in the mathematics
and in the philosophy of Geometry. From the mathematical point
of view, his work has been already considered in Chapter I.; the
consideration of his philosophy, which must occupy us here, will
be a more serious task. Like Riemann, he endeavoured to prove that
all the axioms are empirical, and like Riemann, he based his proof
chiefly on Metageometry. He had an additional resource, however,
in the physiology of the senses, which first led him to reject the
Transcendental Aesthetic, and enabled him to attack Kant from the
psychological as well as the mathematical side[83].

The principal topics, for a criticism of Helmholtz, are three: First,
his criterion of the _ priori_; second, his discussion with Land as
to the "imaginability" of non-Euclidean spaces; third--and this is by
far the most important of the three--his theory of the dependence of
Geometry on Mechanics. Let us discuss these three points successively.

=67.= Helmholtz's criterion of apriority is difficult to discover,
as he never, to my knowledge, gives a precise statement of it.
From his discussion of physical and transcendental Geometry[84],
however, it would appear that he regards as empirical whatever
applies to empirical matter. For he there maintains, that even if
space were an _ priori_ form, yet any Geometry, which aimed at an
application to Physics, would, since the actual places of bodies are
not known _ priori_, be necessarily empirical[85]. It seems the
more probable that he regards this as a possible criterion, as it
is adopted, in several passages, by his disciple Erdmann[86], and
so strange a test could hardly be accepted by a philosopher, unless
he had found it in his master. I have called this a strange test,
because it seems to me completely to ignore the work of the Critical
Philosophy. For if there is one thing which, one might have hoped,
had been made sufficiently clear by Kant's Critique, it is this,
that knowledge which is _ priori_, being itself the condition of
possible experience, applies--and in Kant's view, applies only--to
empirical matter. Helmholtz and Erdmann, therefore, in setting up
this test without discussion, simply ignore the existence of Kant
and the possibility of a transcendental argument. Helmholtz assumes
always that empirical knowledge must be wholly empirical, that there
can be no _ priori_ conditions of the experience in question,
that experience will always be possible, and may give any kind of
result. Thus in discussing "physical" Geometry, he assumes that the
possibility of empirical measurement involves no _ priori_ axioms,
and that no _ priori_ element can be contained in the process. This
assumption, as we shall see in Chapter III., is quite unwarrantable:
certain properties of _space_, in fact, are involved in the
possibility of measuring _matter_. In spite of the fact, therefore,
that we apply measurement to empirical matter, and that our results
are therefore empirical, there may well be an _ priori_ element
in measurement, which is presupposed in its possibility. Such a
criterion, therefore, must pronounce everything empirical, but must
itself be pronounced worthless.

Another and a better criterion, it is true, is also to be found in
Helmholtz, and has also been adopted by Erdmann. Whatever might,
by a different experience, have been rendered different--so this
criterion contends--must itself be dependent on experience, and so
empirical. This criterion seems perfectly sound, but Helmholtz's use
of it is usually vitiated by his neglecting to prove the possibility
of the different experience in question. He says, for example, that
if our experience showed us only bodies which changed their shapes
in motion, we should not arrive at the axiom of Congruence, which
he pronounces accordingly to be empirical. But I shall endeavour
to prove, in Chapter III., that without the axiom of Congruence,
experience of spatial magnitude would be impossible. If my proof
be correct, it follows that no experience can ever reveal spatial
magnitudes which contradict this axiom--a possibility which Helmholtz
nowhere discusses, in setting up his hypothetical experience. Thus
this second criterion, though perfectly sound, requires always
an accompanying transcendental argument, as to the conditions of
possible experience. But this accompaniment is seldom to be found in
Helmholtz.

=68.= One of the few cases, in which Helmholtz has attempted such
an accompaniment, occurs in connection with our second point, the
imaginability of non-Euclidean spaces. The argument on this point
was elicited by Helmholtz's Kantian opponents, who maintained that
the merely logical possibility of these spaces was irrelevant, since
the basis of Geometry was not logic, but intuition. The axioms,
they said, are synthetic propositions, and their contraries are,
therefore, not self-contradictory; they are nevertheless apodeictic
propositions, since no other _intuition_ than the Euclidean is
possible to us[87]. I have already criticized this line of argument
in the beginning of the present chapter. Helmholtz's criticism,
however, was different: admitting the internal consistency of
the argument, he denied one of its premisses. We _can_ imagine
non-Euclidean spaces, he said, though their unfamiliarity makes
this difficult. From this view it followed, of course, that Kant's
argument, even if it were formally valid, could not prove the
apriority of Euclidean space in particular, but only of that general
space which included Euclid and non-Euclid alike[88].

Although I agree with Helmholtz in thinking the distinction between
Euclidean and non-Euclidean spaces empirical, I cannot think his
argument on the "imaginability" of the latter a very happy one. The
validity of any proof must turn, obviously, on the definition of
imaginability. The definition which Helmholtz gives in his answer
to Land is as follows: Imaginability requires "die vollstndige
Vorstellbarkeit derjenigen Sinneseindrcke, welche das betreffende
Object in uns nach den bekannten Gesetzen unserer Sinnesorgane
unter allen denkbaren Bedingungen der Beobachtung erregen, und
wodurch es sich von anderen hnlichen Objecten unterscheiden wrde"
(Wiss. Abh. II. p. 644). This definition is not very clear, owing
to the ambiguity of the word "_Vorstellbarkeit_." The following
definition seems less ambiguous: "Wenn die Reihe der Sinneseindrcke
vollstndig und eindeutig angegeben werden kann, muss man m. E.
die Sache fr _anschaulich vorstellbar_ erklren" (Vortrge und
Reden, II. p. 234). This makes clear, what also appears from his
manner of proof, that he regards things as imaginable which can be
_described_ in conceptual terms. Such, as Land remarks (Mind, Vol.
II. p. 45), "is not the sense required for argumentation in this
case." That Land's criticism is just, is shown by Helmholtz's proof
for non-Euclidean spaces, for it consists only in an analogy to
the volume inside a sphere, which is mathematically obtained thus:
We take the symbols representing magnitudes in "pseudo-spherical"
(hyperbolic) space, and give them a new Euclidean meaning; thus all
our symbolic propositions become capable of two interpretations,
one for pseudo-spherical space, and one for the volume inside a
sphere. It is, however, sufficiently obvious that this procedure,
though it enables us to _describe_ our new space, does not enable
us to _imagine_ it, in the sense of calling up images of the way
things would look in it. We really derive, from this analogy, no
more knowledge than a man born blind may derive, as to light,
from an analogy with heat. The dictum "Nihil est in intellectu
quod non fuerit ante in sensu," would unquestionably be true, if
for _intellect_ we were to substitute _imagination_; it is vain,
therefore, _if_ our actual space be Euclidean, to hope for a power of
_imagining_ a non-Euclidean space. What Helmholtz might, I believe
with perfect truth, have urged against Land, is that the image we
actually have of space is not sufficiently accurate to exclude, in
the actual space we know, all possibility of a slight departure from
the Euclidean type. But in maintaining that we cannot imagine, though
we can conceive and describe, a space different from that we actually
have, Land is, in my opinion, unquestionably in the right. For a
pure Kantian, who maintains, with Land, that none of the axioms can
be proved, this question is of great importance. But if, as I have
maintained, some of the axioms are susceptible of a transcendental
proof, while the others can be verified empirically, the question
is freed from psychological implications, and the imaginability or
non-imaginability of metageometrical spaces becomes unimportant.

=69.= We come now to the third and most important question, the
relation of Geometry to Mechanics. There are three senses in which
Helmholtz's appeal to rigid bodies may be taken: the first, I think,
is the sense in which he originally intended it; the second seems
to be the sense which he adopted in his defence against Land; while
the third is admitted by Land, and will be admitted in the following
argument. These three senses are as follows:

(1) It may be asserted that the actual meaning of the axiom of Free
Mobility lies in the assertion of empirical rigid bodies, and that
the two propositions are equivalent to one another. This is certainly
false.

(2) The axiom of Free Mobility, it may be said, is logically
distinguishable from the assertion of rigid bodies, and may even be
not empirical; but it is barren, even for pure Geometry, without the
aid of measures, which must themselves be empirical rigid bodies.
This sense is more plausible than the first, but I believe we can
show that, in this sense also, the proposition is false.

(3) For pure Geometry and the abstract study of space, it may be
said, Free Mobility, as applied to an abstract geometrical matter,
gives a sufficient possibility of quantitative comparison; but
the moment we extend our results to mixed mathematics, and apply
them to empirically given matter, we require also, as measures,
empirically given rigid bodies, or bodies, at least, whose departures
from rigidity are empirically known. In this sense, I admit, the
proposition is correct[89].

In discussing these three meanings, I shall not confine myself
strictly to the text of Helmholtz or Land: if I endeavoured to do so,
I should be met by the difficulty that neither of them defines the
_ priori_, and that each is too much inclined, in my opinion, to
test it by psychological criteria. I shall, therefore, take the three
meanings in turn, without laying stress on their historical adequacy
to the views of Land or Helmholtz.

=70.= (1) Congruence may be taken to mean--as Helmholtz would
certainly seem to desire--that we find actual bodies, in our
mechanical experience, to preserve their shapes with approximate
constancy, and that we infer, from this experience, the homogeneity
of space. This view, in my opinion, radically misconceives the
nature of measurement, and of the axioms involved in it. For what
is meant by the non-rigidity of a body? We mean, simply, that
it has changed its shape. But this involves the possibility of
comparison with its former shape, in other words, of measurement.
In order, therefore, that there may be any question of rigidity
or non-rigidity, the measurement of spatial magnitudes must be
already possible. It follows that measurement cannot, without a
vicious circle, be itself derived from experience of rigid bodies.
Geometrical measurement, in fact, is the comparison of spatial
magnitudes, and such comparison involves, as will be proved at length
in Chapter III., the homogeneity of space. This is, therefore, the
logical prerequisite of all experience of rigid bodies, and cannot
be the result of such experience. Without the homogeneity of space,
the very notion of rigidity or non-rigidity could not exist, since
these mean, respectively, the constancy or inconstancy of spatial
magnitude in pieces of matter, and both alike, therefore, presuppose
the possibility of spatial measurement. From the homogeneity of
space, we learn that a body, when it moves, will not change its shape
without some physical cause; that it actually does not change its
shape, is never asserted, and is indeed known to be false. As soon as
measurement is possible, actual changes of shape can be estimated,
and their empirical causes can be sought. But if space were not
homogeneous, measurement would be impossible, constant shape would
be a meaningless phrase, and rigidity could never be experienced.
Congruence asserts, in short, that a body can, so far as mere space
is concerned, move without change of shape; rigidity asserts that
it actually does so move--a very different proposition, involving
obviously, as its logical prius, the former geometrical proposition.

This argument may be summed up by the following disjunction: If
bodies change their shapes in motion--and to some extent, since no
body is perfectly rigid, they must all do so--then one of two cases
must occur. _Either_ the changes of shape, as bodies move from
place to place, follow no geometrical law, are not, for instance,
functions of the amount or direction of motion; in which case the
law of causation requires that they should not be effects of the
change of place, but of some simultaneous non-geometrical change,
such as temperature. _Or_ the changes are regular, and the shape _S_
becomes, in a new position _p_, _Sf_(_p_). In this case, the law of
concomitant variations leads us to attribute the change of shape
to the mere motion, and shape thus becomes a function of absolute
position. But this is absurd, for position _means_ merely a relation
or set of relations; it is impossible, therefore, that mere position
should be able to effect changes in a body. Position is one term in a
relation, not a thing _per se_; it cannot, therefore, act on a thing,
nor exist by itself, apart from the other terms of the relation. Thus
Helmholtz's view, that Congruence depends on the existence of rigid
bodies, must, since it involves absolute position, be condemned as
a logical fallacy. Congruence, in fact, as I shall prove more fully
in Chapter III., is an _ priori_ deduction from the relativity of
position.

=71.= (2) The above argument seems to me to answer satisfactorily
Helmholtz's contention in the precise form which he first gave it.
The axiom of Congruence, we must agree, is logically distinguishable
from the existence of rigid bodies. Nevertheless some reference
to matter is logically involved in Geometry[90], but whether this
reference makes Geometry empirical, or does not, rather, show an _
priori_ element in dynamics, is a further question.

The reference to matter is necessitated by the homogeneity of empty
space. For so long as we leave matter out of account, one position
is perfectly indistinguishable from another, and a science of
the relations of positions is impossible. Indeed, before spatial
relations can arise at all, the homogeneity of empty space must
be destroyed, and this destruction must be effected by matter.
The blank page is useless to the geometer until he defaces its
homogeneity by lines in ink or pencil. No spatial figures, in short,
are conceivable, without a reference to a not purely spatial matter.
Again, if Congruence is ever to be used, there must be motion: but
a purely geometrical point, being defined solely by its spatial
attributes, cannot be supposed to move without a contradiction in
terms. What moves, therefore, must be matter. Hence, in order that
motion may afford a test of equality, we must have some _matter_
which is known to be unaffected throughout the motion, that is, we
must have some rigid bodies. And the difficulty is, that these bodies
must not only undergo no change due solely to the nature of space,
but must, further, be unchanged by their changing relation to other
bodies. And here we have a requisite which can no longer be fulfilled
_ priori_: which, indeed, we know to be, in strictness, untrue.
For the forces acting on a body depend upon its spatial relations
to other bodies, and changing forces are liable to produce changing
configuration. Hence, it would seem, actual measurement must be
purely empirical, and must depend on the degree of rigidity to be
obtained, during the process of measurement, in the bodies with which
we are conversant.

This conclusion, I believe, is valid of all actual measurement.
But the possibility of such empirical and approximate rigidity,
I must insist, depends on the _ priori_ law that _mere_ motion,
apart from the action of other matter, cannot effect a change of
shape. For without this law, the effect of other matter would not be
discoverable; the laws of motion would be absurd, and Physics would
be impossible. Consider the second law, for example: How could we
measure the change of motion, if motion itself produced a change
in our measures? Or consider the law of gravitation: How could we
establish the inverse square, unless we were able, independently
of Dynamics, to measure distances? The whole science of Dynamics,
in short, is fundamentally dependent on Geometry, and but for the
independent possibility of measuring spatial magnitudes, none of the
magnitudes of Dynamics could be measured. Time, force, and mass are
alike measured by spatial correlates: these correlates are given, for
time, by the first law, for force and mass, by the second and third.
It is true, then, that an empirical element appears unavoidably in
all actual measurement, inasmuch as we can only know empirically
that a given piece of matter preserves its shape throughout the
necessary change of dynamical relations to other matter involved in
motion; but it is further true that, for Geometry--which regards
matter simply as supplying the necessary breach in the homogeneity
of space, and the necessary term for spatial relations, not as the
bearer of forces which change the configuration of other material
systems--for Geometry, which deals with this abstract and merely
kinematical matter, rigidity is _ priori_, in so far as the only
changes with which it is cognizant--changes of mere position,
namely--are incapable of affecting the shapes of the imaginary and
abstract bodies with which it deals. To use a scholastic distinction,
we may say that matter is the _causa essendi_ of space, but Geometry
is the _causa cognoscendi_ of Physics. Without a Geometry independent
of Physics, Physics itself, which necessarily assumes the results of
Geometry, could never arise; but when Geometry is used in Physics, it
loses some of its _ priori_ certainty, and acquires the empirical
and approximate character which belongs to all accounts of actual
phenomena.

=72.= (3) This argument leads us to Land's distinction of physical
and geometrical rigidity. The distinction may be expressed--and
I think it is better expressed--by distinguishing between
the conceptions of matter proper to Dynamics and to Geometry
respectively. In Dynamics, we are concerned with matter as subject
to and as causing motion, as affected by and as exerting _force_. We
are therefore concerned with the changes of spatial configuration to
which material systems are liable: the description and explanation
of these changes is the proper subject-matter of all Dynamics. But
in order that such a science may exist, it is obviously necessary
that spatial configuration should be already measurable. If this
were not the case, motion, acceleration and force would remain
perfectly indeterminate. Geometry, therefore, must already exist
before Dynamics becomes possible: to make Geometry dependent for its
possibility on the laws of motion or any of their consequences, is
a gross  . Nevertheless, as we have seen, some sort
of matter is essential to Geometry. But this geometrical matter is a
more abstract and wholly different matter from that of Dynamics. In
order to study space by itself, we reduce the properties of matter
to a bare minimum: we avoid entirely the category of causation,
so essential to Dynamics, and retain nothing, in our matter, but
its spatial adjectives[91]. The kind of rigidity affirmed of this
abstract matter--a kind which suffices for the theory of our
science, though not for its application to the objects of daily
life--is purely geometrical, and asserts no more than this: That
since our matter is devoid, _ex hypothesi_, of causal properties,
there remains nothing, in mere empty space, which is capable of
changing the configuration of any geometrical system. A change of
absolute position, it asserts, is nothing; therefore the only real
change involved in motion is a change of relation to other matter;
but such other matter, for the purposes of our science, is regarded
as destitute of causal powers; hence no change can occur, in the
configuration of our system, by the mere effect of motion through
empty space. The necessity of such a principle may be shown by a
simple _reductio ad absurdum_, as follows. A motion of translation
of the universe as a whole, with constant direction and velocity, is
dynamically negligeable; indeed it is, philosophically, no motion at
all, for it involves no change in the condition or mutual relations
of the things in the universe. But if our geometrical rigidity
were denied, the change in the parameter of space might cause all
bodies to change their shapes owing to the mere change of absolute
position, which is obviously absurd.

To make quite plain the function of rigid bodies in Geometry, let us
suppose a liquid geometer in a liquid world. We cannot suppose the
liquid perfectly homogeneous and undifferentiated, in the first place
because such a liquid would be indistinguishable from empty space,
in the second place because our geometer's body--unless he be a
disembodied spirit--will itself constitute a differentiation for him.
We may therefore assume

                    "dim beams,
          Which amid the streams
      Weave a network of coloured light,"

and we may suppose this network to form the occasion for our
geometer's reflections. Then he will be able to imagine a network
in which the lines are straight, or circular, or parabolic, or any
other shape, and he will be able to infer that such a network, if it
can be woven in one part of the fluid, can be woven in another. This
will form sufficient basis for his deductions. The superposition he
is concerned with--since not actual equality, but only the formal
conditions of equality, are the subject-matter of Geometry--is purely
ideal, and is unaffected by the impossibility of congealing any
actual network. But in order to apply his Geometry to the exigencies
of life, he would need some standard of comparison between actual
networks, and here, it is true, he would need either a rigid body,
or a knowledge of the conditions under which similar networks arose.
Moreover these conditions, being necessarily empirical, could hardly
be known apart from previous measurement. Hence for applied, though
not for pure Geometry, one rigid body at least seems essential.

=73.= The utility, for Dynamics, of our abstract geometrical matter,
is sufficiently evident. For having, by its means, a power of
determining the configurations of material systems in whatever part
of space, and knowing that changes of configuration are not due to
mere change of place, we are able to attribute these changes to the
action of other matter, and thus to establish the notion of force,
which would be impossible if change of shape might be due to empty
space.

Thus, to conclude: Geometry requires, if it is to be _practically_
possible, some body or bodies which are either rigid (in the
dynamical sense), or known to undergo some definite changes of shape
according to some definite law. (These changes, we may suppose,
are known by the laws of Physics, which have been experimentally
established, and which throughout assume the truth of Geometry.)
One or more such bodies are necessary to applied Geometry--but only
in the sense in which rulers and compasses are necessary. They are
necessary as, in making the Ordnance Survey, an elaborate apparatus
was necessary for measuring the base line on Salisbury Plain. But
for the _theory_ of Geometry, geometrical rigidity suffices, and
geometrical rigidity means only that a shape, which is possible in
one part of space, is possible in any other. The empirical element
in practice, arising from the purely empirical nature of physical
rigidity, is comparable to the empirical inaccuracies arising from
the failure to find straight lines or circles in the world--which no
one but Mill has regarded as rendering Geometry itself empirical or
inaccurate. But to make Geometry await the perfection of Physics,
is to make Physics, which depends throughout on Geometry, forever
impossible. As well might we leave the formation of numbers until we
had counted the houses in Piccadilly.


Erdmann.

=74.= In connection with Riemann and Helmholtz, it is natural to
consider Erdmann's philosophical work on their theories[92]. This is
certainly the most important book on the subject which has appeared
from the philosophical side, and in spite of the fact that, like
the whole theory of Riemann and Helmholtz, it is inapplicable to
projective Geometry, it still deserves a very full discussion.

Erdmann agrees throughout with the conclusions of Riemann and
Helmholtz, except on a few points of minor importance; and his views,
as this agreement would lead one to expect, are ultra-empirical.
Indeed his logic seems--though I say this with hesitation--to be
incompatible with any system but that of Mill: there is apparently
no distinction, to him, between the general and the universal, and
consequently no concept not embodied in a series of instances. Such
a theory of logic, to my mind, vitiates most of his work, as it
vitiated Riemann's philosophy[93]. This general criticism will find
abundant illustration in the course of our account of Erdmann's views.

=75.= After a general introduction, and a short history of the
development of Metageometry, Erdmann proceeds, in his second
chapter, to discuss what are the axioms of Euclidean Geometry. The
arithmetical axioms, as they are called, he leaves aside, as applying
to magnitude in general; what we want here, he says, is a definition
of space, for which the geometrical axioms are alone relevant.
But a definition of space, he says--following Riemann--demands a
genus of which space shall be a species, and this, since our space
is psychologically unique, can only be furnished by analytical
mathematics (p. 36). Now the space-forms dealt with by Geometry are
magnitudes, and conceptions of magnitude are everywhere applied in
Geometry. But before Riemann, only particular determinations of space
could be exhibited as magnitudes, and thus the desired definition
was impossible to obtain. Now, however, we can subsume space as a
whole under a general conception of magnitude, and thus obtain,
besides the space-intuition and the space-conception, a third form,
namely, the conception of space as a magnitude (_Grssenbegriff
vom Raum_, pp. 38-39). The definition of this will give us the
complete, but not redundant, system of axioms, which could not be
obtained by transforming the general intuition of space into the
space-conception, for want of a plurality of instances (p. 40).

=76.= Before considering the subsequent method of definition, let
us reflect on the theories involved in the above account of the
conception of space as a magnitude. In the first place, it is assumed
that conceptions cannot be formed unless we have a series of separate
objects from which to abstract a common property--in other words,
that the universal is always the general. In the second place, it
is assumed that all definition is classification under a genus. In
the third place, the conception of magnitude, if I am not mistaken,
is fundamentally misunderstood when it is supposed applicable to
space as a whole. But in the fourth place, even if such a conception
existed, it could give none of the essential properties of space. Let
us consider these four points successively.

=77.= As regards the first point, it is to be observed that people
certainly had some conception of space before Riemann invented
the notion of a manifold, and that this conception was certainly
something other than the common qualities of all the points, lines
or figures in space. In the second place, Erdmann's view would
make it impossible to conceive God, unless one were a polytheist,
or the universe--unless, like Leibnitz, one imagined a series of
possible worlds, set over against God, and none of them, therefore,
a true Universe--or, to take an instance more likely to appeal to an
empiricist, the necessarily unique centre of mass of the material
universe. Any universal, in short, which is a bond or unity between
things, and not merely a common property among independent objects,
becomes impossible on Erdmann's view. We cannot, therefore, unless
we adopt Mill's philosophy intact, regard the conception of space
as demanding a series of instances from which to abstract. But even
if we did so regard it, Riemann's manifolds would leave us without
resources. For Euclidean space still appears as unique, at the end of
his series of determinations. We have instances of manifolds, but not
instances of Euclidean space. Thus if Erdmann's theory of conceptions
were correct, he would still be left searching in vain for the
conception of Euclidean space.

=78.= The second point, the view that all definition is
classification, is closely allied to the first, and the two together
plunge us into the depths of scholastic formal logic. The same
instances of things which could not, on Erdmann's view, be conceived,
may now be adduced as things which cannot be defined. Whatever was
said above applies here also, and the point need not, therefore, be
further discussed[94].

=79.= As regards the third point, the impossibility of applying
conceptions of magnitude to space as a whole, a longer argument will
be necessary, for we are concerned, here, with the whole question
of the logical nature of judgments of magnitude. As we had before
too much comparison for our needs, so we have now too little. I will
endeavour to explain this point, which is of great importance, and
underlies, I think, most of the philosophical fallacies of Riemann's
school.

A judgment of magnitude is always a judgment of comparison, and what
is more, the comparison is never concerned with quality, but only
with quantity. Quality, in the judgment of magnitude, is supposed
identical, in the object whose magnitude is stated, and in the unit
with which it is compared. But quality, except in pure number, and in
pure quantity as dealt with by the Calculus, is always present, and
is partly absorbed into quantity, partly untouched by the judgment of
magnitude. As Bosanquet says (Logic, Vol. I. p. 124); "Quantitative
comparison is not _prima facie_ coordinate with qualitative,
but rather stands in its place as the _effect of comparison on
quality_, which so far as comparable _becomes quantity_, and so
far as incomparable furnishes the distinction of parts essential
to the quantitative whole" (italics in the original). Thus, if we
are to regard space as a magnitude, we must be able to adduce all
those series of instances of which Erdmann speaks, and which, for
the conception of space, seemed irrelevant. But it remains to be
proved that the comparison, which we _can_ institute between various
spaces, is capable of expression in a quantitative form. Rather it
would seem that the difference of quality is such as to preclude
quantitative comparison between different spaces, and therefore also
to preclude all judgments of magnitude about space as a whole. Here
an exception might seem to be demanded by non-Euclidean spaces,
whose space-constants give a definite magnitude, inherent in space
as a whole, and therefore, one might think, characterizing space as
a magnitude. But this is a mistake. For the space-constant, in such
spaces, is the ultimate unit, the fixed term in all quantitative
comparison; it is itself, therefore, destitute of quantity, since
there is no independently given magnitude with which to compare it.
A non-Euclidean world, in which the space-constant and all lines
and figures were suddenly multiplied in a constant ratio, would be
wholly unchanged; the lines, as measured against the space-constant,
would have the same magnitude as before, and the space-constant
itself, having no outside standard of comparison, would be destitute
of quantity, and therefore not subject to change of quantity. Such an
enlargement of a non-Euclidean world, in other words, is unmeaning;
and this proves how inapplicable is the notion of quantity to space
as a whole.

It might be objected that this only proves the absence of
quantitative difference between different spaces of positive
space-constant, or between those of negative space-constant: the
quantitative difference persists, it might be said, between those
of positive curvature in general and those of negative curvature
in general, or between both together and Euclidean space. This I
entirely deny. There is no qualitatively similar unit, in the three
kinds of space, by which quantitative comparison could be effected.
The straight lines of one space cannot be put into the other: the
two straight lines, in one space, whose product is the reciprocal
of the measure of curvature, have no corresponding curves in the
other space, and the measures of curvature cannot, therefore,
be quantitatively compared with each other. That the one may be
regarded as positive, the other negative, I admit, but their values
are indeterminate, and the units in the two cases are qualitatively
different. A debt of 300 may be represented as the asset of -300,
and the height of the Eiffel Tower is +300 metres; but it does
not follow that the two are quantitatively comparable. So with
space-constants: the space-constant is itself the unit for magnitudes
in its own space, and differs qualitatively from the space-constant
of another kind of space.

Again, to proceed to a more philosophical argument, two different
spaces cannot co-exist in the same world: we may be unable to decide
between the alternatives of the disjunction, but they remain, none
the less, absolutely incompatible alternatives. Hence we cannot get
that coexistence of two spaces which is essential to comparison. The
fact seems to be that Erdmann, in his admiration for Riemann and
Helmholtz, has fallen in with their mathematical bias, and assumed,
as mathematicians naturally tend to assume, that quantity is
everywhere and always applicable and adequate, and can deal with more
than the mere comparison of things whose qualities are already known
as similar[95].

=80.= This suggests the fourth and last of the above points, that the
_qualities_ of space, even if space could be successfully regarded
as a magnitude, would have to be entirely omitted in such a manner
of regarding it, and that, therefore, none of its important or
essential properties would emerge from such treatment. For to regard
space as a magnitude involves, as we saw, a comparison with something
qualitatively similar, and an abstraction from the similar qualities.
To some extent and by the help of certain doubtful arguments, such a
comparison is instituted by Riemann and Erdmann; but when they have
instituted it, they forget all about the common qualities on which
its possibility depends. But these are precisely the fundamental
properties of space, and those from which, as I shall endeavour to
prove in Chapter III., the axioms common to Euclid and Metageometry
follow _ priori_. Such are the dangers of the quantitative bias.

=81.= After this protest against the initial assumptions in Erdmann's
deduction of space, let us return to consider the manner, in which
this deduction is carried out. Here there will be less ground
for criticism, as the deduction, given its presuppositions, is,
I think, as good as such a deduction can be. To define space as
a magnitude, he says, let us start with two of its most obvious
properties, continuity and the three dimensions. Tones and colours
afford other instances of a manifold with these two properties, but
differ from space in that their dimensions are not homogeneous and
interchangeable. To designate this difference, Erdmann introduces
a useful pair of terms: in the general case, he calls a manifold
_n_-determined (n-_bestimmt_); in the case where, as in space, the
dimensions are homogeneous, he calls the manifold _n_-extended
(n-_ausgedehnt_). Manifolds of the latter sort he calls extents
(_Ausgedehntheiten_). That the difference between the two kinds
is one of quality, not of quantity, he seems not to perceive; he
also overlooks the fact that, in the second kind, from its very
definition, the axiom of Congruence must hold, on account of the
qualitative similarity of different parts. In spite of this fact, he
defines space as an extent, and then regards Congruence as empirical,
and as possibly false in the infinitesimal. This is the more strange,
as he actually proves (p. 50) that measurement is impossible, in an
extent, unless the parts are independent of their place, and can be
carried about unaltered as measures. In spite of this, he proceeds
immediately to discuss whether the measure of curvature is constant
or variable, without investigating how, in the latter case, Geometry
could exist. We cannot know, he says, from geometrical superposition,
that geometrical bodies are independent of place, for if their
dimensions altered in motion according to any fixed law, two bodies
which could be superposed in one place could be superposed in any
other. That such a hypothesis involves absolute position, and denies
the qualitative similarity of the parts of space, which he declares
(p. 171) to be the principle of his theory of Geometry, is nowhere
perceived. But what is more, his notion that magnitude is something
absolute, independent of comparison, has prevented him from seeing
that such a hypothesis is unmeaning. He says himself that, even on
this hypothesis, a geometrical body can be defined as one whose
points retain constant distances from each other, for, since we have
no absolute measure, measurement could not reveal to us the change of
absolute magnitude (p. 60). But is not this a _reductio ad absurdum_?
For magnitude is nothing apart from comparison, and the comparison
here can only be effected by superposition; if, then, as on the above
hypothesis, superposition always gives the same result, by whatever
motion it is effected, there is no sense in speaking of magnitudes as
no longer equal when separated: absolute magnitude is an absurdity,
and the magnitude resulting from comparison does not differ from that
which would result if the dimensions of bodies were unchanged in
motion. Therefore, since magnitude is only intelligible as the result
of comparison, the dimensions of bodies _are_ unchanged in motion,
and the suggested hypothesis is unmeaning. On this subject I shall
have more to say in Chapter III.[96]

=82.= This hypothesis, however, is not introduced for its own sake,
but only to usher in the Helmholtzian _deus ex machina_, Mechanics.
For Mechanics proves--so Erdmann confidently continues--that
rigidity must hold, not merely as to ratios, in the above restricted
geometrical sense, but as to absolute magnitudes (p. 62). Hence we
get at last true Congruence, empirical as Mechanics is empirical, and
impossible to prove apart from Mechanics. I have already criticized
Helmholtz's view of the dependence of Geometry on Mechanics, and
need not here speak of it at length. It is a pity that Erdmann has
in no way specified the procedure by which Mechanics decides the
geometrical alternatives--indeed he seems to rely on the _ipse dixit_
of Helmholtz. How, if Geometry would be totally unable to discover a
change in dimensions of the kind suggested, the Laws of Motion, which
throughout depend on Geometry, should be able to discover it if it
existed, I am wholly at a loss to understand. Uniform motion in a
straight line, for example, presupposes geometrical measurement; if
this measurement is mistaken, what Mechanics imagines to be uniform
motion is not really such, but Mechanics can never discover the
discrepancy. If the Laws of Motion had been regarded as _ priori_,
Geometry might possibly have been reinforced by them; but so long
as they are empirical, they presuppose geometrical measurement, and
cannot therefore condition or affect it.

Erdmann's conclusion, in the second chapter, is that Congruence is
probable, but cannot be verified in the infinitesimal; that its truth
involves the actual existence of rigid bodies (though, by the way,
we know these to be, strictly speaking, non-existent), that rigid
bodies are freely moveable, and do not alter their size in rotation
(Helmholtz's Monodromy); that the axiom of three dimensions is
certain, since small errors are impossible; and that the remaining
axioms of Euclid--those of the straight line and of parallels--are
approximately, if not accurately, true of our actual space (pp.
78, 83). He does not discuss how Congruence, on the above view,
is compatible with the atomic theory, or even with the observed
deformations of approximately rigid bodies; nor how, if space, as he
assumes, is homogeneous, rigid bodies can fail to be freely moveable
through space. The axioms are all lumped together as empirical, and
it appears, in the following chapters, that Erdmann regards their
empirical nature as sufficiently proved by their applicability to
empirical material (cf. pp. 159, 165)--a strange criterion, which
would prove the same conclusion, with equal facility, of Arithmetic
and of the laws of thought.

=83.= The third chapter, on the philosophical consequences of
Metageometry, need not be discussed at length, since it deals rather
with space than with Geometry. At the same time, it will be worth
while to treat briefly of Erdmann's criterion of apriority. On this
subject it is very difficult to discover his meaning, since it
seems to vary with the topic he is discussing. Thus at one time (p.
147) he rejects most emphatically the Kantian connection of the _
priori_ and the subjective[97], and yet at another time (p. 96) he
regards every presentation of external things as partly _ priori_,
partly empirical, merely because such a presentation is due to an
interaction between ourselves and things, and is therefore partly
due to subjective activity, partly due to outside objects. Hence,
he says, the distinction is not between different presentations,
but between different aspects of one and the same presentation.
This seems to return wholly to the Kantian psychological criterion
of subjectivity, with the added disadvantage that it makes the
distinction, like that of analytic and synthetic, epistemologically
worthless. And yet he never hesitates to pronounce every piece
of knowledge in turn empirical. The fact seems to be, that where
he wants a more logical criterion, he adopts a modification of
Helmholtz's criterion for sensations. If space be an _ priori_
form, he says, no experience could possibly change it (p. 108);
but this Metageometry has proved not to be the case, since we can
intuit the perceptions which non-Euclidean space would give us (p.
115). I have criticised this argument in discussing Helmholtz; at
present we are concerned with Erdmann's criterion of apriority. The
subjectivity-criterion--though he certainly uses it in discussing the
apriority of space, and solemnly decides, by its means, that space
is both _ priori_ and empirical since a change either in us or in
the outer world could change it (p. 97)--would seem, like several of
his other tests, to be a lapse on his part: the criterion which he
means to use is Helmholtz's. This criterion, I think, with a slight
change of wording, might be accepted; it seems to me a necessary,
but not a sufficient condition. The _ priori_, we may say, is not
only that which no experience can change, but that without which
experience would become impossible. It is the omission to discuss
the conditions which render geometrical (and mechanical) experience
possible, to my mind, which vitiates the empirical conclusions of
Helmholtz and Erdmann. Why certain conditions should be necessary
for experience--whether on account of the constitution of the mind,
or for some other reason--is a further question, which introduces
the relation of the _ priori_ to the subjective. But in discussing
the question as to what knowledge is _ priori_, as opposed to the
question concerning the further consequences of apriority, it is
well to keep to the purely logical criterion, and so preserve our
independence of psychological controversies. The fact, if it be a
fact, that the world might be such as to defy our attempts to know
it, will not, with the above criterion, invalidate the conclusion
that certain elements in knowledge are _ priori_; for whether
fulfilled or not, they remain necessary conditions for the existence
of any knowledge at all.

=84.= With this caution as to the meaning of apriority, we shall
find, I think, that the conclusions of Erdmann's final chapter, on
the principles of a theory of Geometry, are largely invalidated
by the diversity and inadequacy of his tests of the _ priori_.
He begins by asserting, in conformity with the quantitative bias
noticed above, that the question as to the nature of geometrical
axioms is completely analogous to the corresponding question of the
foundations of pure mathematics (p. 138). This is, I think, a radical
error: for the function of the axioms seems to be, to establish that
qualitative basis on which, as we saw, all qualitative comparison
must rest. But in pure mathematics, this qualitative basis is
irrelevant, for we deal there with pure quantity, _i.e._ with the
merely quantitative result of quantitative comparison, wherever it is
possible, independently of the qualities underlying the comparison.
Geometry, as Grassmann insists[98], ought not to be classed with
pure mathematics, for it deals with a matter which is given to the
intellect, not created by it. The axioms give the means by which
this matter is made amenable to quantity, and cannot, therefore, be
themselves deduced from purely quantitative considerations.

Leaving this point aside, however, let us return to Erdmann.
He distinguishes, within space, a form and a matter: the form
is to contain the properties common to all extents, the matter
the properties which distinguish space from other extents. This
distinction, he says, is purely logical, and does not correspond
with Kant's: matter and form, for Erdmann, are alike empirical. The
axioms and definitions of Geometry, he says, deal exclusively with
the matter of space. It seems a pity, having made this distinction,
to put it to so little use: after a few pages, it is dropped, and
no epistemological consequences are drawn from it. The reason is, I
think, that Erdmann has not perceived how much can be deduced from
his definition of an extent, as a manifold in which the dimensions
are homogeneous and interchangeable. For this property suffices to
prove the complete homogeneity of an extent, and hence--from the
absence of qualitative differences among elements--the relativity of
position and the axiom of Congruence. This deduction will be made at
length in the sequel[99]; at present, I have only to observe that
every extent, on this view, possesses all the properties (except
the three dimensions) common to Euclidean and non-Euclidean spaces.
The axioms which express these properties, therefore, apply to the
form of space, and follow from homogeneity alone, which Erdmann
allows (p. 171) as the principle of any theory of space. The above
distinction of form and matter, therefore, corresponds, when its
full consequences are deduced, to the distinction between the axioms
which follow from the homogeneity of space and those which do not.
Since, then, homogeneity is equivalent to the relativity of position,
and the relativity of position is of the very essence of a form of
externality, it would seem that his distinction of form and matter
can also be made coextensive with the distinction of the _ priori_
and empirical in Geometry. On this subject, I shall have more to say
in Chapter III.

In the remainder of the chapter, Erdmann insists that the straight
line, etc., though not abstracted from experience, which nowhere
presents straight lines, must yet, as applicable to admittedly
empirical sciences, be empirical (p. 159)--a criterion which he
appears to employ only when all other grounds for an empirical
opinion fail, and one which, obviously, can never refuse to do its
work, since all elements of knowledge are susceptible of employment
on some empirical material. He also defines the straight line (p.
155) as a line of constant curvature zero, as though curvature could
be measured independently of the straight line. Even the arithmetical
axioms are declared empirical (p. 165), since in a world where things
were all hopelessly different from one another, these axioms could
not be applied. After this reminder of Mill, we are not surprised, a
few pages later (p. 172), at a vague appeal to "English logicians"
as having proved Geometry to be an inductive science. Nevertheless,
Erdmann declares, almost on the last page of his book (p. 173), that
Geometry is distinguished from all other sciences by the homogeneity
of its material: a principle of which no single application occurs
throughout his book, and which, as we shall see in Chapter III.,
flatly contradicts the philosophical theories advocated throughout
his preceding pages.

On the whole, then, it cannot be said that Erdmann has done much to
strengthen the philosophical position of Riemann and Helmholtz. I
have criticized him at length, because his book has the appearance
of great thoroughness, and because it is undoubtedly the best
defence extant of the position which it takes up. We shall now have
the opposite task to perform, in defending Metageometry, on its
mathematical side, from the attacks of Lotze and others, and in
vindicating for it that measure of philosophical importance--far
inferior, indeed, to the hopes of Erdmann--which it seems really to
possess.


Lotze.

=85.= Lotze's argument as regards Geometry[100]--which follows a
metaphysical argument as to the ontological nature of space, and
assumes the results of this argument--consists of two parts: the
first discusses the various meanings logically assignable (pp.
233-247) to the proposition that other spaces than Euclid's are
possible, and the second criticizes, in detail, the procedure of
Metageometry. The first of these questions is very important, and
demands considerable care as to the logical import of a judgment
of possibility. Although Lotze's discussion is excellent in many
respects, I cannot persuade myself that he has hit on the only true
sense in which non-Euclidean spaces are possible. I shall endeavour
to make good this statement in the following pages.

=86.= Lotze opens with a somewhat startling statement, which,
though philosophically worthy to be true, does not appear to be
historically borne out. Euclidean Geometry has been chiefly shaken,
he says, by the Kantian notion of the exclusive subjectivity of
space--if space is only our private form of intuition, to which
there exists no analogue in the objective world, then other beings
may have other spaces, without supposing any difference in the world
which they arrange in these spaces (p. 233). This certainly seems
a legitimate deduction from the subjectivity of space, which, so
far from establishing the universal validity of Euclid, establishes
his validity only after an empirical investigation of the nature of
space as intuited by Tom, Dick or Harry. But as a matter of fact,
those who have done most to further non-Euclidean Geometry--with the
exception of Riemann, who was a disciple of Herbart--have usually
inherited from Newton a nave realism as regards absolute space.
I might instance the passage quoted from Bolyai in Chapter I., or
Clifford, who seems to have thought that we actually see the images
of things on the retina[101], or again Helmholtz's belief in the
dependence of Geometry on the behaviour of rigid bodies. This belief
led to the view that Geometry, like Physics, is an experimental
science, in which objective truth can be attained, it is true, but
only by empirical methods. However, Lotze's ground for uncertainty
about Euclid is a philosophically tenable ground, and it will be
instructive to observe the various possibilities which arise from it.

If space is only a subjective form--so Lotze opens his
argument--other beings may have a different form. If this corresponds
to a different world, the difference, he says, is uninteresting:
for our world alone is relevant to any metaphysical discussion. But
if this different space corresponds to the same world which we know
under the Euclidean form, then, in his opinion, we get a question of
genuine philosophic interest. And here he distinguishes two cases:
_either_ the relations between things, which are presented to these
hypothetical beings under the form of some different space, are
relations which do not appear to us, or at any rate do not appear
spatial; _or_ they are the same relations which appear to us as
figures in Euclidean space (p. 235). The first possibility would be
illustrated, he says, by beings to whom the tone or colour-manifolds
appeared extended; but we cannot, in his opinion, imagine a manifold,
such as is required for this case, to have its dimensions homogeneous
and comparable _inter se_, and therefore the contents of the various
presentations constituting such a manifold could not be combined
into a single content containing them all. But the possibility of
such a combination is of the essence of anything worth calling a
space: therefore the first of the above possibilities is unmotived
and uninteresting. Lotze's conclusion on this point, I think, is
undeniable, but I doubt whether his argument is very cogent. However,
as this possibility has no connection with that contemplated by
non-Euclideans, it is not worth while to discuss it further.

The second possibility also, Lotze thinks, is not that of
Metageometry, but in truth it comes nearer to it than any of the
other possibilities discussed. If a non-Euclidean were at the same
time a believer in the subjectivity of space, he would have to be
an adherent of this view. Let us see more precisely what the view
is. In Book II., Chapter I., Lotze has accepted the argument of the
Transcendental Aesthetic, but rejected that of the mathematical
antinomies: he has decided that space is, as Kant believed,
subjective, but possesses nevertheless, what Kant denied it, an
objective counterpart. The relation of presented space to its
objective counterpart, as conceived by Lotze, is rather hard to
understand. It seems scarcely to resemble the relation of sensation
to its object--_e.g._ of light to ether-vibrations--for if it did,
space would not be in any peculiar sense subjective. It seems rather
to resemble the relation of a perceived bodily motion to the state
of mind of the person willing the motion. However this may be, the
objective counterpart of space is supposed to consist of certain
immediate interactions of monads, who experience the interactions
as modifications of their internal states. Such interactions, it
is plain, do not form the subject-matter of Geometry, which deals
only with our resulting perceptions of spatial figures. Now if
Lotze's construction of space be correct, there seems certainly
no reason why these resulting perceptions should not, for one and
the same interaction between monads, be very different in beings
differently constituted from ourselves. But if they were different,
says Lotze, they would have to be utterly different--as different,
for example, as the interval between two notes is from a straight
line. The possibility is, therefore, in his opinion, one about which
we can know nothing, and one which must remain always a mere empty
idea. This seems to me to go too far: for whatever the objective
counterpart may be, any argument which gives us information about
it must, when reversed, give us information about any possible form
of intuition in which this counterpart is presented. The argument
which Lotze has used in his former chapter, for example, deducing,
from the relativity of position, the merely relational nature of
the objective counterpart, allows us, conversely, to infer, from
this relational nature, the complete relativity of position in any
possible space-intuition--unless, indeed, it bore a wholly deceitful
relation to those interactions of monads which form its objective
counterpart. But the complete relativity of position, as I shall
endeavour to establish in Chapter III., suffices to prove that our
Geometry must be Euclidean, elliptic, spherical or pseudo-spherical.
We have, therefore, it would seem, very considerable knowledge,
on Lotze's theory of space, of the manner in which what appears
to us as space _must_ appear to any beings with our laws of
thought. We cannot know, it is true, what _psychological_ theory
of space-perception would apply to such beings: they might have a
sense different from any of ours, and they might have no sense in
any way resembling ours, but yet their Geometry would have points of
resemblance to ours, as that of the blind coincides with that of the
seeing. If space has any objective counterpart whatever, in short,
and if any inference is possible, as Lotze holds it to be, from space
to its counterpart, then a converse argument is also possible, though
it may give some only of the qualities of Euclidean space, since some
only of these qualities may be found to have a necessary analogue in
the counterpart.

=87.= Admitting, then, in Lotze's sense, the subjectivity of space,
the above possibility does not seem so empty as he imagines. He
discusses it briefly, however, in order to pass on to what he regards
as the real meaning of Metageometry. In this he is guilty of a
mathematical mistake, which causes much irrelevant reasoning. For
he believes that Metageometry constructs its spaces out of straight
lines and angles in all respects similar to Euclid's, whence he
derives an easy victory in proving that these elements can lead only
to the one space. In this he has been misled by the phraseology of
non-Euclideans, as well as by Euclid's separation of definitions
and axioms. For the fact is, of course, that straight lines are
only fully defined when we add to the formal definition the axioms
of the straight line and of parallels. Within Euclidean space,
Euclid's definition suffices to distinguish the straight line from
all other curves; the two axioms referred to are then absorbed into
the definition of space. But apart from the restriction to Euclidean
space, the definition has to be supplemented by the two axioms, in
order to define completely the Euclidean straight line. Thus Lotze
has misconceived the bearing of non-Euclidean constructions, and
has simply missed the point in arguing as he does. The possibility
contemplated by a non-Euclidean, if it fell under any of Lotze's
cases, would fall under the second case discussed above.

=88.= But the bearing of Metageometry is really, I think, different
from anything imagined by Lotze; and as few writers seem clear on
this point, I will enter somewhat fully into what I conceive to be
its purpose.

In the first place, there are some writers--notably Clifford--who,
being nave realists as regards space, hold that our evidence is
wholly insufficient, as yet, to decide as to its nature in the
infinite or in the infinitesimal (cf. Essays, Vol. I. p. 320):
these writers are not concerned with any possibility of beings
different from ourselves, but simply with the everyday space we
know, which they investigate in the spirit of a chemist discussing
whether hydrogen is a metal, or an astronomer discussing the nebular
hypothesis.

But these are a minority: most, more cautious, admit that our space,
so far as observation extends, is Euclidean, and if not accurately
Euclidean, must be only slightly spherical or pseudo-spherical. Here
again, it is the space of daily life which is under discussion,
and here further the discussion is, I think, independent of any
philosophical assumption as to the nature of our space-intuition. For
even if this be purely subjective, the translation of an intuition
into a conception can only be accomplished approximately, within
the errors of observation incident to self-analysis; and until the
intuition of space has become a conception, we get no scientific
Geometry. The apodeictic certainty of the axiom of parallels shrinks
to an unmotived subjective conviction, and vanishes altogether in
those who entertain non-Euclidean doubts. To reinforce the Euclidean
faith, reason must now be brought to the aid of intuition; but
reason, unfortunately, abandons us, and we are left to the mercy of
approximate observations of stellar triangles--a meagre support,
indeed, for the cherished religion of our childhood.

=89.= But the possibility of an inaccuracy so slight, that our
finest instruments and our most distant parallaxes show no trace
of it, would trouble men's minds no more than the analogous chance
of inaccuracy in the law of gravitation, were it not for the
philosophical import of even the slenderest possibility in this
sphere. And it is the philosophical bearing of Metageometry alone,
I think, which constitutes its real importance. Even if, as we
will suppose for the moment, observation had established, beyond
the possibility of doubt, that our space might be safely regarded
as Euclidean, still Metageometry would have shown a philosophical
possibility, and on this ground alone it could claim, I think, very
nearly all the attention which it at present deserves.

But what is this possibility? A thing is possible, according to
Bradley (Logic, p. 187), when it would follow from a certain number
of conditions, some of which are known to be realized. Now the
conditions to which a form of externality must conform, in order to
be affirmed, are: first, of course, that it should be experienced,
or legitimately inferred from something experienced; but secondly,
that it should conform to certain logical conditions, detailed in
Chapter III., which may be summed up in the relativity of position.
Now what Metageometry has done, in any case, is to suggest the proof
that the second of these conditions is fulfilled by non-Euclidean
spaces. Euclid is affirmed, therefore, on the ground of immediate
experience alone, and his truth, as unmediated by logical necessity,
is merely assertorical, or, if we prefer it, empirical. This is
the most important sense, it seems to me, in which non-Euclidean
spaces are possible. They are, in short, a step in a philosophical
argument, rather than in the investigation of fact: they throw light
on the nature of the grounds for Euclid, rather than on the actual
conformation of space[102]. This import of Metageometry is denied by
Lotze, on the ground that non-Euclidean logic is faulty, a ground
which he endeavours, by much detail and through many pages, to make
good--with what success, we will now proceed to examine.

=90.= Lotze's attack on Metageometry--although it remains, so
far as I know, the best hostile criticism extant, and although
its arguments have become part of the regular stock-in-trade of
Euclidean philosophers--contains, if I am not mistaken, several
misunderstandings due to insufficient mathematical knowledge of the
subject. As these misunderstandings have been widely spread among
philosophers, and cannot be easily removed except by a critic who has
gone into non-Euclidean Geometry with some care, it seems desirable
to discuss Lotze's strictures point by point.

[Illustration]

=91.= The mathematical criticism begins ( 131) with a somewhat
question-begging definition of parallel straight lines. Two straight
lines _a_, _b_, according to this definition, are parallel
when--_a_ and _b_ being arbitrary points on the two lines--if _a_
= _b_, then _ab_ = __, where __, __ are two other points on the
two straight lines respectively. This definition--which contains
Euclid's axiom and definition combined in a very convenient and
enticing form--is of course thoroughly suitable to Euclidean
Geometry, and leads immediately to all the Euclidean propositions
about parallels. But it is perhaps more honest to follow Euclid's
course; when an axiom is thus buried in a definition, it is apt to
seem, since definitions are supposed to be arbitrary, as though the
difficulty had been overcome, while in reality, the possibility of
parallels, as above defined, involves the very point in question,
namely, the disputed axiom of parallels. For what this axiom asserts
is simply the existence of lines conforming to Lotze's definition.
The deduction of the principal propositions on parallels, with
which Lotze follows up his definition, is of course a very simple
proceeding--a proceeding, however, in which the first step begs the
question.

=92.= The next argument for the apriority of Euclidean Geometry has,
oddly enough, an exactly opposite bearing, although it is a great
favourite with opponents of Metageometry. Measurements of stellar
triangles, and all similar attempts at an empirical determination
of the space-constant are, according to Lotze, beside the mark; for
any observed departure from two right angles, or any finite annual
parallax for distant stars, would be attributed to some new kind of
refraction, or, as in the case of aberration, to some other physical
cause, and never to the geometrical nature of space. This is a
strong argument for the empirical validity of Euclid, but as an
argument for the apodeictic certainty of the orthodox system, it has
an opposite tendency. For observations of the kind contemplated would
have to be due to departures from Euclidean straightness, hitherto
unknown, on the part of stellar light-rays. Such departure could,
in certain cases, be accounted for by a finite space-constant, but
it could also, probably, be accounted for by a change in Optics,
for example, by attributing refractive properties to the ether.
Such properties could only exist if ether were of varying density,
if (say) it were denser in the neighbourhood of any of the heavenly
bodies. But such an assumption would, I believe, destroy the utility
of ether for Physics; a slight alteration in our Geometry, so slight
as not appreciably to affect distances within the Solar System,
would probably be in the end, therefore, should such errors ever
be discovered, a simpler explanation than any that Physics could
offer. But this is not the point of my contention. The point is
that, if the physical explanation, as Lotze holds, be possible in
the above case, the converse must also hold: it must be possible to
explain the present phenomena by supposing ether refractive and space
non-Euclidean. From this conclusion there is no escape. If every
conceivable behaviour of light-rays can be explained, within Euclid,
by physical causes, it must also be possible, by a suitable choice
of hypothetical physical causes, to explain the actual phenomena
as belonging to a non-Euclidean space. Such a hypothesis would be
rightly rejected by Science, for the present, on account of its
unnecessary complexity. Nevertheless it would remain, for philosophy,
a possibility to be reckoned with, and the choice could only be
decided upon empirical grounds of simplicity. It may well be doubted
whether, in the world we know, the phenomena could be attributed
to a distinctly non-Euclidean space, but this conclusion follows
inevitably from the contention that no phenomena could force us to
assume such a space. Lotze's argument, therefore, if pushed home,
disproves his own view, and puts Euclidean space, as an empirical
explanation of phenomena, on a level with luminiferous ether[103].

=93.= Lotze now proceeds ( 132) to a detailed criticism of
Helmholtz, whom he regards as a typical exponent of Metageometry.
It is possible that, at the time when he wrote, Helmholtz really
did occupy this position; but it is unfortunate that, in the minds
of philosophers, he should still continue to do so, after the very
material advances brought about by the projective treatment of the
subject. It is also unfortunate that his somewhat careless attempts
to popularise mathematical results have so often been disposed of,
without due attention to his more technical and solid contributions.
Thus his romances about Flatland and Sphereland--at best only
fairy-tale analogies of doubtful value--have been attacked as if they
formed an essential feature of Metageometry.

But to proceed to particulars: Lotze readily allows that the
Flatlanders would set up Plane Geometry, as we know it, but refuses
to admit that the Spherelanders could, without inferring the third
dimension, set up a two-dimensional spherical Geometry which should
be free from contradictions. I will endeavour to give a free
rendering of Lotze's argument on this point.

[Illustration]

Suppose, he says, a north and south pole, _N_ and _S_, arbitrarily
fixed, and an equator _EW_. Suppose a being, _B_, capable of
impressions only from things on the surface of the sphere, to move
in a meridian _NBS_. Let _B_ start from some point _a_, and finally,
after describing a great circle, return to the same point _a_. If
_a_ is known only by the quality of the impression it makes on _B_,
_B_ may imagine he has not reached the same point _a_, but another
similar point _a_, bearing a relation to _a_ similar to that of
the octave in singing: he might even not arrange his impressions
spatially at all. In order that this may occur, we require the
further assumption, that every difference in the above-mentioned
feelings (as he describes the meridian) may be presented as a spatial
distance between two places. Even now, _B_ may think he is describing
a Euclidean straight line, containing similar points at certain
intervals. Allowing, however, that he realizes the identity of _a_
with his initial position, he will now seem, by motion in a straight
line, to have returned to the point from which he started, for his
motion cannot, without the third dimension, seem to him other than
rectilinear.

Up to this point, there seems little ground for objection, except,
perhaps, to the idea of a straight line with periodical similar
points--if _B_ were as philosophical as, in these discussions,
we usually suppose him to be, he would probably object to this
interpretation of his experiences, on the ground that it regards
empty space as something independent of the objects in it. It is
worth pointing out, also, that _B_ would not need to describe the
whole circle, in order suddenly to find himself home again with his
old friends. Accurate measurements of small triangles would suffice
to determine his space-constant, and show him the length of a great
circle (or straight line, as he would call it). We must admit, also,
that so hypothetical a being as _B_ might form no space-intuition at
all, but as he is introduced solely for the purposes of the analogy,
it is convenient to allow him all possible qualifications for his
post. But these points do not touch the kernel of the argument, which
lies in the statement that such a straight line, returning into
itself after a finite time, would appear to _B_ as an "unendurable
contradiction," and thus force him, for logical though not for
sensational purposes, into the assumption of a third dimension. This
assertion seems to me quite unwarranted: the whole of Metageometry
is a solid array in disproof of it. Helmholtz's argument is, it must
be remembered, only an analogy, and the contradiction would exist
_only_ for a Euclidean. A complete _three_-dimensional Geometry has,
we have seen in Chapter I., been developed on the assumption that
straight lines are of finite length. A _constant_ value for the
measure of curvature, as our discussion of Riemann showed, involves
neither reference to the fourth dimension, nor any kind of internal
contradiction. This fact disproves Lotze's contention, which arises
solely from inability to divest his imagination of Euclidean ideas.

Lotze next attacks Helmholtz for the assertion that _B_ would know
nothing of parallel lines--parallel _straight_ lines, as the context
shows, he meant to say[104]. Lotze, however, takes him as meaning,
apparently, mere curves of constant distance from a given straight
line, which are part of the regular stock-in-trade of Metageometry.
Parallels of latitude, in the geographical sense, would not--with
the exception of the equator--appear to _B_ as straight lines, but
as circles. _Great_ circles he _would_ call straight, and this fact
seems to have misled Lotze into thinking _all_ circles were to be
treated as straight lines. Parallels of latitude, therefore, though
_B_ might call them parallels, would not invalidate Helmholtz's
contention, which applies only to straight lines.

The argument that such small circles would be parallel, which we
have just disposed of, is only the preface to another proof that _B_
would need a third dimension. Let us call two of these parallels
of latitude _l{n}_ and _l{s}_, and let them be equidistant from
the equator, one in the northern, one in the southern hemisphere.
Consecutive tangent planes, along these parallels, converge, in
the one case northwards, in the other southwards. Either _B_ could
become aware of their difference, says Lotze, or he could not. In
the former case, which he regards as the more probable, he easily
proves that _B_ would infer a third dimension. But this alternative
is, I think, wholly inadmissible. Tangent planes, like Euclidean
planes in general, would have no meaning to _B_; unless, indeed,
he were a metageometrician, which, with all his metaphysical and
mathematical subtlety, the argument supposes him not to be--and to
such a supposition Lotze, surely, is the last person who has a right
to object. Lotze's attempted proof that this is the right alternative
rests, if I understand him aright, on a sheer error in ordinary
spherical Geometry. _B_ would observe, he says, that the meridians
made smaller angles with his path towards the nearer than towards the
further pole--as a matter of fact, they would be simply perpendicular
to his path in both directions. What Lotze means is, perhaps, that
all the meridians would meet sooner in one direction than in the
other, and this, of course, is true. But the poles, in which the
meridians meet, would appear to _B_ as the centres of the respective
parallels, while the parallels themselves would appear to be circles.
Now I am at a loss to see what difficulty would arise, to _B_, in
supposing two different circles to have different centres[105]. We
must, therefore, take the first alternative, that _B_ would have no
sort of knowledge as to the direction in which the tangent planes
converged. Here Lotze attempts, if I have not misunderstood him, to
prove a _reductio ad absurdum_: _B_ would think, he says, that he
was describing two paths wholly the same in direction, and then he
_might_ regard both paths as circles in a plane. It may be observed
that direction, when applied to a circle as a whole, is meaningless;
indeed direction, in all Metageometry, can only mean, even when
applied to straight lines, direction towards a point. To speak of
two lines, which do not meet, as having the same direction, is a
surreptitious introduction of the axiom of parallels. Apart from
this, I cannot conceive any objection, on _B_'s part, to such a
view--one should say _must_, not _might_. The whole argumentation,
therefore, unless its obscurity has led me astray, must be pronounced
fruitless and inconclusive.

=94.= After this preliminary discussion of Sphereland, Lotze proceeds
to the question of a fourth dimension, and thence to spherical and
pseudo-spherical space. As before, he appears to know only the
more careless and popular utterances of Helmholtz and Riemann, and
to have taken no trouble to understand even the foundations of
mathematical Metageometry. By this neglect, much of what he says
is rendered wholly worthless. To begin with, he regards, as the
purpose of Helmholtz's fairy tale, the suggestion of a possible
fourth dimension, whereas the real purpose was quite the opposite--to
make intelligible a purely three-dimensional non-Euclidean space.
Helmholtz introduced Flatland only because its relation to Sphereland
is analogous to the relation of ours to spherical space[106]. But
Lotze says: The Flatlanders would find no difficulty in a third
dimension, since it would in no way contradict their own Geometry,
while the people in Sphereland, from the contradictions in their
two-dimensional system, would already have been led to it. The
latter contention I have already tried to answer; the former has an
odd sound, in view of the attempt, a few pages later, to prove _
priori_ that all forms of intuition, in any way analogous to space,
_must_ have three dimensions. One cannot help suspecting that the
Flatlanders, with two instead of three dimensions, would make a
similar attempt. But to return to Lotze's argument: Neither analogy
can be used, he says, to prove that we ought perhaps to set up a
fourth dimension, since, for us, no contradictions or otherwise
inexplicable phenomena exist. The only people, so far as I know, who
have used this analogy, are Dr Abbot and a few Spiritualists--the
former in joke, the latter to explain certain phenomena more simply
explained, perhaps, by Maskelyne and Cooke. But although Lotze's
conclusion in this matter is sound, and one with which Helmholtz
might have agreed, his arguments, to my mind, are irrelevant and
unconvincing. There is this difference, he says, between us and the
Spherelanders: the latter were logically forced to a new dimension,
and found it possible; we are not forced to it, and find it, in our
space, impossible. I have contended that, on the contrary, nothing
would force the Spherelanders to assume a third dimension, while they
would find it impossible exactly as we find a fourth impossible--not
logically, that is to say, but only as a presentable construction in
given space.

After a somewhat elephantine piece of humour, about socialistic
whales in a four-dimensional sea of Fourrier's _eau sucre_, Lotze
proceeds to a proof, by logic, that every form of intuition, which
embraces the whole system of ordered relations of a coexisting
manifold, _must_ have three dimensions. One might object, on _
priori_ grounds, to any such attempt: what belongs to pure intuition
could hardly, one would have thought, be determined by _ priori_
reasoning[107]. I will not, however, develop this argument here,
but endeavour to point out, as far as its obscurity will allow, the
particular fallacy of the proof in question.

[Illustration]

Lotze's argument is as follows. In this discussion, though our
terminology is necessarily taken from space, we are really concerned
with a much more general conception. We assume, in order to preserve
the homogeneity of dimensions, that the difference (distance) between
any two elements (points) of our manifold--to borrow Riemann's
word--is of the same kind as, and commensurable with, the difference
between any other two elements. Let us take a series of elements at
successive distances _x_ such that the distance between any two is
the sum of the distances between intermediate elements. Such a series
corresponds to a straight line, which is taken as the _x_-axis. Then
a series _OY_ is called perpendicular to the _x_-axis _OX_, when
the distances of any element _y_, on _OY_, from +_mx_ and -_mx_ are
equal. By our hypothesis, these distances are comparable with, and
qualitatively similar to, _x_ and _y_. So long as _OY_ is defined
only by relation to _OX_, it is conceptually unique. But now let
us suppose the same relation as that between _OX_ and _OY_, to be
possible between _OY_ and a new series _OZ_; we then get a third
series _OZ_ perpendicular to _OY_, and again conceptually unique, so
long as it is defined by relation to _OY_ alone. We might proceed,
in the same way, to a fourth line _OU_ perpendicular to _OZ_. But it
is necessary, for our purposes, that _OZ_ should be perpendicular to
_OX_ as well as _OY_. Without this condition, _OZ_ might extend into
another world, and have no corresponding relation to _OX_--this is a
possibility only excluded by our unavoidable spatial images. At this
point comes the crux of the argument. _That OZ_, says Lotze, which,
besides being perpendicular to _OY_, is also perpendicular to _OX_,
must be among the series of _OY_'s, for these were defined only by
perpendicularity to _OX_. _Hence_, he concludes, there can only be
even a third dimension if _OZ_ coincides with one, and--as soon as
_OX_ is considered fixed--with _only_ one, of the many members of the
_OY_ series.

In this argument it is difficult--to me at any rate--to see any
force at all. The only way I can account for it is, to suppose that
Lotze has neglected the possibility of any but single infinities.
On this interpretation, the argument might be stated thus: There is
an infinite series of continuously varying _OY_'s; to the common
property of these, we add another property, which will divide their
total number by infinity. The remaining _OZ_, therefore, must be
uniquely determined. The same form of argument, however, would prove
that two surfaces can only cut one another in a single point, and
numberless other absurdities. The fact is, that infinities may be of
different orders. For example, the number of points in a line may be
taken as a single infinity, and so may the number of lines in a plane
through any point; hence, by multiplication, the number of points in
a plane is a double infinity, ^{2}, and if we divide this number
by a single infinity, we get still an infinite number left. Thus
Lotze's argument assumes what he has to prove, that the number of
lines perpendicular to a given line, through any point, is a single
infinity, which is equivalent to the axiom of three dimensions. The
whole passage is so obscure, that its meaning may have escaped me. It
is obvious _ priori_, however, as I pointed out in the beginning,
that any proof of the axiom must be fallacious somewhere, and the
above interpretation of the argument is the only one I have been able
to find.

=95.= The rest of the Chapter is devoted to an attack on spherical
and pseudo-spherical space, on the ground that they interfere with
the homogeneity of the three dimensions, and with the similarity
of all parts of space. This is simply false. Such spaces, like the
surface of a sphere, _are_ exactly alike throughout. Lotze shows,
here and elsewhere, that he has not taken the pains to find out
what Metageometry really is. I hold myself, and have tried to prove
in this Essay, that Congruence is an _ priori_ axiom, without
which Geometry would be impossible; but the wish to uphold this
axiom is, as Lotze ought to have known, the precise motive which
led Metageometry to limit itself to spaces of constant measure of
curvature. We see here the importance of distinguishing between
Helmholtz the philosopher and Helmholtz the mathematician. Though the
philosopher wished to dispense with Congruence, the mathematician, as
we saw in Chapter I., retained and strongly emphasized it. A little
later Lotze shows, again, how he has been misled by the unfortunate
analogy of Sphereland. A spherical _surface_, he says, he can
understand; but how are we to pass from this to a spherical space?
Either this surface is the whole of our space, as in Sphereland, or
it generates space by a gradually growing radius. Such concentric
spheres, as Lotze triumphantly points out, of course generate
Euclidean space. His disjunction, however, is utterly and entirely
false, and could never have been suggested by any one with even a
superficial knowledge of Metageometry. This point is less laboured
than the former, which, in all its nakedness, is thus re-stated in
the last sentence of the Chapter: "I cannot persuade myself that one
could, without the elements of homogeneous space, even form or define
the presentation of heterogeneous spaces, or of such as had variable
measures of curvature." As though such spaces were ever set up by
non-Euclidean mathematics!

In conclusion, Lotze expresses a hope that Philosophy, on this
point, will not allow itself to be imposed upon by Mathematics. I
must, instead, rejoice that Mathematics has not been imposed upon by
Philosophy, but has developed freely an important and self-consistent
system, which deserves, for its subtle analysis into logical and
factual elements, the gratitude of all who seek for a philosophy of
space.

=96.= The objections to non-Euclidean Geometry which have just been
discussed fall under four heads:

I. Non-Euclidean spaces are not homogeneous; Metageometry therefore
unduly reifies space.

II. They involve a reference to a fourth dimension.

III. They cannot be set up without an implicit reference to Euclidean
space, or to the Euclidean straight line, on which they are therefore
dependent.

IV. They are self-contradictory in one or more ways.

The reader who has followed me in regarding these four objections as
fallacious, will have no difficulty in disposing of any other critic
of Metageometry, as these are the only mathematical arguments, so
far as I know, ever urged against non-Euclideans[108]. The logical
validity of Metageometry, and the mathematical possibility of
three-dimensional non-Euclidean spaces, will therefore be regarded,
throughout the remainder of the work, as sufficiently established.

=97.= Two other objections may, indeed, be urged against
Metageometry, but these are rather of a philosophical than of a
strictly mathematical import. The first of these, which has been
made the base of operations by Delbuf, applies equally to all
non-Euclidean spaces. The second, which has not, so far as I know,
been much employed, but yet seems to me deserving of notice, bears
directly against spaces of positive curvature alone; but if it could
discredit these, it might throw doubt on the method by which all
alike are obtained. The two objections are:

I. Space must be such as to allow of similarity, _i.e._ of the
increase or diminution, in a constant ratio, of all the lines in a
figure, without change of angles; whereas in non-Euclid, lines, like
angles, have absolute magnitude.

II. Space must be infinite, whereas spherical and elliptic spaces are
finite.

I will discuss the first objection in connection with Delbuf's
articles referred to above. The second, which has not, to my
knowledge, been widely used in criticism, will be better deferred to
Chapter III.


Delbuf.

=98.= M. Delbuf's four articles in the Revue Philosophique contain
much matter that has already been dealt with in the criticism of
Lotze, and much that is irrelevant for our present purpose. The only
point, which I wish to discuss here, is the question of absolute
magnitude, as it is called--the question, that is, whether the
possibility of similar but unequal geometrical figures can be known
_ priori_[109].

In discussing this question, it is important, to begin with, to
distinguish clearly the sense in which absolute magnitude _is_
required in non-Euclidean Geometry, from another sense, in which
it would be absurd to regard any magnitude as absolute. Judgments
of magnitude can only result from comparison, and if Metageometry
required magnitudes which could be determined without comparison, it
would certainly deserve condemnation. But this is not required. All
we require is, that it shall be impossible, while the rest of space
is unaffected, to alter the magnitude of any figure, as compared with
other figures, while leaving the relative internal magnitudes of its
parts unchanged. This construction, which is possible in Euclid,
is impossible in Metageometry. We have to discuss whether such an
impossibility renders non-Euclidean spaces logically faulty.

M. Delbuf's position on this axiom--which he calls the postulate
of homogeneity[110]--is, that all Geometry must presuppose it, and
that Metageometry, consequently, though logically sound, is logically
subsequent to Euclid, and can only make its constructions within a
Euclidean "homogeneous" space (Rev. Phil. Vol. XXXVII., pp. 380-1).
He would appear to think, nevertheless, that homogeneity (in his
sense) is learnt from experience, though on this point he is not
very explicit. (See Vol. XXXVIII., p. 129.) No _ priori_ proof, at
any rate, is offered in his articles. As a result of experience,
every one would admit, similarity is known to be possible within the
limits of observation; but the fact that this possibility extends to
Ordnance maps, which deal with a spherical surface, should make us
chary of inferring, from such a datum, the certainty of Euclid for
large spaces. Moreover if homogeneity be empirical, Metageometry,
which dispenses with it, is not necessarily in _logical_ dependence
upon Euclid, since homogeneity and isogeneity are _logically_
separable. I shall assume, therefore, as the only contention which
can be interesting to our argument, that homogeneity is regarded as
_ priori_, and as logically essential to Geometry.

=99.= Now we saw, in discussing Erdmann's views of the judgment of
quantity, that in non-Euclidean space, as in Euclidean, a change
of all spatial magnitudes, in the same ratio, would be no change
at all; the ratios of all magnitudes to the space-constant would
be unchanged, and the space-constant, as the ultimate standard of
comparison, cannot, in any intelligible sense, be said to have any
particular magnitude. The absolute magnitudes of Metageometry,
therefore, are absolute only as against any other _particular_
magnitude, not as against other magnitudes in general. If this were
not the case, the comparative nature of the judgment of magnitude
would be contradicted, and metrical Metageometry would become absurd.
But as it is, the difference from Euclid consists only in this: that
in Metageometry we have, while in Euclid we have not, a standard of
comparison involved in the nature of our space as a whole, which we
call the space-constant. We have to discuss whether the assertion of
such a standard involves an undue reification of space.

I do not believe that this is the case. For an undue reification of
space would only arise, if we were no longer able to regard position
as wholly relative, and as geometrically definable only by departure
from other positions. But the relativity of position, as we have
abundantly seen, is preserved by all spaces of constant curvature--in
all of these, positions can only be defined, geometrically, by
relations to fresh positions[111]. This series of definitions may
lead to an infinite regress, but it may also, as in spherical space,
form a vicious circle, and return again to the position from which
it started. No reification of space, no independent existence of
mere relations, seems involved in such a procedure. The whole of
Metageometry, in short, is a proof that the relativity of position
is compatible with absolute magnitude, in the only sense required
by non-Euclidean spaces. We must conclude, therefore, that there
is nothing incompatible, in a denial of homogeneity (in Delbuf's
sense), either with the relational nature of space, or with the
comparative nature of magnitude. This last _ priori_ objection to
Metageometry, therefore, cannot be maintained, and the issue must be
decided on empirical grounds alone.

=100.= The foundations of Geometry have been the subject of much
recent speculation in France, and this seems to demand some notice.
But in spite of the splendid work which the French have done on the
allied question of number and continuous quantity, I cannot persuade
myself that they have succeeded in greatly advancing the subject
of geometrical philosophy. The chief writers have been, from the
mathematical side, _Calinon_ and _Poincar_, from the philosophical,
_Renouvier_ and _Delbuf_; as a mediator between mathematics and
philosophy, _Lechalas_.

_Calinon_, in an interesting article on the geometrical
indeterminateness of the universe, maintains that any Geometry may be
applied to the actual world by a suitable hypothesis as to the course
of light-rays. For the earth only is known to us otherwise than by
Optics, and the earth is an infinitesimal part of the universe.
This line of argument has been already discussed in connection with
Lotze, but Calinon adds a new suggestion, that the space-constant may
perhaps vary with the time. This would involve a causal connection
between space and other things, which seems hardly conceivable, and
which, if regarded as possible, must surely destroy Geometry, since
Geometry depends throughout on the irrelevance of Causation[112].
Moreover, in all operations of measurement, some time is spent;
unless we knew that space was unchanging throughout the operation,
it is hard to see how our results could be trustworthy, and how,
consequently, a change in the parameter could be discovered. The
same difficulties would arise, in fact, as those which result from
supposing space not homogeneous.

_Poincar_ maintains that the question, whether Euclid or
Metageometry should be accepted, is one of convenience and
convention, not of truth; axioms are definitions in disguise, and the
choice between definitions is arbitrary. This view has been discussed
in Chapter I., in connection with Cayley's theory of distance, on
which it depends.

_Lechalas_ is a philosophical disciple of Calinon. He is a
rationalist of the pre-Kantian type, but a believer in the validity
of Metageometry. He holds that Geometry can dispense with all purely
spatial postulates, and work with axioms of magnitude alone[113],
which, in his opinion, are purely analytic. The principle of
contradiction, to him, is the sole and only test of truth; we make
long chains of reasoning from our premisses to see if contradictions
will emerge. It might be objected that this view, though it saves
general Geometry from being logically empirical, leaves it only
empirically logical; this must, in fact, be the fate of every piece
of _ priori_ knowledge, if M. Lechalas's were the only test of
truth. However, he concludes that general Geometry is apodeictic,
while the space of our actual world, like all other phenomena, is
contingent.

_Delbuf_ criticizes non-Euclidean space from an ultra-realist
standpoint: he holds that _real_ space is neither homogeneous nor
isogeneous, but that _conceived_ space, as abstracted from real
space, has both these properties. He offers no justification for
his real space, which seems to be maintained in the spirit of nave
realism, nor does he show how he has acquired his intimate knowledge
of its constitution[114]. His arguments against Metageometry, in so
far as they are not repetitions of Lotze, have been discussed above.

_Renouvier_, finally, is a pure Kantian, of the most orthodox type.
His views as to the importance, for Geometry, of the distinction
between synthetic and analytic judgments, have been discussed, in
connection with Kant, at the beginning of the present Chapter[115].

=101.= Before beginning the constructive argument of the next
Chapter, let us endeavour briefly to sum up the theories which
have been polemically advocated throughout the criticisms we have
just concluded. We agreed to accept, with Kant, necessity for any
possible experience as the test of the _ priori_, but we refused,
for the present, to discuss the connection of the _ priori_ with
the subjective, regarding the purely logical test as sufficient for
our immediate purpose. We also refused to attach importance to the
distinction of analytic and synthetic, since it seemed to apply, not
to different judgments, but only to different aspects of any judgment.

We then discussed Riemann's attempt to identify the empirical element
in Geometry with the element not deducible from ideas of magnitude,
and we decided that this identification was due to a confusion as
to the nature of magnitude. For judgments of magnitude, we said,
require always some qualitative basis, which is not quantitatively
expressible.

In criticizing Helmholtz, we decided that Mechanics logically
presupposes Geometry, though space presupposes matter; but that the
matter which space presupposes, and to which Geometry indirectly
refers, is a more abstract matter than that of Mechanics, a matter
destitute of force and of causal attributes, and possessed only
of the purely spatial attributes required for the possibility
of spatial figures. But we conceded that Geometry, when applied
to mixed mathematics or to daily life, demands more than this,
demands, in fact, some means of discovering, in the more concrete
matter of Mechanics, either a rigid body, or a body whose departure
from rigidity follows some empirically discoverable law. _Actual_
measurement, therefore, we agreed to regard as empirical.

Our conclusions, as regards the empiricism of Riemann and Helmholtz,
were reinforced by a criticism of Erdmann. We then had an opposite
task to perform, in defending Metageometry against Lotze. Here we
saw that there are two senses in which Metageometry is possible. The
first concerns our actual space, and asserts that it may have a very
small space-constant; the second concerns philosophical theories
of space, and asserts a purely logical possibility, which leaves
the decision to experience. We saw also that Lotze's mathematical
strictures arose from insufficient knowledge of the subject, and
could all be refuted by a better acquaintance with Metageometry.

Finally, we discussed the question of absolute magnitude, and found
in it no logical obstacle to non-Euclidean spaces. Our conclusion,
then, in so far as we are as yet entitled to a conclusion, is
that all spaces with a space-constant are _ priori_ justifiable,
and that the decision between them must be the work of experience.
Spaces without a space-constant, on the other hand, spaces, that is,
which are not homogeneous throughout, we found logically unsound
and impossible to know, and therefore to be condemned _ priori_.
The constructive proof of this thesis will form the argument of the
following chapter.

FOOTNOTES:

[67] The Critical Philosophy of Kant, Vol. I. p. 287.

[68] For a discussion of Kant from a less purely mathematical
standpoint, see Chap. IV.

[69] Cf. Vaihinger's Commentar, II. pp. 202, 265. Also p. 336 ff.

[70] E.g. second edition, p. 39: "So werden auch alle geometrischen
Grundstze, z. B. dass in einem Triangel zwei Seiten zusammen grsser
sind als die dritte, niemals aus allgemeinen Begriffen von Linie
und Triangel, sondern aus der Anschauung, und zwar _ priori_ mit
apodiktischer Gewissheit abgeleitet."

[71] Cf. Bradley's Logic, Bk. III. Pt. I. Chap. VI.; Bosanquet's
Logic, Bk. I. Chap. I. pp. 97-103.

[72] Philosophie de la Rgle et du Compas, Anne Philosophique, II.
pp. 1-66.

[73] I have stated this doctrine dogmatically, as a proof would
require a whole treatise on Logic. I accept the proofs offered by
Bradley and Bosanquet, to which the reader is referred.

[74] For a further discussion of this point, see Chaps. III. and IV.

[75] See Chap. IV. for a discussion of this argument.

[76] See Chap. IV.  185.

[77] An Otherness of substance, rather than of attribute, is here
intended; an Otherness which may perhaps be called real as opposed to
logical diversity.

[78] This proposition will be argued at length in Chap. IV.

[79] See Psychologie als Wissenschaft, I. Section III. Chap. VII.;
II. Section I. Chap. III. and Section II. Chap. III. Compare also
Synechologie, Section I. Chaps. II. and III.

[80] On the influence of Herbart on Riemann, compare Erdmann, Die
Axiome der Geometrie, p. 30.

[81] I do not mean that measurement of colours is effected without
reference to their relations, since all measurement is essentially
comparison. But in colours, it is the elements which are compared,
while in space, it is the relations between elements.

[82] For a discussion of this point, see Chap. III. Sec. B,  176.

[83] The works of Helmholtz on geometrical philosophy comprise, in
addition to the articles quoted in Chap. I., the following articles:
"Ursprung und Sinn der geometrischen Axiome, gegen Land," Wiss. Abh.
Vol. II. p. 640, 1878. (Also Mind, Vol. III.: an answer to Land in
Mind, Vol. II.) "Ursprung und Bedeutung der geometrischen Axiome,"
1870, Vortrge und Reden, Vol. II. p. 1. (Also Mind, Vol. I.) Two
Appendices to "Die Thatsachen in der Wahrnehmung," entitled: II. "Der
Raum kann transcendental sein, ohne dass es die Axiome sind"; and
III. "Die Anwendbarkeit der Axiome auf die physische Welt," 1878,
Vortrge und Reden, Vol. II. p. 256 ff.

The two Appendices last mentioned are popularizings and expansions of
the article in Mind, Vol. III. The most widely read, though also, to
my mind, the least valuable, of all Helmholtz's writings on Geometry,
is the article in Mind, Vol. I. This contains the famous and much
misunderstood analogies of Flatland and Sphereland, which will be
discussed, and as far as possible defended, in answering Lotze's
attack on Metageometry--an attack based, apparently, almost entirely
on this one popular article. The present discussion, therefore, may
be confined almost entirely to Mind, Vol. III., and the philosophical
portions of the two papers quoted in Chap. I., _i.e._ to the articles
in Wiss. Abh. Vol. II. pp. 610-660. His other works are popular, and
important only because of the large public to which they appeal.

[84] In the answer to Land, Mind, Vol. III. and Wiss. Abh. II. p. 640.

[85] See also Die Thatsachen in der Wahrnehmung, Zusatz II., Der Raum
kann transcendental sein, ohne dass es die Axiome sind. Vortrge und
Reden, Vol. II.

[86] See below, criticism of Erdmann,  84.

[87] See Prof. Land, in Mind, Vol. II.

[88] See concluding paragraph of Helmholtz's article in Mind, Vol.
III.

[89] Cf. Veronese, Grundzge der Geometrie (German translation), p.
ix. Also pp. xxxiv, 304, and Note II. pp. 692-4.

[90] See Chap. IV.  197 ff.

[91] Cf. the opinion of Bolyai, quoted by Erdmann, Axiome, p. 26; cf.
also ib. p. 60.

[92] Die Axiome der Geometrie: Eine philosophische Untersuchung der
Riemann-Helmholtz'schen Raumtheorie, Leipzig, 1877.

[93] On the influence of Mill, cf. Stallo, Concepts of Modern
Physics, p. 216.

[94] This view seems to be derived, through Riemann, from Herbart.
See Psych. als Wiss. ed. Hart. Vol. V. p. 262.

[95] The same irreducibility of space to mere magnitude is proved by
Kant's hands and spherical triangles, in which a difference persists
in spite of complete quantitative equality.

[96] See  146-7.

[97] "Jeder Versuch, Kant's Lehre von der Aprioritt als
des subjectiven, von aller Erfahrung absolut unabhngigen
Erkenntnissfactors, trotzdem zu halten, ist deshalb von voruherein
aussichtslos."

[98] Ausdehnungslehre von 1844, 2nd edition, pp. xxii. xxiii.

[99] See  129 ff.

[100] Metaphysik, Book II. Chap. II. My references are to the
original.

[101] See Lectures and Essays, Vol. I. p. 261.

[102] On the meaning of geometrical possibility, cf. Veronese,
Grundzge der Geometrie (German translation), pp. xi.-xiii.

[103] Compare Calinon, "Sur l'Indtermination gomtrique de
l'Univers," Revue Philosophique, 1893, Vol. XXXVI. pp. 595-607.

[104] Vortrge und Reden, Vol. II. p. 9: "Parallele Linien wrden
die Bewohner der Kugel gar nicht kennen. Sie wrden behaupten, dass
jede beliebige zwei _geradeste_ Linien, gehrig verlangert, sich
schliesslich nicht nur in einem, sondern in zwei Punkten schneiden
mssten." (The italics are mine.) The omission of _straight_ in such
phrases is a frequent laxity of mathematicians.

[105] It has been suggested to me that Lotze regards the meridians
as projected on to a plane, as in a map. If this be so, there is an
obviously illegitimate introduction of the third dimension.

[106] This is proved by Helmholtz's remark at the end of a detailed
attempt to make spherical and pseudo-spherical spaces imaginable
(l.c. p. 28): "Anders ist es mit den drei Dimensionen des Raumes. Da
alle unsere Mittel sinnlicher Anschauung sich nur auf einen Raum von
drei Dimensionen erstrecken, und die vierte Dimension nicht bloss
eine Abnderung von Vorhandenem, sondern etwas vollkommen Neues wre,
so befinden wir uns schon wegen unserer krperlichen Organisation in
der absoluten Unmglichkeit, uns eine Anschauungsweise einer vierten
Dimension vorzustellen."

[107] Cf. Grassmann, Ausdehnungslehre von 1844, 2nd Edition, p. xxiii.

[108] See especially Stallo, Concepts of Modern Physics,
International Science Series, Vol. XLII. Chaps. XIII. and
XIV.; Renouvier, "Philosophie de la rgle et du compas," Anne
Philosophique, II.; Delbuf, "L'ancienne et les nouvelles
gomtries," Revue Philosophique, Vols. XXXVI.-XXXIX.

[109] M. Delbuf deserves credit for having based Euclid, already in
1860, in his "Prolgomnes Philosophiques de la Gomtrie," on this
axiom--certainly a better basis, at first sight, than the axiom of
parallels.

[110] This meaning of homogeneity must not be confounded with the
sense in which I have used the word. In Delbuf's sense, it means
that figures may be similar though of different sizes; in my sense it
means that figures may be similar though in different places. This
property of space is called by Delbuf isogeneity.

[111] For a full proof of this proposition, see Chap. III.

[112] See Chap. III., especially  133.

[113] For a criticism of this view, see the above discussions on
Riemann and Erdmann.

[114] Cf. Couturat, "De l'Infini Mathmatique," Paris, Flix Alcan,
1896, p. 544.

[115] The following is a list of the most important recent French
philosophical writings on Geometry, so far as I am acquainted with
them.

  Andrade: "Les bases exprimentales de la gomtrie euclidienne";
  Rev. Phil. 1890, II., and 1891, I.

  Bonnel: "Les hypothses dans la gomtrie"; Gauthier-Villars,
  1897.

  L'Abb de Broglie: "La gomtrie non-euclidienne," two articles;
  Annales de Phil. Chrt. 1890.

  Calinon: "Les espaces gomtriques"; Rev. Phil. 1889, I., and
  1891, II. "Sur l'indtermination gomtrique de l'univers"; ib.
  1893, II.

  Couturat: "L'Anne Philosophique de F. Pillon," Rev. de Mt. et
  de Morale, Jan. 1893.

  "Note sur la gomtrie non-euclidienne et la relativit de
  l'espace"; ib., May, 1893.

  "tudes sur l'espace et le temps," ib. Sep. 1896.

  Delbuf: "L'ancienne et les nouvelles gomtries," four articles;
  Rev. Phil. 1893-5.

  Lechalas: "La gomtrie gnrale"; Crit. Phil. 1889.

  "La gomtrie gnrale et les jugements synthtiques  priori"
  and "Les bases exprimentales de la gomtrie"; Rev. Phil. 1890,
  II.

  "M. Delbuf et Le problme des mondes semblables"; ib. 1894, I.

  "Note sur la gomtrie non-euclidienne et le principe de
  similitude"; Rev. de Mt. et de Morale, March, 1893.

  "La courbure et la distance en gomtrie gnrale"; ib., March,
  1896.

  "La gomtrie gnrale et l'intuition"; Annales de Phil. Chrt.,
  1890.

  "Etude sur l'espace et le temps"; Paris, Alcan, 1896.

  Liard: "Des dfinitions gomtrie et des dfinitions empiriques,"
  2nd ed.; Paris, Alcan, 1888.

  Mansion: "Premiers principes de la mtagomtrie"; two
  articles in Rev. No-Scholastique, 1896. Separately published,
  Gauthier-Villars, 1896.

  Milhaud: "La gomtrie non-euclidienne et la thorie de la
  connaissance"; Rev. Phil. 1888, I.

  Poincar: "Non-Euclidian Geometry"; Nature, Vol. XLV., 1891-2.

  "L'espace et la gomtrie"; Rev. de Mt. et de Morale, Nov. 1895.

  "Rsponse  quelques critiques," ib. Jan. 1897.

  Renouvier: "Philosophie de la rgle et du compas"; Crit. Phil.,
  1889, and L'Anne Phil., II^{me} anne, 1891.

  Sorel: "Sur la gomtrie non-euclidienne"; Rev. Phil., 1891, I.

  Tannery: "Thorie de la connaissance mathmatique"; Rev. Phil.,
  1894, II.




CHAPTER III.


Section A.

THE AXIOMS OF PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY.

=102.= Projective Geometry proper, as we saw in Chapter I., does not
employ the conception of magnitude, and does not, therefore, require
those axioms which, in the systems of the second or metrical period,
were required solely to render possible the application of magnitude
to space. But we saw, also, that Cayley's reduction of metrical
to projective properties was purely technical and philosophically
irrelevant. Now it is in metrical properties alone--apart from
the exception to the axiom of the straight line, which itself,
however, presupposes metrical properties[116]--that non-Euclidean
and Euclidean spaces differ. The properties dealt with by projective
Geometry, therefore, in so far as these are obtained without the use
of imaginaries, are properties common to all spaces. Finally, the
differences which appear between the Geometries of different spaces
of the same curvature--_e.g._ between the Geometries of the plane
and the cylinder--are differences in projective properties[117].
Thus the necessity which arises, in metrical Geometry, for further
qualifications besides those of constant curvature, disappears when
our general space is defined by purely projective properties.

=103.= We have good ground for expecting, therefore, that the axioms
of projective Geometry will be the simplest and most complete
expression of the indispensable requisites of any geometrical
reasoning: and this expectation, I hope, will not be disappointed.
Projective Geometry, in so far as it deals only with the properties
common to all spaces, will be found, if I am not mistaken, to be
wholly _ priori_, to take nothing from experience, and to have, like
Arithmetic, a creature of the pure intellect for its object. If this
be so, it is that branch of pure mathematics which Grassmann, in his
_Ausdehnungslehre_ of 1844, felt to be possible, and endeavoured, in
a brilliant failure, to construct without any appeal to the space of
intuition.

=104.= But unfortunately, the task of discovering the axioms of
projective Geometry is far from easy. They have, as yet, found
no Riemann or Helmholtz to formulate them philosophically. Many
geometers have constructed systems, which they intended to be, and
which, with sufficient care in interpretation, really are, free from
metrical presuppositions. But these presuppositions are so rooted
in all the very elements of Geometry, that the task of eliminating
them demands a reconstruction of the whole geometrical edifice. Thus
Euclid, for example, deals, from the start, with spatial equality--he
employs the circle, which is necessarily defined by means of
equality, and he bases all his later propositions on the congruence
of triangles as discussed in Book I.[118] Before we can use any
elementary proposition of Euclid, therefore, even if this expresses a
projective property, we have to prove that the property in question
can be deduced by projective methods. This has not, in general,
been done by projective geometers, who have too often assumed, for
example, that the quadrilateral construction--by which, as we saw in
Chap. I., they introduce projective coordinates--or anharmonic ratio,
which is _prim facie_ metrical, could be satisfactorily established
on their principles. Both these assumptions, however, can be
justified, and we may admit, therefore, that the claims of projective
Geometry to logical independence of measurement or congruence are
valid. Let us see, then, how it proceeds.

=105.= In the first place, it is important to realize that
when coordinates are used, in projective Geometry, they are not
coordinates in the ordinary metrical sense, _i.e._ the numerical
measures of certain spatial magnitudes. On the contrary, they are a
set of numbers, arbitrarily but systematically assigned to different
points, like the numbers of houses in a street, and serving only,
from a philosophical standpoint, as convenient designations for
points which the investigation wishes to distinguish. But for the
brevity of the alphabet, in fact, they might, as in Euclid, be
replaced by letters. How they are introduced, and what they mean, has
been discussed in Chapter I. Here we have only to repeat a caution,
whose neglect has led to much misunderstanding.

=106.= The distinction between various points, then, is not a result,
but a condition, of the projective coordinate system. The coordinate
system is a wholly extraneous, and merely convenient, set of marks,
which in no way touches the essence of projective Geometry. What we
must begin with, in this domain, is the possibility of distinguishing
various points from one another. This may be designated, with
Veronese, as the first axiom of Geometry[119]. How we are to define
a point, and how we distinguish it from other points, is for the
moment irrelevant; for here we only wish to discover the nature
of projective Geometry, and the kind of properties which it uses
and demonstrates. How, and with what justification, it uses and
demonstrates them, we will discuss later.

=107.= Now it is obvious that a mere collection of points,
distinguished one from another, cannot found a Geometry: we must
have some idea of the manner in which the points are interrelated,
in order to have an adequate subject-matter for discussion. But
since all ideas of quantity are excluded, the relations of points
cannot be relations of distance in the ordinary sense, nor even, in
the sense of ordinary Geometry, anharmonic ratios, for anharmonic
ratios are usually defined as the ratios of four distances, or of
four sines, and are thus quantitative. But since all quantitative
comparison presupposes an identity of quality, we may expect to find,
in projective Geometry, the qualitative substrata of the metrical
superstructure.

And this, we shall see, is actually the case. We have not distance,
but we _have_ the straight line; we have not quantitative anharmonic
ratio, but we _have_ the property, in any four points on a line,
of being the intersections with the rays of a given pencil. And
from this basis, we can build up a qualitative science of abstract
externality, which is projective Geometry. How this happens, I shall
now proceed to show.

=108.= All geometrical reasoning is, in the last resort, circular:
if we start by assuming points, they can only be defined by the
lines or planes which relate them; and if we start by assuming lines
or planes, they can only be defined by the points through which
they pass. This is an inevitable circle, whose ground of necessity
will appear as we proceed. It is, therefore, somewhat arbitrary to
start either with points or with lines, as the eminently projective
principle of duality mathematically illustrates; nevertheless we will
elect, with most geometers, to start with points[120]. We suppose,
therefore, as our datum, a set of discrete points, for the moment
without regard to their interconnections. But since connections are
essential to any reasoning about them as a system, we introduce, to
begin with, the axiom of the straight line. Any two of our points,
we say, lie on a line which those two points completely define.
This line, being determined by the two points, may be regarded as
a relation of the two points, or an adjective of the system formed
by both together. This is the only purely qualitative adjective--as
will be proved later--of a system of two points. Now projective
Geometry can only take account of qualitative adjectives, and can
distinguish between different points only by their relations to
other points, since all points, _per se_, are qualitatively similar.
Hence it comes that, for projective Geometry, when two points only
are given, they are qualitatively indistinguishable from any two
other points on the same straight line, since any two such other
points have the same qualitative relation. Reciprocally, since one
straight line is a figure determined by any two of its points, and
all points are qualitatively similar, it follows that all straight
lines are qualitatively similar. We may regard a point, therefore, as
determined by two straight lines which meet in it, and the point,
on this view, becomes the only qualitative relation between the two
straight lines. Hence, if the point only be regarded as given, the
two straight lines are qualitatively indistinguishable from any other
pair through the point.

=109.= The extension of these two reciprocal principles is the
essence of all projective transformations, and indeed of all
projective Geometry. The fundamental operations, by which figures
are projectively transformed, are called projection and section. The
various forms of projection and section are defined in Cremona's
"Projective Geometry," Chapter I., from which I quote the following
account.

"_To project from a fixed point S_ (the _centre of projection_) a
figure (_ABCD_ ... _abcd_ ...) composed of points and straight lines,
is to construct the straight lines or _projecting rays SA_, _SB_,
_SC_, _SD_, ... and the planes (_projecting planes_) _Sa_, _Sb_,
_Sc_, _Sd_, ... We thus obtain a new figure composed of straight
lines and planes which all pass through the centre _S_.

"_To cut by a fixed plane  (transversal plane_) a figure (__ ...
_abcd_ ...) made up of planes and straight lines, is to construct the
straight lines or _traces , , _ ... and the points or _traces
a, b, c_....[121] By this means we obtain a new figure
composed of straight lines and points lying in the plane __.

"_To project from a fixed straight line s_ (the _axis_) a figure
_ABCD_ composed of points, is to construct the planes _sA_, _sB_,
_sC_.... The figure thus obtained is composed of planes which all
pass through the axis _s_.

"_To cut by a fixed straight line s_ (a _transversal_) a figure
__ ... composed of planes, is to construct the points _s_, _s_,
_s_.... In this way a new figure is obtained, composed of points all
lying on the fixed transversal _s_.

"If a figure is composed of straight lines _a_, _b_, _c_ ... which
all pass through a fixed point or _centre S_, it can be _projected_
from a straight line or _axis s_ passing through _S_; the result is a
figure composed of planes _sa_, _sb_, _sc_....

"If a figure is composed of straight lines _a_, _b_, _c_ ...
all lying in a fixed plane, it may be cut by a straight line
(transversal) _s_ lying in the same plane; the figure which results
is formed by the points _sa_, _sb_, _sc_...."

=110.= The successive application, to any figure, of two reciprocal
operations of projection and section, is regarded as producing a
figure protectively indistinguishable from the first, provided only
that the dimensions of the original figure were the same as those
of the resulting figure, that, for example, if the second operation
be section by a plane, the original figure shall have been a plane
figure. The figures obtained from a given figure, by projection
or section alone, are related to that figure by the principle of
duality, of which we shall have to speak later on.

I shall endeavour to show, in what follows, first, in what sense
figures obtained from each other by projective transformation are
qualitatively alike; secondly, what axioms, or adjectives of space,
are involved in the principle of projective transformation; and
thirdly, that these adjectives must belong to any form of externality
with more than one dimension, and are, therefore, _ priori_
properties of any possible space.

For the sake of simplicity, I shall in general confine myself to two
dimensions. In so doing, I shall introduce no important difference of
principle, and shall greatly simplify the mathematics involved.

=111.= The two mathematically fundamental things in projective
Geometry are anharmonic ratio, and the quadrilateral construction.
Everything else follows mathematically from these two. Now what is
meant, in projective Geometry, by anharmonic ratio?

[Illustration]

If we start from anharmonic ratio as ordinarily defined, we are
met by the difficulty of its quantitative nature[122]. But among
the properties deduced from this definition, many, if not most,
are purely qualitative. The most fundamental of these is that, if
through any four points in a straight line we draw four straight
lines which meet in a point, and if we then draw a new straight line
meeting these four, the four new points of intersection have the
same anharmonic ratio as the four points we started with. Thus, in
the figure, _abcd_, _abcd_, _abcd_, all have the same
anharmonic ratio. The reciprocal relation holds for the anharmonic
ratio of four straight lines. Here we have, plainly, the required
basis for a qualitative definition. The definition must be as follows:

Two sets of four points each are defined as having the same
anharmonic ratio, when (1) each set of four lies in one straight
line, and (2) corresponding points of different sets lie two by two
on four straight lines through a single point, or when both sets have
this relation to any third set[123]. And reciprocally: Two sets of
four straight lines are defined as having the same anharmonic ratio
when (1) each set of four passes through a single point, and (2)
corresponding lines of different sets pass, two by two, through four
points in one straight line, or when both sets have this relation to
any third set.

Two sets of points or of lines, which have the same anharmonic ratio,
are treated by projective Geometry as equivalent: this qualitative
equivalence replaces the quantitative equality of metrical Geometry,
and is obviously included, by its definition, in the above account of
projective transformations in general.

=112.= We have next to consider the quadrilateral construction[124].
This has a double purpose: first, to define the important special
case known as a harmonic range; and secondly, to afford an
unambiguous and exhaustive method of assigning different numbers to
different points. This last method has, again, a double purpose:
first, the purpose of giving a convenient symbolism for describing
and distinguishing different points, and of thus affording a means
for the introduction of analysis; and secondly, of so assigning
these numbers that, if they had the ordinary metrical significance,
as distances from some point on the numbered straight line, they
would yield -1 as the anharmonic ratio of a harmonic range, and
that, if four points have the same anharmonic ratio as four
others, so have the corresponding numbers. This last purpose is
due to purely technical motives: it avoids the confusion with our
preconceptions which would result from any other value for a harmonic
range; it allows us, when metrical interpretations of projective
results are desired, to make these interpretations without tedious
numerical transformations, and it enables us to perform projective
transformations by algebraical methods. At the same time, from the
strictly projective point of view, as observed above, the numbers
introduced have a purely conventional meaning; and until we pass to
metrical Geometry, no reason can be shown for assigning the value -1
to a harmonic range. With this preliminary, let us see in what the
quadrilateral construction consists.

[Illustration]

=113.= A harmonic range, in elementary Geometry, is one whose
anharmonic ratio is -1, or one in which the three segments formed by
the four points are in harmonic progression, or again, one in which
the ratio of the two internal segments is equal to the ratio of the
two external segments. If _a_, _b_, _c_, _d_ be the four points, it
is easily seen that these definitions are equivalent to one another:
they give respectively:

    (ab/bc)/(ad/dc) = -1, (1/ab) - (1/ac) = (1/ac) - (1/ad),

          and (ab/bc) = (ad/cd).

But as they are all quantitative, they cannot be used for our present
purpose. Nor are any definitions which involve bisection of lines or
angles available. We must have a definition which proceeds entirely
by the help of straight lines and points, without measurement of
distances or angles. Now from the above definitions of a harmonic
range, we see that _a_, _b_, _c_, _d_ have the same anharmonic ratio
as _c_, _b_, _a_, _d_. This gives us the property we require for our
definition. For it shows that, in a harmonic range, we can find a
projective transformation which will interchange _a_ and _c_. This is
a necessary and sufficient condition for a harmonic range, and the
quadrilateral construction is the general method for giving effect to
it.

[Illustration]

Given any three points _A_, _B_, _D_ in one straight line, the
quadrilateral construction finds the point _C_ harmonic to _A_ with
respect to _B_, _D_ by the following method: Take any point _O_
outside the straight line _ABD_, and join it to _B_ and _D_. Through
_A_ draw any straight line cutting _OD_, _OB_ in _P_ and _Q_. Join
_DQ_, _BP_, and let them intersect in _R_. Join _OR_, and let _OR_
meet _ABD_ in _C_. Then _C_ is the point required.

To prove this, let _DRQ_ meet _OA_ in _T_, and draw _AR_, meeting
_OD_ in _S_. Then a projective transformation of _A_, _B_, _C_, _D_
from _R_ on to _OD_ gives the points _S_, _P_, _O_, _D_, which,
projected from _A_ on to _DQ_, give _R_, _Q_, _T_, _D_. But these
again, projected from _O_ on to _ABD_, give _C_, _B_, _A_, _D_.
Hence _A_, _B_, _C_, _D_ can be projectively transformed into _C_,
_B_, _A_, _D_, and therefore form a harmonic range. From this point,
the proof that the construction is unique and general follows
simply[125].

The introduction of numbers, by this construction, offers no
difficulties of principle--except, indeed, those which always
attend the application of number to continua--and may be studied
satisfactorily in Klein's Nicht-Euklid (I. p. 337 ff.). The principle
of it is, to assign the numbers 0, 1,  to _A_, _B_, _D_ and
therefore the number 2 to _C_, in order that the differences _AB_,
_AC_, _AD_ may be in harmonic progression. By taking _B_, _C_, _D_ as
a new triad corresponding to _A_, _B_, _D_, we find a point harmonic
to _B_ with respect to _C_, _D_ and assign to it the number 3, and so
on. In this way, we can obtain any number of points, and we are sure
of having no number and no point twice over, so that our coordinates
have the essential property of a unique correspondence with the
points they denote, and _vice versa_.

=114.= The point of importance in the above construction,
however, and the reason why I have reproduced it in detail, is
that it proceeds entirely by means of the general principles of
transformation enunciated above. From this stage onwards, everything
is effected by means of the two fundamental ideas we have just
discussed, and everything, therefore, depends on our general
principle of projective equivalence. This principle, as regards two
dimensions, may be stated more simply than in the passage quoted from
Cremona. It starts, in two dimensions, from the following definitions:

To project the points _A_, _B_, _C_, _D_ ... from a centre _O_, is to
construct the straight lines _OA_, _OB_, _OC_, _OD_....

To cut a number of straight lines _a_, _b_, _c_, _d_ ... by a
transversal _s_, is to construct the points _sa_, _sb_, _sc_,
_sd_....[126]

The successive application of these two operations, provided the
original figure consisted of points on one straight line or of
straight lines through one point, gives a figure projectively
indistinguishable from the former figure; and hence, by extension,
if any points in one straight line in the original figure lie in one
straight line in the derived figure, and reciprocally for straight
lines through points, the two operations have given projectively
similar figures. This general principle may be regarded as consisting
of two parts, according to the order of the operations: if we begin
with projection and end with section, we transform a figure of
points into another figure of points; by the converse order, we
transform a figure of lines into another figure of lines.

=115.= Before we can be clear as to the meaning of our principle, we
must have some notion as to our definition of points and straight
lines. But this definition, in projective Geometry, cannot be given
without some discussion of the principle of duality, the mathematical
form of the philosophical circle involved in geometrical definitions.

Confining ourselves for the moment to two dimensions, the principle
asserts, roughly speaking, that any theorem, dealing with lines
through a point and points on a line, remains true if these two
terms, wherever they occur, are interchanged. Thus: two points
lie on one straight line which they completely determine; and two
straight lines meet in one point, which they completely determine.
The four points of intersection of a transversal with four lines
through a point have an anharmonic ratio independent of the
particular transversal; and the four lines joining four points on one
straight line to a fifth point have an anharmonic ratio independent
of that fifth point. So also our general principle of projective
transformation has two sides: one in which points move along fixed
lines, and one in which lines turn about fixed points.

This duality suggests that any definition of points must be effected
by means of the straight line, and any definition of the straight
line must be effected by means of points. When we take the third
dimension into account, it is true, the duality is no longer so
simple; we have now to take account also of the plane, but this only
introduces a circle of three terms, which is scarcely preferable to
a circle of two terms. We now say: Three points, or a line and a
point, determine a plane: but conversely, three planes, or a line
and plane, determine a point. We may regard the straight line as a
relation between two of its points, but we may also regard the point
as a relation between two straight lines through it. We may regard
the plane as a relation between three points, or between a point and
a line, but we may also regard the point as a relation between three
planes, or between a line and a plane, which meet in it.

=116.= How are we to get outside this circle? The fact is that, in
pure Geometry, we cannot get outside it. For space, as we shall see
more fully hereafter, is nothing but relations; if, therefore, we
take any spatial figure, and seek for the terms between which it is a
relation, we are compelled, in Geometry, to seek these terms within
space, since we have nowhere else to seek them, but we are doomed,
since anything purely spatial is a mere relation, to find our terms
melting away as we grasp them.

Thus the relativity of space, while it is the essence of the
principle of duality, at the same time renders impossible the
expression of that principle, or of any other principle of pure
Geometry, in a manner which shall be free from contradictions.
Nevertheless, if we are to advance at all with our analysis of
geometrical reasoning and with our definitions of lines and points,
we must, for a while, ignore this contradiction; we must argue
as though it did not exist, so as to free our science from any
contradictions which are not inevitable.

=117.= In accordance with this procedure, then, let us define our
points as the terms of spatial relations, regarding whatever is not
a point as a relation between points. What, on this view, must our
points be taken to be? Obviously, if extension is mere relativity,
they must be taken to contain no extension; but if they are to
supply the terms for spatial relations, _e.g._ for straight lines,
these relations must exhibit them as the terms of the figures they
relate. In other words, since what can really be taken, without
contradiction, as the term of a spatial relation, is unextended, we
must take, as the term to be used in Geometry, where we cannot go
outside space, the least spatial thing which Geometry can deal with,
the thing which, though _in_ space, _contains_ no space; and this
thing we define as the point[127].

Neglecting, then, the fundamental contradiction in this definition,
the rest of our definitions follow without difficulty. The straight
line is the relation between two points, and the plane is the
relation between three. These definitions will be argued and defended
at length in section B of this Chapter[128], where we can discuss at
the same time the alternative metrical definitions; for our present
purpose, it is sufficient to observe that projective Geometry, from
the first, regards the straight line as determined by two points, and
the plane as determined by three, from which it follows, if we take
points as possible terms for spatial relations, that the straight
line and the plane may be regarded as relations between two and three
points respectively. If we agree on these definitions, we can proceed
to discuss the fundamental principle of projective Geometry, and to
analyse the axioms implicated in its truth.

=118.= Projective Geometry, we have seen, does not deal with
quantity, and therefore recognizes no difference where the
difference is purely quantitative. Now quantitative comparison
depends on a recognized identity of quality; the recognition of
qualitative identity, therefore, is logically prior to quantity, and
presupposed by every judgment of quantity. Hence all figures, whose
differences can be exhaustively described by quantity, _i.e._ by
pure measurement, must have an identity of quality, and this must be
recognizable without appeal to quantity. It follows that, by defining
the word quality in geometrical matters, we shall discover what
sets of figures are projectively indiscernible. If our definition
is correct, it ought to yield the general projective principle with
which we set out.

=119.= We agreed to regard points as the terms of spatial relations,
and we agreed that different points could be distinguished. But
we postponed the discussion of the conditions under which this
distinction could be effected. This discussion will yield us the
definition of quality and the proof of our general projective
principle.

Points, to begin with, have been defined as nothing but the terms for
spatial relations. They have, therefore, no intrinsic properties;
but are distinguished solely by means of their relations. Now the
relation between two points, we said, is the straight line on which
they lie. This gives that identity of quality for all pairs of points
on the same straight line, which is required both by our projective
principle and by metrical Geometry. (For only where there is identity
of quality can quantity be properly applied.) If only two points are
given, they cannot, without the use of quantity, be distinguished
from any two other points on the same straight line; for the
qualitative relation between any two such points is the same as for
the original pair, and only by a difference of relation can points be
distinguished from one another.

But conversely, one straight line is nothing but the relation
between two of its points, and all points are qualitatively alike.
Hence there can be nothing to distinguish one straight line from
another except the points through which it passes, and these are
distinguished from other points only by the fact that it passes
through them. Thus we get the reciprocal transformation: if we are
given only one point, any pair of straight lines through that point
is qualitatively indistinguishable from any other. This again is, on
the one hand, the basis of the second part of our general projective
principle, and on the other hand the condition of applying quantity,
in the measurement of angles, to the departure of two intersecting
straight lines.

=120.= We can now see the reason for what may have hitherto seemed a
somewhat arbitrary fact, namely, the necessity of _four_ collinear
points for anharmonic ratio. Recurring to the quadrilateral
construction and the consequent introduction of number, we see
that anharmonic ratio is an intrinsic projective relation of four
collinear points or concurrent straight lines, such that given three
terms and the relation, the fourth term can be uniquely determined
by projective methods. Now consider first a pair of points. Since
all straight lines are projectively equivalent, the relation between
one pair of points is precisely equivalent to that between another
pair. Given one point only, therefore, no projective relation, to
any second point, can be assigned, which shall in any way limit our
choice of the second point. Given two points, however, there is such
a relation--the third point may be given collinear with the first
two. This limits its position to one straight line, but since two
points determine nothing but one straight line, the third point
cannot be further limited. Thus we see why no intrinsic projective
relation can be found between three points, which shall enable us,
from two, uniquely to determine the third. With three given collinear
points, however, we have more given than a mere straight line, and
the quadrilateral construction enables us uniquely to determine any
number of fresh collinear points. This shows why anharmonic ratio
must be a relation between four points, rather than between three.

=121.= We can now prove, I think, that two figures, which are
projectively related, are qualitatively similar. Let us begin with
a collection of points on a straight line. So long as these are
considered without reference to other points or figures, they are
all qualitatively similar. They can be distinguished by immediate
intuition, but when we endeavour, without quantity, to distinguish
them conceptually, we find the task impossible, since the only
qualitative relation of any two of them, the straight line, is
the same for any other two. But now let us choose, at hap-hazard,
some point outside the straight line. The points of our line now
acquire new adjectives, namely their relations to the new point,
_i.e._ the straight lines joining them to this new point. But these
straight lines, reciprocally, alone define our external point,
and all straight lines are qualitatively similar. If we take some
other external point, therefore, and join it to the same points
of our original straight line, we obtain a figure in which, so
long as quantity is excluded, there is no conceptual difference
from the former figure. Immediate intuition can distinguish the
two figures, but qualitative discrimination cannot do so. Thus we
obtain a projective transformation of four lines into four other
lines, as giving a figure qualitatively indistinguishable from the
original figure. A similar argument applies to the other projective
transformations. Thus the only reason, within projective Geometry,
for not regarding projective figures as actually identical, is the
intuitive perception of difference of position. This is fundamental,
and must be accepted as a _datum_. It is presupposed in the
distinction of various points, and forms the very life of Geometry.
It is, in fact, the essence of the notion of a form of externality,
which notion forms the subject-matter of projective Geometry.

=122.= We may now sum up the results of our analysis of projective
Geometry, and state the axioms on which its reasoning is based. We
shall then have to prove that these axioms are necessary to any form
of externality, with which we shall pass, from mere analysis, to a
transcendental argument.

The axioms which have been assumed in the above analysis, and which,
it would seem, suffice to found projective Geometry, may be roughly
stated as follows:

I. We can distinguish different parts of space, but all parts are
qualitatively similar, and are distinguished only by the immediate
fact that they lie outside one another.

II. Space is continuous and infinitely divisible; the result of
infinite division, the zero of extension, is called a _point_[129].

III. Any two points determine a unique figure, called a straight
line, any three in general determine a unique figure, the plane.
Any four determine a corresponding figure of three dimensions, and
for aught that appears to the contrary, the same may be true of any
number of points. But this process comes to an end, sooner or later,
with some number of points which determine the whole of space. For
if this were not the case, no number of relations of a point to a
collection of given points could ever determine its relation to fresh
points, and Geometry would become impossible[130].

This statement of the axioms is not intended to have any exclusive
precision: other statements equally valid could easily be made. For
all these axioms, as we shall see hereafter, are philosophically
interdependent, and may, therefore, be enunciated in many ways. The
above statement, however, includes, if I am not mistaken, everything
essential to projective Geometry, and everything required to prove
the principle of projective transformation. Before discussing the
apriority of these axioms, let us once more briefly recapitulate the
ends which they are intended to attain.

=123.= From the exclusively mathematical standpoint, as we have
seen, projective Geometry discusses only what figures can be obtained
from each other by projective transformations, _i.e._ by the
operations of projection and section. These operations, in all their
forms, presuppose the point, straight line, and plane[131], whose
necessity for projective Geometry, from the purely mathematical point
of view, is thus self-evident from the start. But philosophically,
projective Geometry has, as we saw, a wider aim. This wider aim,
which gives, to the investigation of projectively equivalent figures,
its chief importance, consists in the determination of qualitative
spatial similarity, in the determination, that is, of all the figures
which, when any one figure is given, can be distinguished from the
given figure, so long as quantity is excluded, only by the mere fact
that they are external to it.

=124.= Now when we consider what is involved in such absolute
qualitative equivalence, we find at once, as its most obvious
prerequisite, the perfect homogeneity of space. For it is assumed
that a figure can be completely defined by its internal relations,
and that the external relations, which constitute its position,
though they suffice to distinguish it from other figures, in
no way affect its internal properties, which are regarded as
qualitatively identical with those of figures with quite different
external relations. If this were not the case, anything analogous
to projective transformation would be impossible. For such
transformation always alters the position, _i.e._ the external
relations, of a figure, and could not, therefore, if figures were
dependent on their relations to other figures or to empty space,
be studied without reference to other figures, or to the absolute
position of the original figure. We require for our principle,
in short, what may be called the mutual passivity and reciprocal
independence of two parts or figures of space.

This passivity and this independence involve the homogeneity of
space, or its equivalent, the relativity of position. For if
the internal properties of a figure are the same, whatever its
external relations may be, it follows that all parts of space are
qualitatively similar, since a change of external relation is a
change in the part of space occupied. It follows, also, that all
position is relative and extrinsic, _i.e._, that the position of a
point, or the part of space occupied by a figure, is not, and has
no effect upon, any intrinsic property of the point or figure, but
is exclusively a relation to other points or figures in space, and
remains without effect except where such relations are considered.

=125.= The homogeneity of space and the relativity of position,
therefore, are presupposed in the qualitative spatial comparison
with which projective Geometry deals. The latter, as we saw, is
also the basis of the principle of duality. But these properties,
as I shall now endeavour to prove, belong of necessity to any form
of externality, and are thus _ priori_ properties of all possible
spaces. To prove this, however, we must first define the notion of a
form of externality in general.

Let us observe, to begin with, that the distinction between
Euclidean and non-Euclidean Geometries, so important in metrical
investigations, disappears in projective Geometry proper. This
suggests that projective Geometry, though originally invented as
the science of Euclidean space, and subsequently of non-Euclidean
spaces also, deals really with a wider conception, a conception which
includes both, and neglects the attributes in which they differ. This
conception I shall speak of as a form of externality.

=126.= In Grassmann's profound philosophical introduction to his
_Ausdehnungslehre_ of 1844, he suggested that Geometry, though
improperly regarded as pure, was really a branch of applied
mathematics, since it dealt with a subject-matter not created,
like number, by the intellect, but given to it, and therefore not
wholly subject to its laws alone. But it must be possible--so he
contended--to construct a branch of pure mathematics, a science, that
is, in which our object should be wholly a creature of the intellect,
which should yet deal, as Geometry does, with extension--extension
as conceived, however, not as empirically perceived in sensation or
intuition.

From this point of view, the controversy between Kantians and
anti-Kantians becomes wholly irrelevant, since the distinction
between pure and mixed mathematics does not lie in the distinction
between the subjective and the objective, but between the purely
intellectual on the one hand, and everything else on the other.
Now Kant had contended, with great emphasis, that space was not an
intellectual construction, but a subjective intuition. Geometry,
therefore, with Grassmann's distinction, belongs to mixed mathematics
as much on Kant's view as on that of his opponents. And Grassmann's
distinction, I contend, is the more important for Epistemology,
and the one to be adopted in distinguishing the _ priori_ from
the empirical. For what is merely intuitional can change, without
upsetting the laws of thought, without making knowledge formally
impossible: but what is purely intellectual cannot change, unless the
laws of thought should change, and all our knowledge simultaneously
collapse. I shall therefore follow Grassmann's distinction in
constructing an _ priori_ and purely conceptual form of externality.

=127.= The pure doctrine of extension, as constructed by Grassmann,
need not be discussed--it included much empirical material, and was
philosophically a failure. But his principles, I think, will enable
us to prove that projective Geometry, abstractly interpreted, is
the science which he foresaw, and deals with a matter which can be
constructed by the pure intellect alone. If this be so, however,
it must be observed that projective Geometry, for the moment, is
rendered purely hypothetical[132]. All necessary truth, as Bradley
has shown, is hypothetical[133], and asserts, _prim facie_, only
the ground on which rests the necessary connection of premisses
and conclusion. If we construct a mere conception of externality,
and thus abandon our actually given space, the result of our
construction, until we return to something actually given, remains
without existential import--if there _be_ experienced externality, it
asserts, then there must be a form of externality with such and such
properties. That there must be experienced externality, Kant's first
argument about space proves, I think, to those who admit experience
of a world of diverse but interrelated things. But this is a question
which belongs to the next Chapter.

What we have to do here is, not to discuss whether there is a form of
externality, but whether, if there be such a form, it must possess
the properties embodied in the axioms of projective Geometry. Now
first of all, what do we mean by such a form?

=128.= In any world in which perception presents us with various
things, with discriminated and differentiated contents, there must
be, in perception, at least one "principle of differentiation[134],"
an element, that is, by which the things presented are distinguished
as various. This element, taken in isolation, and abstracted from the
content which it differentiates, we may call a form of externality.
That it must, when taken in isolation, appear as a form, and not as
a mere diversity of material content, is, I think, fairly obvious.
For a diversity of material content cannot be studied apart from
that material content; what we wish to study here, on the contrary,
is the bare possibility of such diversity, which forms the residuum,
as I shall try to prove hereafter[135], when we abstract from any
sense-perception all that is distinctive of its particular matter.
This possibility, then, this principle of bare diversity, is our form
of externality. How far it is necessary to assume such a form, as
distinct from interrelated things, I shall consider later on[136].
For the present, since space, as dealt with by Geometry, is certainly
a form of this kind, we have only to ask: What properties must such a
form, when studied in abstraction, necessarily possess?

=129.= In the first place, externality is an essentially relative
conception--nothing can be external to itself. To be external to
something is to be another with some relation to that thing. Hence,
when we abstract a form of externality from all material content,
and study it in isolation, position will appear, of necessity,
as purely relative--a position can have no intrinsic quality, for
our form consists of pure externality, and externality contains
no shadow or trace of an intrinsic quality. Thus we obtain our
fundamental postulate, the relativity of position, or, as we may put
it, the complete absence, on the part of our form, of any vestige of
thinghood.

The same argument may also be stated as follows: If we abstract the
conception of externality, and endeavour to deal with it _per se_, it
is evident that we must obtain an object alike destitute of elements
and of totality. For we have abstracted from the diverse matter
which filled our form, while any element, or any whole, would retain
some of the qualities of a matter. Either an element or a whole, in
fact, would have to be a thing not external to itself, and would
thus contain something not pure externality. Hence arise infinite
divisibility, with the self-contradictory notion of the point, in the
search for elements, and unbounded extension, with the contradiction
of an infinite regress or a vicious circle, in the search for a
completed whole. Thus again, our form contains neither elements nor
totality, but only endless relations--the terms of these relations
being excluded by our abstraction from the matter which fills our
form.

=130.= In like manner we can deduce the homogeneity of our form. The
diversity of content, which was possible only within the form of
externality, has been abstracted from, leaving nothing but the bare
possibility of diversity, the bare principle of differentiation,
itself uniform and undifferentiated. For if diversity presupposes
such a form, the form cannot, unless it were contained in a fresh
form, be itself diverse or differentiated.

Or we may deduce the same property from the relativity of position.
For any quality in one position, by which it was marked out from
another, would be necessarily more or less intrinsic, and would
contradict the pure relativity. Hence all positions are qualitatively
alike, _i.e._ the form is homogeneous throughout.

=131.= From what has been said of homogeneity and relativity,
follows one of the strangest properties of a form of externality.
This property is, that the relation of externality between any two
things is infinitely divisible, and may be regarded, consequently,
as made up of an infinite number of the would-be elements of our
form, or again as the sum of two relations of externality[137]. To
speak of dividing or adding relations may well sound absurd--indeed
it reveals the impropriety of the word relation in this connexion.
It is difficult, however, to find an expression which shall be less
improper. The fact seems to be, that externality is not so much a
relation as bare relativity, or the bare possibility of a relation.
On this subject, I shall enlarge in Chapter IV.[138] At this point
it is only important to realize, what the subsequent argument will
assume, that the relation--if we may so call it--of externality
between two or more things must, since our form is homogeneous, be
capable of continuous alteration, and must, since our infinitely
divisible form is constituted by such relations, be capable of
infinite division. But the result of infinite division is defined
as the element of our form. (Our form has no elements, but we have
to imagine elements in order to reason about it, as will be shown
more fully in Chapter IV.) Hence it follows, that every relation
of externality may be regarded, for scientific purposes, as an
infinite congeries of elements, though philosophically, the relations
alone are valid, and the elements are a self-contradictory result
of hypostatizing the form of externality. This way of regarding
relations of externality is important in understanding the meaning of
such ideas as three or four collinear points.

As this point is difficult and important, I will repeat, in somewhat
greater detail, the explanation of the manner in which straight
lines and planes come to be regarded as congeries of points. From
the strictly projective standpoint, though all other figures _are_
merely a collection of any required number of points, lines or
planes, given by some projective construction, straight lines and
planes themselves are given integrally, and are not to be considered
as divisible or composed of parts. To say that a point lies on
a straight line means, for projective Geometry proper, that the
straight line is a relation between this and some other point.
Here the points concerned, if our statement is to be freed from
contradictions, must be regarded, if I may use such an expression, as
_real_ points--_i.e._ as unextended material centres[139]. Straight
lines and planes are then relations between these material atoms.
They are relations, however, which may undergo a metrical alteration
while remaining projectively unchanged. When the projective relation
between the two points _A_, _B_ is the same as that between the two
points _A_, _C_, while the metrical relation (distance) is different,
the three points _A_, _B_, _C_ are said to be collinear. Now the
metrical manner of regarding spatial figures demands that they should
be hypostatized, and no longer regarded as mere relations. For when
we regard a quantity as extensive, _i.e._ as divisible into parts,
we necessarily regard it as more than a mere relation or adjective,
since no mere relation or adjective can be divided. For quantitative
treatment, therefore, spatial relations must be hypostatized[140].
When this is done, we obtain, as we saw above, a homogeneous
and infinitely divisible form of externality. We find now that
distance, for example, may be continuously altered without changing
the straight line on which it is measured. We thus obtain, on the
straight line in question, a continuous series of points, which,
since it is continuous, we regard as constituting our straight line.
It is thus solely from the hypostatizing of relations, which metrical
Geometry requires, that the view of straight lines and planes as
_composed_ of points arises, and it is from this hypostatizing that
the difficulties of metrical Geometry spring.

=132.= The next step, in defining a form of externality, is obtained
from the idea of _dimensions_. Positions, we have seen, are defined
solely by their relations to other positions. But in order that
such definition may be possible, a finite number of relations must
suffice, since infinite numbers are philosophically inadmissible. A
position must be definable, therefore, if knowledge of our form is
to be possible at all, by some finite integral number of relations
to other positions. Every relation thus necessary for definition
we call a dimension. Hence we obtain the proposition: _Any form of
externality must have a finite integral number of dimensions_.

=133.= The above argument, it may be urged, has overlooked a
possibility. It has used a transcendental argument, so an opponent
may contend, without sufficiently proving that knowledge about
externality must be possible without reference to the matters
external to each other. The definition of a position may be
impossible, so long as we neglect the matter which fills the form,
but may become possible when this matter is taken into account.
Such an objection can, I think, be successfully met, by a reference
to the passivity and homogeneity of our form. For any dependence
of the definition of a position on the particular matter filling
that position, would involve some kind of interaction between the
matter and its position, some effect of the diverse content on
the homogeneous form. But since the form is totally destitute of
thinghood, perfectly impassive, and perfectly void of differences
between its parts, any such effect is inconceivable. An effect on
a position would have to alter it in some way, but how could it be
altered? It has no qualities except those which make it the position
it is, as opposed to other positions; it cannot change, therefore,
without becoming a different position. But such a change contradicts
the law of identity. Hence it is not the position which has changed,
but the content which has moved in the form. Thus it must be
possible, if knowledge of our form can be obtained at all, to obtain
this knowledge in logical independence of the particular matter which
fills it. The above argument, therefore, granted the possibility of
knowledge in the department in question, shows the necessity of a
finite integral number of dimensions.

=134.= Let us repeat our original argument in the light of this
elucidation. A position is completely defined when, and only when,
enough relations are known to enable us to determine its relation
to any fresh known position. Only by relations within the form of
externality, as we have just seen, and never by relations which
involve a reference to the particular matter filling the form,
can such a definition be effected. But the possibility of such a
definition follows from the Law of Excluded Middle, when this law is
interpreted to mean, as Bosanquet makes it mean, that "Reality ... is
a system of reciprocally determinate parts[141]." For this implies
that, given the relations of a part _A_ to other parts _B_, _C_ ...,
a sufficient wealth of such relations throws light on the relations
of _B_ to _C_, etc. If this were not the case, the parts _A_, _B_,
_C_ ... could not be said to form such a system; for in such a
system, to define _A_ is to define, at the same time, all the other
members, and to give an adjective to _A_, is to give an adjective to
_B_ and _C_. But the relations between positions are, when we restore
the matter from which the positions were abstracted, relations
between the things occupying those positions, and these relations, we
have seen, can be studied without reference to the particular nature,
in other respects, of the related things. It follows that, when we
apply the general principle of systematic unity to these relations in
particular, we find these relations to be dependent on each other,
since they are not dependent, for their definition, on anything else.
This gives the axiom of dimensions, in the above general form, as
the result, on our abstract geometrical level, of the relativity of
position and the law of excluded middle.

=135.= Before proceeding further, it is necessary to discuss the
important special case where a form of externality has only one
dimension. Of the two such forms, given in experience, one, namely
time, presents an instance of this special case. But it may be shown,
I think, that the function, in constituting the possibility of
experience, which we demand of such forms, could not be accomplished
by a one-dimensional form alone. For in a one-dimensional form, the
various contents may be arranged in a series, and cannot, without
interpenetration, change the order of contents in the series.
But interpenetration is impossible, since a form of externality
is the mere expression of diversity among things, from which it
follows that things cannot occupy the same position in a form,
unless there is another form by which to differentiate them. For
without externality, there is no diversity[142]. Thus two bodies
may occupy the same space, but only at different times: two things
may exist simultaneously, but only at different places. A form of
one dimension, therefore, could not, by itself, allow that change
of the relations of externality, by which alone a varied world
of interrelated things can be brought into consciousness. In a
one-dimensional space, for example, only a single object, which must
appear as a point, or two objects at most, one in front and one
behind, could ever be perceived. Thus two or more dimensions seem
an essential condition of anything worth calling an experience of
interrelated things.

=136.= It may be objected, to this argument, that its validity
depends upon the assumption that the change of a relation of
externality must be continuous. Both to make and to meet this
objection, in a manner which shall not imply time, seems almost
impossible. For we cannot speak of change, whether continuous or
discrete, without imagining time. Let us, therefore, allow time to
be known, and discuss whether the temporal change, in any other form
of externality, is necessarily continuous[143]. We must reply, I
think, that continuity is necessary. The change of relation, in our
non-temporal form, may be safely described as motion, and the law
of Causality--since we have already assumed time--may be applied to
this motion. It then follows that discrete motion would involve a
finite effect from an infinitesimal cause, for a cause acting only
for a moment of time would be infinitesimal. It involves, also, a
validity in the point of time, whereas what is valid in any form of
externality is not, as we have already seen, the infinitesimal and
self-contradictory element resulting from infinite division, but the
finite relation which mathematics analyzes into vanishing elements.
Hence change must be continuous, and the possibility of serial
arrangement holds good.

In a one-dimensional form other than time, the same argument must
hold. For something analogous to Causality would be necessary to
experience, and the relativity of the form would still necessarily
hold. Hence, since only these two properties of time have been
assumed, the above contention would remain valid of any second form
whose relations were correlated with those of the first, as the
analogue of Causality would require them to be.

=137.= The next step in the argument, which assumes two or more
dimensions, is concerned with the general analogues of straight
lines and planes, _i.e._ with figures--which may be regarded either
as relations between positions or as series of positions--uniquely
determined by two or by three positions. If this step can be
successfully taken, our deduction of the above projective axioms will
be complete, and descriptive Geometry will be established as the
abstract _ priori_ doctrine of forms of externality.

To prove this contention, consider of what nature the relations
can be by which positions are defined. We have seen already that
our form is purely relational and infinitely divisible, and that
positions (points) are the self-contradictory outcome of the search
for something other than relations. What we really mean, therefore,
by the relations defining a position, is, when we undo our previous
abstraction, the relations of externality by which some thing is
related to other things. But how, when we remain in the abstract
form, must such relations appear?

=138.= We have to prove that two positions must have a relation
independent of any reference to other positions. To prove this, let
us recur to what was said, in connection with dimensions, as to the
passivity and homogeneity of our form. Since positions are defined
only by relations, there must be relations, within the form, between
positions. But if there are such relations, there must be a relation
which is intrinsic to two positions. For to suppose the contrary,
is to attribute an interaction or causal connection, of some kind,
between those two positions and other positions--a supposition
which the perfect homogeneity of our form renders absurd, since all
positions are qualitatively similar, and cannot be changed without
losing their identity. We may put this argument thus: since positions
are only defined by their relations, such definition could never
begin, unless it began with a relation between only two positions.
For suppose three positions _A_, _B_, _C_ were necessary, and gave
rise to the relation _abc_ between the three. Then there would remain
no means of defining the different pairs _BC_, _CA_, _AB_, since the
only relation defining them would be one common to all three pairs.
Nothing would be gained, in this case, by reference to fresh points,
for it follows, from the homogeneity and passivity of the form, that
these fresh points could not affect the internal relations of our
triad, which relations, if they can give definiteness at all, must
give it without the aid of external reference. Two positions must,
therefore, if definition is to be possible, have some relation which
they by themselves suffice to define. Precisely the same argument
applies to three positions, or to four; the argument loses its scope
only when we have exhausted the dimensions of the form considered.
Thus, in three dimensions, five positions have no fresh relation,
not deducible from those already known, for by the definition of
dimensions, all the relations involved can be deduced from those of
the fourth point to the first three, together with those of the fifth
to the first three.

We may give the argument a more concrete, and perhaps a more
convincing shape, by considering the matter arranged in our form. If
two things are mutually external, they must since they belong to the
same world, have some relation of externality; there is, therefore,
a relation of externality between two things. But since our form is
homogeneous, the same relation of externality may subsist in other
parts of the form, _i.e._ while the two things considered alter their
relations of externality to other things. The relation of externality
between two things is, therefore, independent of other things. Hence,
when we return to the abstract language of the form, two positions
have a relation determined by those two positions alone, and
independent of other positions.

Precisely the same argument applies to the relations of three
positions, and in each case the relation must appear in the form as
not a mere inference from the positions it relates. For relations,
as we have seen, actually constitute a form of externality, and are
not mere inferences from terms, which are nowhere to be found in the
form[144].

To sum up: Since position is relative, two positions must have
_some_ relation to each other; and since our form of externality
is homogeneous, this relation can be kept unchanged while the two
positions change their relations to other positions. Hence their
relation is intrinsic, and independent of other positions. Since
the form is a mere complex of relations, the relation in question
must, if the form is sensuous or intuitive, be itself sensuous or
intuitive, and not a mere inference. In this case, a unique relation
must be a unique figure--in spatial terms, the straight line joining
the two points.

=139.= With this, our deduction of projective Geometry from the
_ priori_ conceptual properties of a form of externality is
completed. That such a form, when regarded as an independent thing,
is self-contradictory, has been abundantly evident throughout the
discussion. But the science of the form has been founded on the
opposite way of regarding it: we have held it throughout to be a mere
complex of relations, and have deduced its properties exclusively
from this view of it. The many difficulties, in applying such an _
priori_ deduction to intuitive space, and in explaining, as logical
necessities, properties which appear as sensuous or intuitional data,
must be postponed to Chapter IV. For the present, I wish to point out
that projective Geometry is wholly _ priori_; that it deals with an
object whose properties are logically deduced from its definition,
not empirically discovered from data; that its definition, again, is
founded on the possibility of experiencing diversity in relation,
or multiplicity in unity; and that our whole science, therefore, is
logically implied in, and deducible from, the possibility of such
experience.

=140.= In metrical Geometry, on the contrary, we shall find a very
different result. Although the geometrical conditions which render
spatial measurement possible, will be found identical, except for
slight differences in the form of statement, with the _ priori_
axioms discussed above, yet the actual measurement--which deals
with actually given space, not the mere intellectual construction
we have been just discussing--gives results which can only be known
empirically and approximately, and can be deduced by no necessity
of thought. The Euclidean and non-Euclidean spaces give the various
results which are _ priori_ possible; the axioms peculiar to
Euclid--which are properly not axioms, but empirical results of
measurement--determine, within the errors of observation, which of
these _ priori_ possibilities is realized in our actual space. Thus
measurement deals throughout with an empirically given matter, not
with a creature of the intellect, and its _ priori_ elements are
only the conditions presupposed in the possibility of measurement.
What these conditions are, we shall see in the second section of this
chapter.


Section B.

THE AXIOMS OF METRICAL GEOMETRY.

=141.= We have now reviewed the axioms of projective Geometry, and
have seen that they are _ priori_ deductions from the fact that
we can experience externality, _i.e._ a coexistent multiplicity of
different but interrelated things. But projective Geometry, in spite
of its claims, is not the whole science of space, as is sufficiently
proved by the fact that it cannot discriminate between Euclidean and
non-Euclidean spaces[145]. For this purpose, spatial measurement
is required: metrical Geometry, with its quantitative tests, can
alone effect the discrimination. For all application of Geometry to
physics, also, measurement is required; the law of gravitation, for
example, requires the determination of actual distances. For many
purposes, in short, projective Geometry is wholly insufficient: thus
it is unable to distinguish between different kinds of conics, though
their distinction is of fundamental importance in many departments of
knowledge.

Metrical Geometry is, then, a necessary part of the science of
space, and a part not included in descriptive Geometry. Its _
priori_ element, nevertheless, so far as this is spatial and not
arithmetical, is the same as the postulate of projective Geometry,
namely, the homogeneity of space, or its equivalent, the relativity
of position. We can see, in fact, that the _ priori_ element in
both is likely to be the same. For the _ priori_ in metrical
Geometry will be whatever is presupposed in the possibility of
spatial measurement, _i.e._ of quantitative spatial comparison. But
such comparison presupposes simply a known identity of quality,
the determination of which is precisely the problem of projective
Geometry. Hence the conditions for the possibility of measurement, in
so far as they are not arithmetical, will be precisely the same as
those for projective Geometry.

=142.= Metrical Geometry, therefore, though distinct from projective
Geometry, is not independent of it, but presupposes it, and arises
from its combination with the extraneous idea of _quantity_.
Nevertheless the mathematical form of the axioms, in metrical
Geometry, is slightly different from their form in projective
Geometry. The homogeneity of space is replaced by its equivalent, the
axiom of Free Mobility. The axiom of the straight line is replaced
by the axiom of distance: Two points determine a unique quantity,
distance, which is unaltered in any motion of the two points as a
single figure. This axiom, indeed, will be found to involve the axiom
of the straight line--such a quantity could not exist unless the
two points determined a unique curve--but its mathematical form is
changed. Another important change is the collapse of the principle
of duality: quantity can be applied to the straight line, because
it is divisible into similar parts, but cannot be applied to the
indivisible point. We thus obtain a reason, which was wanting in
descriptive Geometry, for preferring points, as spatial elements,
to straight lines or planes[146]. Finally, an entirely new idea is
introduced with quantity, namely, the idea of _Motion_. Not that we
study motion, or that any of our results have reference to motion,
but that they cannot, though in projective Geometry they could, be
obtained without at least an ideal motion of our figures through
space.

Let us now examine in detail the prerequisites of spatial
measurement. We shall find three axioms, without which such
measurement would be impossible, but with which it is adequate to
decide, empirically and approximately, the Euclidean or non-Euclidean
nature of our actual space. We shall find, further, that these three
axioms can be deduced from the conception of a form of externality,
and owe nothing to the evidence of intuition. They are, therefore,
like their equivalents the axioms of projective Geometry, _ priori_,
and deducible from the conditions of spatial experience. This
experience, accordingly, can never disprove them, since its very
existence presupposes them.


I. _The Axiom of Free Mobility._

=143.= Metrical Geometry, to begin with, may be defined as the
science which deals with the comparison and relations of spatial
magnitudes. The conception of magnitude, therefore, is necessary from
the start. Some of Euclid's axioms, accordingly, have been classed as
arithmetical, and have been supposed to have nothing particular to do
with space. Such are the axioms that equals added to or subtracted
from equals give equals, and that things which are equal to the same
thing are equal to one another. These axioms, it is said, are purely
arithmetical, and do not, like the others, ascribe an adjective to
space. As regards their use in arithmetic, this is of course true.
But if an arithmetical axiom is to be applied to spatial magnitudes,
it must have some spatial import[147], and thus even this class is
not, in Geometry, _merely_ arithmetical. Fortunately, the geometrical
element is the same in all the axioms of this class--we can see at
once, in fact, that it can amount to no more than a definition of
spatial magnitude[148]. Again, since the space with which Geometry
deals is infinitely divisible, a definition of spatial magnitude
reduces itself to a definition of spatial equality, for, as soon as
we have this last, we can compare two spatial magnitudes by dividing
each into a number of equal units, and counting the number of such
units in each[149]. The ratio of the number of units is, of course,
the ratio of the two magnitudes.

=144.= We require, then, at the very outset, some criterion of
spatial equality: without such a criterion metrical Geometry would
become wholly impossible. It might appear, at first sight, as though
this need not be an axiom, but might be a mere definition. In part
this is true, but not wholly. The part which is merely a definition
is given in Euclid's eighth axiom: "Magnitudes which exactly coincide
are equal." But this gives a sufficient criterion only when the
magnitudes to be compared already occupy the same position. When, as
will normally be the case, the two spatial magnitudes are external to
one another--as, indeed, must be the case, if they are distinct, and
not whole and part--the two magnitudes can only be made to coincide
by a motion of one or both of them. In order, therefore, that our
definition of spatial magnitude may give unambiguous results,
coincidence when superposed, if it can ever occur, must occur always,
whatever path be pursued in bringing it about. Hence, if mere motion
could alter shapes, our criterion of equality would break down.
It follows that the application of the conception of magnitude
to figures in space involves the following axiom[150]: _Spatial
magnitudes can be moved from place to place without distortion_; or,
as it may be put, _Shapes do not in any way depend upon absolute
position in space_.

The above axiom is the axiom of Free Mobility[151]. I propose to
prove (1) that the denial of this axiom would involve logical and
philosophical absurdities, so that it must be classed as wholly _
priori_; (2) that metrical Geometry, if it refused this axiom, would
be unable, without a logical absurdity, to establish the notion of
spatial magnitude at all. The conclusion will be, that the axiom
cannot be proved or disproved by experience, but is an _ priori_
condition of metrical Geometry. As I shall thus be maintaining a
position which has been much controverted, especially by Helmholtz
and Erdmann, I shall have to enter into the arguments at some length.

=145.= A. _Philosophical Argument._ The denial of the axiom involves
absolute position, and an action of mere space, _per se_, on things.
For the axiom does not assert that real bodies, as a matter of
empirical fact, never change their shape in any way during their
passage from place to place: on the contrary, we know that such
changes do occur, sometimes in a very noticeable degree, and always
to some extent. But such changes are attributed, not to the change
of place as such, but to physical causes: changes of temperature,
pressure, etc. What our axiom has to deal with is not actual material
bodies, but geometrical figures[152], and it asserts that a figure
which is possible in any one position in space is possible in every
other. Its meaning will become clearer by reference to a case where
it does not hold, say the space formed by the surface of an egg.
Here, a triangle drawn near the equator cannot be moved without
distortion to the point, as it would no longer fit the greater
curvature of the new position: a triangle drawn near the point
cannot be fitted on to the flatter end, and so on. Thus the method
of superposition, such as Euclid employs in Book I. Prop. IV.,
becomes impossible; figures cannot be freely moved about, indeed,
given any figure, we can determine a certain series of possible
positions for it on the egg, outside which it becomes impossible.
What I assert is, then, that there is a philosophic absurdity in
supposing space in general to be of this nature. On the egg we have
marked points, such as the two ends; the space formed by its surface
is not homogeneous, and if things are moved about in it, it must of
itself exercise a distorting effect upon them, quite independently of
physical causes; if it did not exercise such an effect, the things
could not be moved. Thus such a space would not be homogeneous, but
would have marked points, by reference to which bodies would have
absolute position, quite independently of any other bodies. Space
would no longer be passive, but would exercise a definite effect upon
things, and we should have to accommodate ourselves to the notion
of marked points in empty space; these points being marked, not by
the bodies which occupied them, but by their effects on any bodies
which might from time to time occupy them. This want of homogeneity
and passivity is, however, absurd; space must, since it is a form of
externality, allow only of relative, not of absolute, position, and
must be completely homogeneous throughout. To suppose it otherwise,
is to give it a thinghood which no form of externality can possibly
possess. We must, then, on purely philosophical grounds, admit that a
geometrical figure which is possible anywhere is possible everywhere,
which is the axiom of Free Mobility.

=146.= B. _Geometrical Argument._ Let us see next what sort of
Geometry we could construct without this axiom. The ultimate standard
of comparison of spatial magnitudes must, as we saw in introducing
the axiom, be equality when superposed; but need we, from this
equality, infer equality when separated? It has been urged by Erdmann
that, for the more immediate purposes of Geometry, this would be
unnecessary[153]. We might construct a new Geometry, he thinks, in
which sizes varied with motion on any definite law. Such a view,
as I shall show below, involves a logical error as to the nature
of magnitude. But before pointing this out, let us discuss the
geometrical consequences of assuming its truth. Suppose the length
of an infinitesimal arc in some standard position were _ds_; then
in any other position _p_ its length would be _ds.f(p)_, where the
form of the function _f(p)_ must be supposed known. But how are we
to determine the position _p_? For this purpose, we require _p_'s
coordinates, _i.e._, some measurement of distance from the origin.
But the distance from the origin could only be measured if we assumed
our law _f(p)_ to measure it by. For suppose the origin to be _O_,
and _Op_ to be a straight line whose length is required. If we have
a measuring rod with which we travel along the line and measure
successive infinitesimal arcs, the measuring rod will change its
size as we move, so that an arc which appears by the measure to be
_ds_ will really be _f(s).ds_, where _s_ is the previously traversed
distance. If, on the other hand, we move our line _Op_ slowly through
the origin, and measure each piece as it passes through, our measure,
it is true, will not alter, but now we have no means of discovering
the law by which any element has changed its length in coming to
the origin. Hence, until we assume our function _f(p)_, we have no
means of determining _p_, for we have just seen that distances from
the origin can only be estimated by means of the law _f(p)_. It
follows that experience can neither prove nor disprove the constancy
of shapes throughout motion, since, if shapes were not constant, we
should have to _assume_ a law of their variation before measurement
became possible, and therefore measurement could not itself reveal
that variation to us[154].

Nevertheless, such an arbitrarily assumed law _does_, at first sight,
give a mathematically possible Geometry. The fundamental proposition,
that two magnitudes which can be superposed in any one position can
be superposed in any other, still holds. For two infinitesimal arcs,
whose lengths in the standard position are _ds{1}_ and _ds{2}_,
would, in any other position _p_, have lengths _f(p).ds{1}_ and
_f(p).ds{2}_, so that their ratio would be unaltered. From this
constancy of ratio, as we know through Riemann and Helmholtz, the
above proposition follows. Hence all that Geometry requires, it would
seem, as a basis for measurement, is an axiom that the alteration
of shapes during motion follows a definite known law, such as that
assumed above.

=147.= There is, however, in such a view, as I remarked above, a
logical error as to the nature of magnitude. This error has been
already pointed out in dealing with Erdmann[155], and need only be
briefly repeated here. A judgment of magnitude is essentially a
judgment of comparison: in unmeasured quantity, comparison as to
the mere more or less, but in measured magnitude, comparison as to
the precise how many times. To speak of differences of magnitude,
therefore, in a case where comparison cannot reveal them, is
logically absurd. Now in the case contemplated above, two magnitudes,
which appear equal in one position, appear equal also when compared
in another position. There is no sense, therefore, in supposing
the two magnitudes unequal when separated, nor in supposing,
consequently, that they have changed their magnitudes in motion.
This senselessness of our hypothesis is the logical ground of the
mathematical indeterminateness as to the law of variation. Since,
then, there is no means of comparing two spatial figures, as regards
magnitude, except superposition, the only logically possible axiom,
if spatial magnitude is to be self-consistent, is the axiom of Free
Mobility in the form first given above.

=148.= Although this axiom is _ priori_, its application to the
measurement of actual bodies, as we found in discussing Helmholtz's
views, always involves an empirical element[156]. Our axiom, then,
only supplies the _ priori_ condition for carrying out an operation
which, in the concrete, is empirical--just as arithmetic supplies the
_ priori_ condition for a census. As this topic has been discussed
at length in Chapter II., I shall say no more about it here.

=149.= There remain, however, a few objections and difficulties to be
discussed. First, how do we obtain equality in solids, and in Kant's
cases of right and left hands, or of right and left-handed screws,
where actual superposition is impossible? Secondly, how can we take
congruence as the only possible basis of spatial measurement, when we
have before us the case of time, where no such thing as congruence
is conceivable? Thirdly, it might be urged that we can immediately
estimate spatial equality by the eye, with more or less accuracy,
and thus have a measure independent of congruence. Fourthly, how is
metrical Geometry possible on non-congruent surfaces, if congruence
be the basis of spatial measurement? I will discuss these objections
successively.

=150.= (1) How do we measure the equality of solids? These could only
be brought into actual congruence if we had a fourth dimension to
operate in[157], and from what I have said before of the absolute
necessity of this test, it might seem as though we should be left
here in utter ignorance. Euclid is silent on the subject, and in
all works on Geometry it is assumed as self-evident that two cubes
of equal side are equal. This assumption suggests that we are not
so badly off as we should have been without congruence, as a test
of equality in one or two dimensions; for now we can at least be
sure that two cubes have all their sides and all their faces equal.
Two such cubes differ, then, in no sensible spatial quality save
position, for volume, in this case at any rate, is not a sensible
quality. They are, therefore, as far as such qualities are concerned,
indiscernible. If their places were interchanged, we might know the
change by their colour, or by some other non-geometrical property;
but so far as any property of which Geometry can take cognisance is
concerned, everything would seem as before. To suppose a difference
of volume, then, would be to ascribe an effect to mere position,
which we saw to be inadmissible while discussing Free Mobility.
Except as regards position, they are geometrically indiscernible, and
we may call to our aid the Identity of Indiscernibles to establish
their agreement in the one remaining geometrical property of volume.
This may seem rather a strange principle to use in Mathematics,
and for Geometry their equality is, perhaps, best regarded as
a definition; but if we demand a philosophical ground for this
definition, it is, I believe, only to be found in the Identity of
Indiscernibles. We can, without error, make our _definition_ of
three-dimensional equality rest on two-dimensional congruence. For
since direct comparison as to volume is impossible, we are at liberty
to _define_ two volumes as equal, when all their various lines,
surfaces, angles and solid angles are congruent, since there remains,
in such a case, no _measurable_ difference between the figures
composing the two volumes. Of course, as soon as we have established
this one case of equality of volumes, the rest of the theory follows;
as appears from the ordinary method of integrating volumes, by
dividing them into small cubes.

Thus congruence _helps_ to establish three-dimensional equality,
though it cannot directly _prove_ such equality; and the same
philosophical principle, of the homogeneity of space, by which
congruence was proved, comes to our rescue here. But how about
right-handed and left-handed screws? Here we can no longer apply the
Identity of Indiscernibles, for the two are very well discernible.
But as with solids, so here, Free Mobility can help us much. It
can enable us, by ordinary measurement, to show that the internal
relations of both screws are the same, and that the difference lies
only in their relation to other things in space. Knowing these
internal relations, we can calculate, by the Geometry which Free
Mobility has rendered possible, all the geometrical properties of
these screws--radius, pitch, etc.--and can show them to be severally
equal in both. But this is all we require. Mediate comparison is
possible, though immediate comparison is not. Both can, for instance,
be compared with the cylinder on which both would fit, and thus their
equality can be proved. A precisely similar proof holds, of course,
for the other cases, right and left hands, spherical triangles, etc.
On the whole, these cases confirm my argument; for they show, as Kant
intended them to show[158], the essential relativity of space.

=151.= (2) As regards time, no congruence is here conceivable,
for to effect congruence requires always--as we saw in the case
of solids--one more dimension than belongs to the magnitudes
compared. No day can be brought into temporal coincidence with any
other day, to show that the two exactly cover each other; we are
therefore reduced to the arbitrary assumption that some motion or
set of motions, given us in experience, is uniform. Fortunately,
we have a large set of motions which all roughly agree; the swing
of the pendulum, the rotation and revolution of the earth and the
planets, etc. These do not exactly agree, but they lead us to the
laws of motion, by which we are able, on our arbitrary hypothesis,
to estimate their small departures from uniformity; just as the
assumption of Free Mobility enabled us to measure the departures
of actual bodies from rigidity. But here, as there, another
possibility is mathematically open to us, and can only be excluded
by its philosophic absurdity; we might have assumed that the above
set of approximately agreeing motions all had velocities which
varied approximately as some arbitrarily assumed function of the
time, _f(t)_ say, measured from some arbitrary origin. Such an
assumption would still keep them as nearly synchronous as before,
and would give an equally possible, though more complex, system
of Mechanics; instead of the first law of motion, we should have
the following: A particle perseveres in its state of rest, or of
rectilinear motion with velocity varying as _f(t)_, except in so far
as it is compelled to alter that state by the action of external
forces. Such a hypothesis _is_ mathematically possible, but, like the
similar one for space, it is excluded logically by the comparative
nature of the judgment of quantity, and philosophically by the fact
that it involves absolute time, as a determining agent in change,
whereas time can never, philosophically, be anything but a passive
form, abstracted from change. I have introduced this parallel from
time, not as directly bearing on the argument, but as a simpler case
which may serve to illustrate my reasoning in the more complex case
of space. For since time, in mathematics, is one-dimensional, the
mathematical difficulties are simpler than in Geometry; and although
nothing accurately corresponds to congruence, there is a very similar
mixture of mathematical and philosophical necessity, giving, finally,
a thoroughly definite axiom as the basis of time-measurement,
corresponding to congruence as the basis of space-measurement[159].

=152.= (3) The case of time-measurement suggests the third of the
above objections to the absolute necessity of the axiom of Free
Mobility. Psycho-physics has shown that we have an approximate
power, by means of what may be called the sense of duration, of
immediately estimating equal short times. This establishes a rough
measure independent of any assumed uniform motion, and in space also,
it may be said, we have a similar power of immediate comparison.
We can see, by immediate inspection, that the sub-divisions on
a foot rule are not grossly inaccurate; and so, it may be said,
we both have a measure independent of congruence, and also could
discover, by experience, any gross departure from Free Mobility.
Against this view, however, there is at the outset a very fundamental
psychological objection. It has been urged that all our comparison
of spatial magnitudes proceeds by ideal superposition. Thus James
says (Psychology, Vol. II. p. 152): "Even where we only feel one
sub-division to be vaguely larger or less, the mind must pass rapidly
between it and the other sub-division, and receive the immediate
sensible shock of the more," and "so far as the sub-divisions of
a sense-space are to be _measured_ exactly against each other,
objective forms occupying one sub-division must be directly or
indirectly superposed upon the other[160]."

Even if we waive this fundamental objection, however, others remain.
To begin with, such judgments of equality are only very rough
approximations, and cannot be applied to lines of more than a certain
length, if only for the reason that such lines cannot well be seen
together. Thus this method can only give us any security in our own
immediate neighbourhood, and could in no wise warrant such operations
as would be required for the construction of maps &c., much less the
measurement of astronomical distances. They might just enable us to
say that some lines were longer than others, but they would leave
Geometry in a position no better than that of the Hedonical Calculus,
in which we depend on a purely subjective measure. So inaccurate, in
fact, is such a method acknowledged to be, that the foot-rule is as
much a need of daily life as of science. Besides, no one would trust
such immediate judgments, but for the fact that the stricter test of
congruence to some extent confirms them; if we could not apply this
test, we should have no ground for trusting them even as much as
we do. Thus we should have, here, no real escape from our absolute
dependence upon the axiom of Free Mobility.

=153.= (4) One last elucidatory remark is necessary before our proof
of this axiom can be considered complete. We spoke above of the
Geometry on an egg, where Free Mobility does not hold. What, I may
be asked, is there about a thoroughly non-congruent Geometry, more
impossible than this Geometry on the egg? The answer is obvious. The
Geometry of non-congruent surfaces is _only_ possible by the use of
infinitesimals, and in the infinitesimal all surfaces become plane.
The fundamental formula, that for the length of an infinitesimal
arc, is only obtained on the assumption that such an arc may be
treated as a straight line, and that Euclidean Plane Geometry may be
applied in the immediate neighbourhood of any point. If we had not
our Euclidean measure, which could be moved without distortion, we
should have no method of comparing small arcs in different places,
and the Geometry of non-congruent surfaces would break down. Thus
the axiom of Free Mobility, as regards three-dimensional space, is
necessarily implied and presupposed in the Geometry of non-congruent
surfaces; the possibility of the latter, therefore, is a dependent
and derivative possibility, and can form no argument against the _
priori_ necessity of congruence as the test of equality.

=154.= It is to be observed that the axiom of Free Mobility, as I
have enunciated it, includes also the axiom to which Helmholtz gives
the name of Monodromy. This asserts that a body does not alter its
dimensions in consequence of a complete revolution through four
right angles, but occupies at the end the same position as at the
beginning. The supposed mathematical necessity of making a separate
axiom of this property of space has been disproved by Sophus Lie (v.
Chap. I.  45); philosophically, it is plainly a particular case of
Free Mobility[161], and indeed a particularly obvious case, for a
translation really does make some change in a body, namely, a change
in position, but a rotation through four right angles may be supposed
to have been performed any number of times without appearing in the
result, and the absurdity of ascribing to space the power of making
bodies grow in the process is palpable; everything that was said
above on congruence in general applies with even greater evidence to
this special case.

=155.= The axiom of Free Mobility involves, if it is to be true, the
homogeneity of space, or the complete relativity of position. For if
any shape, which is possible in one part of space, be always possible
in another, it follows that all parts of space are qualitatively
similar, and cannot, therefore, be distinguished by any intrinsic
property. Hence positions in space, if our axiom be true, must be
wholly defined by external relations, _i.e._ _Position is not an
intrinsic, but a purely relative, property of things in space_. If
there could be such a thing as absolute position, in short, metrical
Geometry would be impossible. This relativity of position is the
fundamental postulate of all Geometry, to which each of the necessary
metrical axioms leads, and from which, conversely, each of these
axioms can be deduced.

=156.= This converse deduction, as regards Free Mobility, is not very
difficult, and follows from the argument of Section A[162], which
I will briefly recapitulate. In the first place, externality is an
essentially relative conception--nothing can be external to itself.
To be external to something is to be an other with some relation to
that thing. Hence, when we abstract a form of externality from all
material content, and study it in isolation, position will appear
of necessity as purely relative--it can have no intrinsic quality,
for our form consists of pure externality, and externality contains
no shadow or trace of an intrinsic quality. Hence we derive our
fundamental postulate, the relativity of position. From this follows
the homogeneity of our form, for any quality in one position, which
marked out that position from another, would be necessarily more or
less intrinsic, and would contradict the pure relativity. Finally
Free Mobility follows from homogeneity, for our form would not be
homogeneous unless it allowed, in every part, shapes or systems
of relations, which it allowed in any other part. Free Mobility,
therefore, is a necessary property of every possible form of
externality.

=157.= In summing up the argument we have just concluded, we may
exhibit it, in consequence of the two preceding paragraphs, in the
form of a completed circle. Starting from the conditions of spatial
measurement, we found that the comparison, required for measurement,
could only be effected by superposition. But we found, further, that
the result of such comparison will only be unambiguous, if spatial
magnitudes and shapes are unaltered by motion in space, if, in other
words, shapes do not depend upon absolute position in space. But this
axiom can only be true if space is homogeneous and position merely
relative. Conversely, if position is assumed to be merely relative,
a change of magnitude in motion--involving as it does, the assertion
of absolute position--is impossible, and our test of spatial equality
is therefore adequate. But position in any form of externality must
be purely relative, since externality cannot be an intrinsic property
of anything. Our axiom, therefore, is _ priori_ in a double sense.
It is presupposed in all spatial measurement, and it is a necessary
property of any form of externality. A similar double apriority, we
shall see, appears in our other necessary axioms.


II. _The Axiom of Dimensions[163]._

=158.= We have seen, in discussing the axiom of Free Mobility, that
all position is relative, that is, a position exists only by virtue
of relations[164]. It follows that, if positions can be defined at
all, they must be uniquely and exhaustively defined by some finite
number of such relations. If Geometry is to be possible, it must
happen that, after enough relations have been given to determine a
point uniquely, its relations to any fresh known point are deducible
from the relations already given. Hence we obtain, as an _ priori_
condition of Geometry, logically indispensable to its existence, the
axiom that _Space must have a finite integral number of Dimensions_.
For every relation required in the definition of a point constitutes
a dimension, and a fraction of a relation is meaningless. The number
of relations required must be finite, since an infinite number of
dimensions would be practically impossible to determine. If we
remember our axiom of Free Mobility, and remember also that space
is a continuum, we may state our axiom, for metrical Geometry, in
the form given by Helmholtz (v. Chap. I.  25): "In a space of n
dimensions, the position of every point is uniquely determined by the
measurement of n continuous independent variables (coordinates).[165]"

=159.= So much, then, is _ priori_ necessary to metrical Geometry.
The restriction of the dimensions to three seems, on the contrary,
to be wholly the work of experience[166]. This restriction cannot
be logically necessary, for as soon as we have formulated any
analytical system, it appears wholly arbitrary. Why, we are driven
to ask, cannot we add a fourth coordinate to our _x_, _y_, _z_, or
give a geometrical meaning to _x^{4}_? In this more special form, we
are tempted to regard the axiom of dimensions, like the number of
inhabitants of a town, as a purely statistical fact, with no greater
necessity than such facts have.

Geometry affords intrinsic evidence of the truth of my division of
the axiom of dimensions into an _ priori_ and empirical portion.
For while the extension of the number of dimensions to four, or to
_n_, alters nothing in plane and solid Geometry, but only adds a
new branch which interferes in no way with the old, _some_ definite
number of dimensions is assumed in all Geometries, nor is it
possible to conceive of a Geometry which should be free from this
assumption[167].

=160.= Let us, since the point seems of some interest, repeat our
proof of the apriority of this axiom from a slightly different point
of view. We will begin, this time, from the most abstract conception
of space, such as we find in Riemann's dissertation, or in Erdmann's
extents. We have here, an ordered manifold, infinitely divisible and
allowing of Free Mobility[168]. Free Mobility involves, as we saw,
the power of passing continuously from any one point to any other, by
any course which may seem pleasant to us; it involves, also, that,
in such a course, no changes occur except changes of mere position,
_i.e._, positions do not differ from one another in any qualitative
way. (This absence of qualitative difference is the distinguishing
mark of space as opposed to other manifolds, such as the colour- and
tone-systems: in these, every element has a definite qualitative
sensational value, whereas in space, the sensational value of a
position depends wholly on its spatial relation to our own body, and
is thus not intrinsic, but relative.) From the absence of qualitative
differences among positions, it follows logically that positions
exist only by virtue of other positions; one position differs from
another just because they are two, not because of anything intrinsic
in either. Position is thus defined simply and solely by relation to
other positions. Any position, therefore, is completely defined when,
and only when, enough such relations have been given to enable us to
determine its relation to any new position, this new position being
defined by the same number of relations. Now, in order that such
definition may be at all possible, a finite number of relations must
suffice. But every such relation constitutes a dimension. Therefore,
if Geometry is to be possible, it is _ priori_ necessary that space
should have a finite integral number of dimensions.

=161.= The limitation of the dimensions to three is, as we have
seen, empirical; nevertheless, it is not liable to the inaccuracy
and uncertainty which usually belong to empirical knowledge. For
the alternatives which logic leaves to sense are discrete--if the
dimensions are not three, they must be two or four or some other
number--so that _small_ errors are out of the question[169]. Hence
the final certainty of the axiom of three dimensions, though in part
due to experience, is of quite a different order from that of (say)
the law of Gravitation. In the latter, a small inaccuracy might exist
and remain undetected; in the former, an error would have to be so
considerable as to be utterly impossible to overlook. It follows that
the certainty of our whole axiom, that the number of dimensions is
three, is almost as great as that of the _ priori_ element, since
this element leaves to sense a definite disjunction of discrete
possibilities.


III. _The Axiom of Distance._

=162.= We have already seen, in discussing projective Geometry, that
two points must determine a unique curve, the straight line. In
metrical Geometry, the corresponding axiom is, that two points must
determine a unique spatial quantity, distance. I propose to prove,
in what follows, (1) that if distance, as a quantity completely
determined by two points, did not exist, spatial magnitude would
not be measurable; (2) that distance can only be determined by two
points, if there is an actual curve in space determined by those two
points; (3) that the existence of such a curve can be deduced from
the conception of a form of externality, and (4) that the application
of quantity to such a curve necessarily leads to a certain magnitude,
namely distance, uniquely determined by any two points which
determine the curve. The conclusion will be, if these propositions
can be successfully maintained, that the axiom of distance is _
priori_ in the same double sense as the axiom of Free Mobility,
_i.e._ it is presupposed in the possibility of measurement, and it is
necessarily true of any possible form of externality.

=163.= (1) The possibility of spatial measurement allows us to
infer the existence of a magnitude uniquely determined by any two
points. The proof of this depends on the axiom of Free Mobility, or
its equivalent, the homogeneity of space. We have seen that these
are involved in the possibility of spatial measurement; we may
employ them, therefore, in any argument as to the conditions of this
possibility.

Now to begin with, two points must, if Geometry is to be possible,
have _some_ relation to each other, for we have seen that such
relations alone constitute position or localization. But if two
points have a relation to each other, this must be an intrinsic
relation. For it follows, from the axiom of Free Mobility, that
two points, forming a figure congruent with the given pair, can be
constructed in any part of space. If this were not possible, we have
seen that metrical Geometry could not exist. But both the figures may
be regarded as composed of two points and their relation; if the
two figures are congruent, therefore, it follows that the relation
is quantitatively the same for both figures, since congruence is the
test of spatial equality. Hence the two points have a quantitative
relation, which is such that they can traverse all space in a
combined motion without in any way altering that relation. But in
such a general motion, any external relation of the two points,
any relation involving other points or figures in space, must be
altered[170]. Hence the relation between the two points, being
unaltered, must be an intrinsic relation, a relation involving no
other point or figure in space; and this intrinsic relation we call
distance[171].

=164.= It might be objected, to the above argument, that it involves
a _petitio principii_. For it has been assumed that the two points
and their relation form a figure, to which other figures can be
congruent. Now if two points have no intrinsic relation, it would
seem that they cannot form such a figure. The argument, therefore,
apparently assumes what it had to prove. Why, it may be asked, should
not three points be required, before we obtain any relation, which
Free Mobility allows us to construct afresh in other parts of space?

The answer to this, as to the corresponding question in the first
section of this chapter, lies, I think, in the passivity of space,
or the mutual independence of its parts. For it follows, from this
independence, that any figure, or any assemblage of points, may
be discussed without reference to other figures or points. This
principle is the basis of infinite divisibility, of the use of
quantity in Geometry, and of all possibility of isolating particular
figures for discussion. It follows that two points cannot be
dependent, as to their relation, on any other points or figures, for
if they were so dependent, we should have to suppose some action
of such points or figures on the two points considered, which
would contradict the mutual independence of different positions.
To illustrate by an example: the relation of two given points does
not depend on the other points of the straight line on which the
given points lie. For only through their relation, _i.e._ through
the straight line which they determine, can the other points of the
straight line be known to have any peculiar connection with the given
pair.

=165.= But why, it may be asked, should there be only one such
relation between two points? Why not several? The answer to this lies
in the fact that points are wholly constituted by relations, and have
no intrinsic nature of their own[172]. A point is defined by its
relations to other points, and when once the relations necessary for
definition have been given, no fresh relations to the points used in
definition are possible, since the point defined has no qualities
from which such relations could flow. Now one relation to any one
other point is as good for definition as more would be, since however
many we had, they would all remain unaltered in a combined motion of
both points. Hence there can only be one relation determined by any
two points.

=166.= (2) We have thus established our first proposition--two points
have one and only one relation uniquely determined by those two
points. This relation we call their distance apart. It remains to
consider the conditions of the measurement of distance, _i.e._, how
far a unique value for distance involves a curve uniquely determined
by the two points.

In the first place, some curve joining the two points is involved
in the above notion of a combined motion of the two points, or of
two other points forming a figure congruent with the first two.
For without some such curve, the two point-pairs cannot be known
as congruent, nor can we have any test by which to discover when
a point-pair is moving as a single figure[173]. Distance must be
measured, therefore, by some line which joins the two points. But
need this be a line which the two points completely determine?

=167.= We are accustomed to the definition of the straight line
as the _shortest_ distance between two points, which implies that
distance might equally well be measured by curved lines. This
implication I believe to be false, for the following reasons. When we
speak of the length of a curve, we can give a meaning to our words
only by supposing the curve divided into infinitesimal rectilinear
arcs, whose sum gives the length of an equivalent straight line;
thus unless we presuppose the straight line, we have no means of
comparing the lengths of different curves, and can therefore never
discover the applicability of our definition. It might be thought,
perhaps, that some other line, say a circle, might be used as the
basis of measurement. But in order to estimate in this way the length
of any curve other than a circle, we should have to divide the curve
into infinitesimal circular arcs. Now two successive points do not
determine a circle, so that an arc of two points would have an
indeterminate length. It is true that, if we exclude infinitesimal
radii for the measuring circles, the lengths of the infinitesimal
arcs would be determinate, even if the circles varied, but that is
only because all the small circular arcs through two consecutive
points coincide with the straight line through those two points.
Thus, even with the help of the arbitrary restriction to a finite
radius, all that happens is that we are brought back to the straight
line. If, to mend matters, we take three consecutive points of our
curve, and reckon distance by the arc of the circle of curvature,
the notion of distance loses its fundamental property of being a
relation between _two_ points. For two consecutive points of the
arc could not then be said to have any corresponding distance
apart--three points would be necessary before the notion of distance
became applicable. Thus the circle is not a possible basis for
measurement, and similar objections apply, of course, with increased
force, to any other curve. All this argument is designed to show,
in detail, the logical impossibility of measuring distance by any
curve not completely defined by the two points whose distance apart
is required. If in the above we had taken distance as measured
by circles of _given radius_, we should have introduced into its
definition a relation to other points besides the two whose distance
was to be measured, which we saw to be a logical fallacy. Moreover,
how are we to know that all the circles have equal radii, until we
have an independent measure of distance?

=168.= A straight line, then, is not the _shortest_ distance, but is
simply _the_ distance between two points--so far, this conclusion
has stood firm. But suppose we had two or more curves through
two points, and that all these curves were congruent _inter se_.
We should then say, in accordance with the definition of spatial
equality, that the lengths of all these curves were equal. Now
it might happen that, although no one of the curves was uniquely
determined by the two end-points, yet the common length of all the
curves was so determined. In this case, what would hinder us from
calling this common length the distance apart, although no unique
figure in space corresponded to it? This is the case contemplated by
spherical Geometry, where, as on a sphere, antipodes can be joined by
an infinite number of geodesics, all of which are of equal length.
The difficulty supposed is, therefore, not a purely imaginary one,
but one which modern Geometry forces us to face. I shall consequently
discuss it at some length.

=169.= To begin with, I must point out that my axiom is not quite
equivalent to Euclid's. Euclid's axiom states that two straight lines
cannot enclose a space, _i.e._, cannot have more than one common
point. Now if every two points, without exception, determine a unique
straight line, it follows, of course, that two different straight
lines can have only one point in common--so far, the two axioms are
equivalent. But it may happen, as in spherical space, that two points
_in general_ determine a unique straight line, but fail to do so
when they have to each other the special relation of being antipodes.
In such a system every pair of straight lines in the same plane meet
in two points, which are each other's antipodes; but two points, _in
general_, still determine a unique straight line. We are still able,
therefore, to obtain distances from unique straight lines, except in
limiting cases; and in such cases, we can take any point intermediate
between the two antipodes, join it by the _same_ straight line to
both antipodes, and measure its distance from those antipodes in the
usual way. The sum of these distances then gives a unique value for
the distance between the antipodes.

Thus even in spherical space, we are greatly assisted by the axiom
of the straight line; all linear measurement is effected by it, and
exceptional cases can be treated, through its help, by the usual
methods for limits. Spherical space, therefore, is not so adverse
as it at first appeared to be to the _ priori_ necessity of the
axiom. Nevertheless we have, so far, not attacked the kernel of the
objection which spherical space suggested. To this attack it is now
our duty to proceed.

=170.= It will be remembered that, in our _ priori_ proof that
two points must have one definite relation, we held it impossible
for those two points to have, to the rest of space, any relation
which would be unaltered by motion. Now in spherical space, in the
particular case where the two points are antipodes, they _have_ a
relation, unaltered by motion, to the rest of space--the relation,
namely, that their distance is half the circumference of the
universe. In our former discussion, we assumed that any relation
to outside space must be a relation of position--and a relation of
position must be altered by motion. But with a finite space, in
which we have absolute magnitude, another relation becomes possible,
namely, a relation of magnitude. Antipodal points, accordingly,
like coincident points, no longer determine a unique straight line.
And it is instructive to observe that there is, in consequence, an
ambiguity in the expression for distance, like the ordinary ambiguity
in angular measurement. If 1/k^{2} be the space constant, and _d_
be one value for the distance between two points, 2kn  d, where
_n_ is any integer, is an equally good value. Distance is, in short,
a periodic function like angle. Thus such a state of things rather
confirms than destroys my contention, that distance depends on a
curve uniquely determined by two points. For as soon as we drop this
unique determination, we see ambiguities creeping into our expression
for distance. Distance still has a set of _discrete_ values,
corresponding to the fact that, given one point, the straight line
is uniquely determined for all other points but one, the antipodal
point. It is tempting to go on, and say: If through _every_ pair of
points there were an infinite number of the curves used in measuring
distance, distance would be able, for the same pair of points, to
take, not only a discrete series, but an infinite _continuous_ series
of values.

=171.= This, however, is mere speculation. I come now to the _pice
de rsistance_ of my argument. The ambiguity in spherical space
arose, as we saw, from a relation of _magnitude_ to the rest of
space--such a relation being unaltered by a motion of the two points,
and therefore falling outside our introductory reasoning. But what
is this relation of magnitude? Simply a relation of the _distance_
between the two points to a _distance_ given in the nature of the
space in question. It follows that such a relation _presupposes_ a
measure of distance, and need not, therefore, be contemplated in
any argument which deals with the _ priori_ requisites for the
possibility of definite distances[174].

=172.= I have now shown, I hope conclusively, that spherical space
affords no objection to the apriority of my axiom. Any two points
have one relation, their distance, which is independent of the
rest of space, and this relation requires, as its measure, a curve
uniquely determined by those two points. I might have taken the bull
by the horns, and said: Two points _can_ have no relation but what
is given by lines which join them, and therefore, if they have a
relation independent of the rest of space, there must be one line
joining them which they completely determine. Thus James says[175]:

"Just as, in the field of quantity, the relation between two numbers
is another number, so in the field of space the relations are facts
of the same order with the facts they relate.... When we speak of
the relation of direction of two points towards each other, we mean
simply the sensation of the line that joins the two points together.
_The line is the relation...._ The relation of position between the
top and bottom points of a vertical line is that line, and nothing
else."

If I had been willing to use this doctrine at the beginning, I
might have avoided all discussion. A unique relation between two
points _must_ in this case, involve a unique line between them. But
it seemed better to avoid a doctrine not universally accepted, the
more so as I was approaching the question from the logical, not the
psychological, side. After disposing of the objections, however, it
is interesting to find this confirmation of the above theory from so
different a standpoint. Indeed, I believe James's doctrine could be
proved to be a logical necessity, as well as a psychological fact.
For what sort of thing can a spatial relation between two distinct
points be? It must be something spatial, and it must, since points
are wholly constituted by their relations, be something at least
as real and tangible as the points it relates. There seems nothing
which can satisfy these requirements, except a line joining them.
Hence, once more, a unique relation must involve a unique line. That
is, linear magnitude is logically impossible, unless space allows of
curves uniquely determined by any two of their points.

=173.= (3) But farther, the existence of curves uniquely determined
by two points can be deduced from the nature of any form of
externality[176]. For we saw, in discussing Free Mobility, that this
axiom, together with homogeneity and the relativity of position,
can be so deduced, and we saw in the beginning of our discussion on
distance, that the existence of a unique relation between two points
could be deduced from the homogeneity of space. Since position is
relative, we may say, any two points must have _some_ relation to
each other: since our form of externality is homogeneous, this
relation can be kept unchanged while the two points move in the
form, _i.e._, change their relations to other points; hence their
relation to each other is an intrinsic relation, independent of their
relations to other points. But since our form _is_ merely a complex
of relations, a relation of externality must appear in the form, with
the same evidence as anything else in the form; thus if the form be
intuitive or sensational, the relation must be immediately presented,
and not a mere inference. Hence the intrinsic relation between two
points must be a unique figure in our form, _i.e._ in spatial terms,
the straight line joining the two points.

=174.= (4) Finally, we have to prove that the existence of such a
curve necessarily leads, when quantity is applied to the relation
between two points, to a unique magnitude, which those two points
completely determine. With this, we shall be brought back to
distance, from which we started, and shall complete the circle of our
argument.

We saw, in section A  119, that the figure formed by two points is
projectively indistinguishable from that formed by any two other
points in the same straight line; the figure, in both cases, is,
from the projective standpoint, simply the straight line on which
the two points lie. The difference of relation, in the two cases,
is not qualitative, since projective Geometry cannot deal with it;
nevertheless, there is some difference of relation. For instance, if
one point be kept fixed, while the other moves, there is obviously
some change of relation. This change, since all parts of the straight
line are qualitatively alike, must be a change of quantity. If two
points, therefore, determine a unique figure, there must exist, for
the distinction between the various other points of this figure, a
unique quantitative relation between the two determining points, and
therefore, since these points are arbitrary, between only two points.
This relation is _distance_, with which our argument began, and to
which it at least returns.

=175.= To sum up: If points are defined simply by relations to other
points, _i.e._, if all position is relative, _every point must have
to every other point one, and only one, relation independent of
the rest of space. This relation is the distance between the two
points._ Now a relation between two points can only be defined by a
line joining them--nay further, it may be contended that a relation
can only _be_ a line joining them. Hence a unique relation involves
a unique line, _i.e._, a line determined by any two of its points.
Only in a space which admits of such a line is linear magnitude a
logically possible conception. But when once we have established the
possibility, _in general_, of drawing such lines, and therefore of
measuring linear magnitudes, we may find that a certain magnitude has
a peculiar relation to the constitution of space. The straight line
may turn out to be of finite length, and in this case its length will
give a certain peculiar magnitude, the space-constant. Two antipodal
points, that is, points which bisect the entire straight line, will
then have a relation of magnitude which, though unaltered by motion,
is rendered peculiar by a certain constant relation to the rest of
space. This peculiarity presupposes a measure of linear magnitude in
general, and cannot, therefore, upset the apriority of the axiom of
the straight line. But it destroys, for points having the peculiar
antipodal relation to each other, the argument which proved that the
relation between two points could not, since it was unchanged by
motion, have reference to the rest of space. Thus it is intelligible
that, for such special points, the axiom breaks down, and an infinite
number of straight lines are possible between them; but unless we had
started with assuming the general validity of the axiom, we could
never have reached a position in which antipodal points could have
been known to be peculiar, or, indeed, a position which would have
enabled us to give any quantitative definition whatever of particular
points.

Distance and the straight line, as relations uniquely determined
by two points, are thus _ priori_ necessary to metrical Geometry.
But further, they are properties which must belong to any form of
externality. Since their necessity for Geometry was deduced from
homogeneity and the relativity of position, and since these are
necessary properties of any form of externality, the same argument
proves both conclusions. We thus obtain, as in the case of Free
Mobility, a double apriority: The axiom of Distance, and its
implication, the axiom of the Straight Line, are, on the one hand,
presupposed in the possibility of spatial magnitude, and cannot,
therefore, be contradicted by any experience resulting from the
measurement of space; while they are consequences, on the other hand,
of the necessary properties of any form of externality which is to
render possible experience of an external world.

=176.= In connection with the straight line, it will be convenient
to discuss the conditions of a metrical coordinate system. The
projective coordinate system, as we have seen, aims only at a
convenient nomenclature for different points, and can be set up
without introducing the notion of spatial quantity. But a metrical
coordinate system does much more than this. It defines every point
quantitatively, by its quantitative spatial relations to a certain
coordinate figure. Only when the system of coordinates is thus
metrical, _i.e._, when every coordinate represents some spatial
magnitude, which is itself a relation of the point defined to some
other point or figure--can operations with coordinates lead to a
metrical result. When, as in projective Geometry, the coordinates
are not spatial magnitudes, no amount of transformation can give a
metrical result. I wish to prove, here, that a metrical coordinate
system necessarily involves the straight line, and cannot, without a
logical fallacy, be set up on any other basis. The projective system
of coordinates, as we saw, is entirely based on the straight line;
but the metrical system is more important, since its quantities
embody actual information as to spatial magnitudes, which, in
projective Geometry, is not the case.

In the first place, a point's metrical coordinates constitute a
complete quantitative definition of it; now a point can only be
defined, as we have seen, by its relations to other points, and
these relations can only be defined by means of the straight line.
Consequently, any metrical system of coordinates must involve the
straight line, as the basis of its definitions of points.

This _ priori_ argument, however, though I believe it to be quite
sound, is not likely to carry conviction to any one persuaded of the
opposite. Let us, therefore, examine metrical coordinate systems in
detail, and show, in each case, their dependence on the straight line.

We have already seen that the notion of distance is impossible
without the straight line. We cannot, therefore, define our
coordinates in any of the ordinary ways, as the distances from three
planes, lines, points, spheres, or what not. Polar coordinates
are impossible, since,--waiving the straightness of the radius
vector--the length of the radius vector becomes unmeaning. Triangular
coordinates involve not only angles, which must in the limit be
rectilinear, but straight lines, or at any rate some well-defined
curves. Now curves can only be metrically defined in two ways:
_Either_ by relation to the straight line, as, _e.g._, by the
curvature at any point, _or_ by purely analytical equations, which
presuppose an intelligible system of metrical coordinates. What
methods remain for assigning these arbitrary values to different
points? Nay, how are we to get any estimate of the difference--to
avoid the more special notion of distance--between two points?
The very notion of a point has become illusory. When we have a
coordinate system, we may define a point by its three coordinates;
in the absence of such a system, we may define the notion of point
_in general_ as the intersection of three surfaces or of two curves.
Here we take surfaces and curves as notions which intuition makes
plain, but if we wish them to give us a precise numerical definition
of _particular_ points, we must specify the kind of surface or
curve to be used. Now this, as we have seen, is only possible when
we presuppose either the straight line, or a coordinate system. It
follows that every coordinate system presupposes the straight line,
and is logically impossible without it.

=177.= The above three axioms, we have seen, are _ priori_ necessary
to metrical Geometry. No others can be necessary, since metrical
systems, logically as unassailable as Euclid's, and dealing with
spaces equally homogeneous and equally relational, have been
constructed by the metageometers, without the help of any other
axioms. The remaining axioms of Euclidean Geometry--the axiom of
parallels, the axiom that the number of dimensions is three, and
Euclid's form of the axiom of the straight line (two straight lines
cannot enclose a space)--are not essential to the possibility of
metrical Geometry, _i.e._, are not deducible from the fact that
a science of spatial magnitudes is possible. They are rather
to be regarded as empirical laws, obtained, like the empirical
laws of other sciences, by actual investigation of the given
subject-matter--in this instance, experienced space.

=178.= In summing up the distinctive argument of this Section,
we may give it a more general form, and discuss the conditions
of measurement in any continuous manifold, _i.e._, the qualities
necessary to the manifold, in order that quantities in it may be
determinable, not only as to the more or less, but as to the precise
_how much_.

Measurement, we may say, is the application of number to continua,
or, if we prefer it, the transformation of mere quantity into number
of units. Using _quantity_ to denote the vague more or less, and
_magnitude_ to denote the precise number of units, the problem of
measurement may be defined as the transformation of quantity into
magnitude.

Now a number, to begin with, is a whole consisting of smaller units,
all of these units being qualitatively alike. In order, therefore,
that a continuous quantity may be expressible as a number, it must,
on the one hand, be itself a whole, and must, on the other hand,
be divisible into qualitatively similar parts. In the aspect of a
whole, the quantity is _intensive_; in the aspect of an aggregate of
parts, it is _extensive_. A purely intensive quantity, therefore,
is not numerable--a purely extensive quantity, if any such could
be imagined, would not be a single quantity at all, since it would
have to consist of wholly unsynthesized particulars. A measurable
quantity, therefore, is a whole divisible into similar parts. But
a continuous quantity, if divisible at all, must be _infinitely_
divisible. For otherwise the points at which it could be divided
would form natural barriers, and so destroy its continuity. But
further, it is not sufficient that there should be a possibility
of division into mutually external parts; while the parts, to be
perceptible as parts, must be mutually external, they must also, to
be knowable as _equal_ parts, be capable of overcoming their mutual
externality. For this, as we have seen, we require superposition,
which involves Free Mobility and homogeneity--the absence of Free
Mobility in time, where all other requisites of measurement are
fulfilled, renders direct measurement of time impossible. Hence
infinite divisibility, free mobility, and homogeneity are necessary
for the possibility of measurement in _any_ continuous manifold, and
these, as we have seen, are equivalent to our three axioms. These
axioms are necessary, therefore, not only for spatial measurement,
but for all measurement. The only manifold given in experience, in
which these conditions are satisfied, is space. All other exact
measurement--as could be proved, I believe, for every separate
case--is effected, as we saw in the case of time, by reduction to
a spatial correlative. This explains the paramount importance, to
exact science, of the mechanical view of nature, which reduces
all phenomena to motions in time and space. For number is, of
all conceptions, the easiest to operate with, and science seeks
everywhere for an opportunity to apply it, but finds this opportunity
only by means of spatial equivalents to phenomena[177].

=179.= We have now seen in what the _ priori_ element of Geometry
consists. This _ priori_ element may be defined as the axioms common
to Euclidean and non-Euclidean spaces, as the axioms deducible from
the conception of a form of externality, or--in metrical Geometry--as
the axioms required for the possibility of measurement. It remains
to discuss, in a final chapter, some questions of a more general
philosophic nature, in which we shall have to desert the firm ground
of mathematics and enter on speculations which I put forward very
tentatively, and with little faith in their ultimate validity. The
chief questions for this final chapter will be two: (1) How is such
_ priori_ and purely logical necessity possible, as applied to an
actually given subject-matter like space? (2) How can we remove the
contradictions which have haunted us in this chapter, arising out of
the relativity, infinite divisibility, and unbounded extension of
space? These two questions are forced upon us by the present chapter,
but as they open some of the fundamental problems of philosophy, it
would be rash to expect a conclusive or wholly satisfactory answer. A
few hints and suggestions may be hoped for, but a complete solution
could only be obtained from a complete philosophy, of which the
prospects are far too slender to encourage a confident frame of mind.


FOOTNOTES:

[116] See infra, Axiom of Distance, in Sec. B. of this Chapter.

[117] Thus on a cylinder, two geodesics, _e.g._ a generator and
a helix, may have any number of intersections--a very important
difference from the plane.

[118] Cf. Cremona, Projective Geometry (Clarendon Press, 2nd ed.
1893) p. 50: "Most of the propositions in Euclid's Elements are
metrical, and it is not easy to find among them an example of a
purely descriptive theorem."

[119] Op. cit. p. 226.

[120] Some ground for this choice will appear when we come to
metrical Geometry.

[121] The straight line _a_ denotes the straight line common to the
planes __ and _a_, the point _a_ denotes the point common to the
plane __ and the straight line _a_, and similarly for the rest of the
notation.

[122] Cremona (op. cit. Chap. IX. p. 50) defines anharmonic ratio as
a metrical property which is unaltered by projection. This, however,
destroys the logical independence of projective Geometry, which can
only be maintained by a purely descriptive definition.

[123] There is no corresponding property of _three_ points on a line,
because they can be projectively transformed into any other three
points on the same line. See  120.

[124] Due to v. Staudt's "Geometrie der Lage."

[125] See Cremona, op. cit. Chapter VIII.

[126] The corresponding definitions, for the two-dimensional manifold
of lines through a point, follow by the principle of duality.

[127] It is important to observe that this definition of the Point
introduces metrical ideas. Without metrical ideas, we saw, nothing
appears to give the Point precedence of the straight line, or indeed
to distinguish it conceptually from the straight line. A reference
to quantity is therefore inevitable in defining the Point, if the
definition is to be geometrical. A non-metrical definition would have
to be also non-geometrical. See Chap. IV.  196-199.

[128]  163-175.

[129] On this axiom, however, compare  131.

[130] For the proof of this proposition, see Chap. III. Sec. B, Axiom
of Dimensions.

[131] The straight line and plane, in all discussions of general
Geometry, are not necessarily Euclidean. They are simply figures
determined, in general, by two and by three points respectively;
whether they conform to the axiom of parallels and to Euclid's form
of the axiom of the straight line, is not to be considered in the
general definition.

[132] That projective Geometry must have existential import, I shall
attempt to prove in Chapter IV.

[133] Logic, Book I. Chapter II.

[134] Cf. Bradley's Logic, p. 63. It will be seen that the sense in
which I have spoken of space as a principle of differentiation is not
the sense of a "principle of individuation" which Bradley objects to.

[135] Chap. IV.  186-191.

[136] Chap. IV.  201 ff.

[137] It is important to observe, however, that this way of regarding
spatial relations is metrical; from the projective standpoint, the
relation between two points is the whole unbounded straight line on
which they lie, and need not be regarded as divisible into parts or
as built up of points.

[138]  207, 208. Cf. Hegel, Naturphilosophie,  254.

[139] See Chap. IV.  196-199.

[140] See a forthcoming article on "The relations of number and
quantity" by the present writer in _Mind_, July, 1897.

[141] Logic, Vol. II. Chap. VII. p. 211.

[142] Real, as opposed to logical, diversity is throughout intended.
Diverse aspects may coexist in a thing at one time and place, but two
diverse real things cannot so coexist.

[143] On the insufficiency of time alone, see Chapter IV.  191.

[144] Geometrically, the axiom of the plane is, not that three
points determine a figure at all, which follows from the axiom of
the straight line, but that the straight line joining two casual
points of the plane lies wholly in the plane. This axiom requires a
projective method of constructing the plane, _i.e._ of finding all
the triads of points which determine the same projective figure as
the given triad. The required construction will be obtained if we
can find any projective figure determined by three points, and any
projective method of reaching other points which determine the same
figure.

[Illustration]

Let _O_, _P_, _Q_ be the three points whose projective relation
is required. Then we have given us the three straight lines _PQ_,
_QO_, _OP_. Metrically, the relation between these points is made
up of the area, and the magnitude of the sides and angles, of the
triangle _OPQ_, just as the relation between two points is distance.
But projectively, the figure is unchanged when _P_ and _Q_ travel
along _OP_ and _OQ_, or when _OP_ and _OQ_ turn about _O_ in such a
way as still to meet _PQ_. This is a result of the general principle
of projective equivalence enunciated above ( 108, 109). Hence the
projective relation between _O_, _P_, _Q_ is the same as that between
_O_, _p_, _q_ or _O_, _P_, _Q_; that is, _p_, _q_ and _P_, _Q_
lie in the plane _OPQ_. In this way, any number of points on the
plane may be obtained, and by repeating the construction with fresh
triads, every point of the plane can be reached. We have to prove
that, when the plane is so constructed, the straight line joining any
two points of the plane lies wholly in the plane.

It is evident, from the manner of construction, that any point of
_PQ_, _OP_, _OQ_, _OP_ or _OQ_ lies in the plane. If we can prove
that any point of _pq_ lies in the plane, we shall have proved all
that is required, since _pq_ may be transformed, by successive
repetitions of the same construction, into any straight line joining
two points of the plane. But we have seen that the same plane is
determined by _O_, _p_, _q_ and by _O_, _P_, _Q_. The straight lines
_PQ_, _pq_ have, therefore, the same relation to the plane. But _PQ_
lies wholly in the plane; therefore _pq_ also lies wholly in the
plane. Hence our axiom is proved.

[145] A detailed proof has been given above, Chap. I. 3rd period. It
is to be observed that any reference to infinitely distant elements
involves metrical ideas.

[146] Cf. Section A,  115-117.

[147] Contrast Erdmann, op. cit. p. 138.

[148] Cf. Erdmann, op. cit. p. 164.

[149] Strictly speaking, this method is only applicable where the two
magnitudes are commensurable. But if we take infinite divisibility
rigidly, the units can theoretically be taken so small as to obtain
any required degree of approximation. The difficulty is the universal
one of applying to continua the essentially discrete conception of
number.

[150] Cf. Erdmann, op. cit. p. 50.

[151] Also called the axiom of congruence. I have taken congruence to
be the _definition_ of spatial equality by superposition, and shall
therefore generally speak of the _axiom_ as Free Mobility.

[152] For the sense in which these figures are to be regarded as
material, see criticism of Helmholtz, Chapter II.  69 ff.

[153] Op. cit. p. 60.

[154] The view of Helmholtz and Erdmann, that mechanical experience
suffices here, though geometrical experience fails us, has been
discussed above, Chapter II.  73, 82.

[155] Chapter II.  81.

[156] Chapter II.  72.

[157] Contrast Delbuf, L'ancienne et les nouvelles gomtries, II.
Rev. Phil. 1894, Vol. xxxvii. p. 354.

[158] Prolegomena,  13. See Vaihinger's Commentar, II. pp. 518-532
esp. pp. 521-2. The above was Kant's whole purpose in 1768, but only
part of his purpose in the Prolegomena, where the intuitive nature of
space was also to be proved.

[159] On the subject of time measurement, cf. Bosanquet's Logic, Vol.
i. pp. 178-183. Since time, in the above account, is measured by
motion, its measurement presupposes that of spatial magnitudes.

[160] Cf. Stumpf. Ursprung der Raumvorstellung, p. 68.

[161] As is Helmholtz's other axiom, that the possibility of
superposition is independent of the course pursued in bringing it
about.

[162] Cf.  129, 130.

[163] This deduction is practically the same as that in Sec. A, but
I have stated it here with more special reference to space and to
metrical Geometry.

[164] The question: "Relations to what?" is a question involving
many difficulties. It will be touched on later in this chapter, and
answered, as far as possible, in the fourth chapter. For the present,
in spite of the glaring circle involved, I shall take the relations
as relations to other positions.

[165] Wiss. Abh. Vol. II. p. 614.

[166] Cp. Grassmann, Ausdehnungslehre von 1844, 2nd ed. p. XXIII.

[167] Delbuf, it is true, speaks of Geometries with _m_/_n_
dimensions, but gives no reference (Rev. Phil. T. xxxvi. p. 450).

[168] In criticizing Erdmann, it will be remembered, we saw that Free
Mobility is a necessary property of his extents, though he does not
regard it as such.

[169] Cf. Riemann, Hypothesen welche der Geometrie zu Grunde liegen,
Gesammelte Werke, p. 266; also Erdmann, op. cit. p. 154.

[170] This is subject, in spherical space, to the modification
pointed out below, in dealing with the exception to the axiom of the
straight line. See  168-171.

[171] In speaking of distance at once as a quantity and as an
intrinsic relation, I am anxious to guard against an apparent
inconsistency. I have spoken of the judgment of quantity, throughout,
as one of comparison; how, then, can a quantity be intrinsic? The
reply is that, although measurement and the judgment of quantity
express the result of comparison, yet the terms compared must exist
before the comparison; in this case, the terms compared in measuring
distances, _i.e._ in comparing them _inter se_, are intrinsic
relations between points. Thus, although the _measurement_ of
distance involves a reference to other distances, and its expression
as a magnitude requires such a reference, yet its existence does not
depend on any external reference, but exclusively on the two points
whose distance it is.

[172] See the end of the argument on Free Mobility,  155 ff.

[173] In Frischauf's "Absolute Geometrie nach Johann Bolyai," Anhang,
there is a series of definitions, starting from the sphere, as the
locus of congruent point-pairs when one point of the pair is fixed,
and hence obtaining the circle and the straight line. From the above
it follows, that the sphere so defined already involves a curve
between the points of the point-pair, by which various point-pairs
can be known as congruent; and it will appear, as we proceed, that
this curve must be a straight line. Frischauf's definition by means
of the sphere involves, therefore, a vicious circle, since the sphere
presupposes the straight line, as the test of congruent point-pairs.

[174] Nor in any argument which, like those of projective Geometry,
avoids the notion of magnitude or distance altogether. It follows
that the propositions of projective Geometry apply, without reserve,
to spherical space, since the exception to the axiom of the straight
line arises only on metrical ground.

[175] Psychology, Vol. II. pp. 149-150.

[176] This step in the argument has been put very briefly, since it
is a mere repetition of the corresponding argument in Section A, and
is inserted here only for the sake of logical completeness. See  137
ff.

[177] Cf. Hannequin, Essai critique sur l'hypothse des atomes,
Paris, 1895, passim.




CHAPTER IV.

PHILOSOPHICAL CONSEQUENCES.


=180.= In the present chapter, we have to discuss two questions
which, though scarcely geometrical, are of fundamental importance
to the theory of Geometry propounded above. The first of these
questions is this: What relation can a purely logical and deductive
proof, like that from the nature of a form of externality, bear to an
experienced subject-matter such as space? You have merely framed a
general conception, I may be told, containing space as a particular
species, and you have then shown, what should have been obvious from
the beginning, that this general conception contained some of the
attributes of space. But what ground does this give for regarding
these attributes as _ priori_? The conception Mammal has some of the
attributes of a horse; but are these attributes therefore _ priori_
adjectives of the horse? The answer to this obvious objection is so
difficult, and involves so much general philosophy, that I have kept
it for a final chapter, in order not to interrupt the argument on
specially geometrical topics.

=181.= I have already indicated, in general terms, the ground for
regarding as _ priori_ the properties of any form of externality.
This ground is transcendental, _i.e._ it is to be found in the
conditions required for the possibility of experience. The form of
externality, like Riemann's manifolds, is a general class-conception,
including time as well as Euclidean and non-Euclidean spaces. It
is not motived, however, like the manifolds, by a _quantitative_
resemblance to space, but by the fact that it fulfils, if it has
more than one dimension, all those functions which, in our actual
world, are fulfilled by space. But a form of externality, in order
to accomplish this, must be, not a mere conception, but an actually
experienced intuition. Hence the conception of such a form is the
general _conception_, containing under it every logically possible
_intuition_ which can fulfil the function actually fulfilled by
space. And this function is, to render possible experience of
diverse but interrelated things. Some form in sense-perception,
then, whose conception is included under our form of externality,
is _ priori_ necessary to experience of diversity in relation, and
without experience of this, we should, as modern logic shows, have no
experience at all. This still leaves untouched the relation of the
_ priori_ to the subjective: the form of externality is necessary
to experience, but is not, _on that account_, to be declared purely
subjective. Of course, necessity for experience can only arise from
the nature of the mind which experiences; but it does not follow that
the necessary conditions could be fulfilled, unless the objective
world had certain properties. The _ground_ of necessity, we may
safely say, arises from the mind; but it by no means follows that
the _truth_ of what is necessary depends only on the constitution of
the mind. Where this is not the case, our conclusion, when a piece
of knowledge has been declared _ priori_, can only be: Owing to the
constitution of the _mind_, experience will be impossible unless the
_world_ accepts certain adjectives.

Such, in outline, will be the argument of the first half of this
chapter, and such will be the justification for regarding as _
priori_ those axioms of Geometry, which were deduced above from the
conception of a form of externality. For these axioms, and these
only, are necessarily true of any world in which experience is
possible.

=182[178].= The view suggested has, obviously, much in common with
that of the Transcendental Aesthetic. Indeed the whole of it, I
believe, can be obtained by a certain limitation and interpretation
of Kant's classic arguments. But as it differs, in many important
points, from the conclusions aimed at by Kant, and as the agreement
may easily seem greater than it is, I will begin by a brief
comparison, and endeavour, by reference to authoritative criticisms,
to establish the legitimacy of my divergence from him.

=183.= In the first place, the psychological element is much larger
in Kant's thesis than in mine. I shall contend, it is true, that a
form of externality, if it is to do its work, must not be a mere
conception or a mere inference, but must be a given element in
sense-perception--not, of course, originally given in isolation,
but discoverable, through analysis, by attention to the object of
sense-perception[179]. But Kant contended, not only that this element
is given, but also that it is subjective. Space, for him, is, on the
one hand, not conceptual, but on the other hand, not sensational.
It forms, for him, no part of the data of sense, but is added by a
subjective intuition, which he regards as not only logically, but
psychologically, prior to objects in space[180].

This part of Kant's argument is wholly irrelevant for us. Whether a
form of externality be given in sense, or in a pure intuition, is for
us unimportant, since we neglect the question as to the connection
of the _ priori_ and the subjective; while the temporal priority of
space to objects in it has been generally recognized as irrelevant
to Epistemology, and has often been regarded as forming no part of
Kant's thesis[181]. If we call intuitional whatever is given in
sense-perception, then we may contend that a form of externality must
be intuitional; but whether it is a pure intuition, in Kant's sense,
or not, is irrelevant to us, as is its priority to the objects in it.

That the non-sensational nature of space is no essential part of
Kant's _logical_ teaching, appears from an examination of his
argument. He has made, in the introduction, the purely logical
distinction of matter and form, but has given to this distinction,
in the very moment of suggesting it, a psychological implication.
This he does by the assertion that the form, in which the matter
of sensations is ordered, cannot itself be sensational. From this
assumption it follows, of course, that space cannot be sensational.
But the assumption is totally unsupported by argument, being set
forth, apparently, as a self-evident axiom; it has been severely
criticized by Stumpf[182] and others[183], and has been described by
Vaihinger as a fatal _petitio principii_[184]; it is irrelevant to
the logical argument, when this argument is separated, as we have
separated it, from all connection with psychological subjectivity;
and finally, it leaves us a prey to psychological theories of space,
which have seemed, of late, but little favourable to the pure Kantian
doctrine.

=184.= We have a right, therefore, in an epistemological inquiry, to
neglect Kant's psychological teaching--in so far, at any rate, as it
distinguishes spatial intuition from sensation--and attend rather to
the logical aspect alone. That part of his psychological teaching,
which maintains that space is not a mere conception, is, with certain
limitations, sufficiently evident as applied to actual space; but for
us, it must be transformed into a much more difficult thesis, namely,
that _no_ form of externality, which renders experience of diversity
in relation possible, can be merely conceptual. This question, to
which we must return later, is no longer psychological, but belongs
wholly to Epistemology.

=185.= What, then, remains the kernel, for our purposes, of Kant's
first argument for the apriority of space? His argument, in the form
in which he gave it, is concerned with the eccentric projection
of sensations. In order that I may refer sensations, he says,
to something outside myself, I must already have the subjective
space-form in the mind. In this shape, as Vaihinger points out
(Commentar, II. pp. 69, 165), the argument rests on a _petitio
principii_, for only if sensations are necessarily non-spatial does
their projection demand a subjective space-form. But, further, is the
logical apriority of space concerned with the externality of things
to ourselves?

Space _seems_ to perform two functions: on the one hand, it reveals
things, by the eccentric projection of sensations, as external
to the self, while, on the other hand, it reveals simultaneously
presented things as mutually external. These two functions, though
often treated as coordinate and almost equivalent[185], seem to me
widely different. Before we discuss the apriority of space, we must
carefully distinguish, I think, between these two functions, and
decide which of them we are to argue about.

Now externality to the Self, it would seem, must necessarily raise
the whole question of the nature and limits of the Ego, and what is
more, it cannot be derived from spatial presentation, unless we give
the Self a definite position in space. But things acquire a position
in space only when they can appear in sense-perception; we are
forced, therefore, if we adopt this view of the function of space, to
regard the Self as a phenomenon presented to sense-perception. But
this reduces externality to the Self to externality to the body. The
body, however, is a presented object like any other, and externality
of objects to it is, therefore, a special case of the mutual
externality of presented things. Hence we cannot regard space as
giving, primarily at any rate, externality to the Self, but only the
mutual externality of the things presented to sense-perception[186].

=186.= This, then, is the kind of externality we are to expect
from space, and our question must be: Would the existence of
diverse but interrelated things be unknowable, if there were not,
in sense-perception, some form of externality? This is the crucial
question, on which turns the apriority of our form, and hence of the
necessary axioms of Geometry.

=187.= The converse argument to mine, the argument from the
spatio-temporal element in perception to a world of interrelated
but diverse things, is developed at length in Bradley's Logic. It
is put briefly in the following sentence (p. 44, note): "If space
and time are continuous, and if all appearance must occupy some time
or space--and it is not hard to support both these _theses_--we can
at once proceed to the conclusion, no mere particular exists. Every
phenomenon will exist in more times or spaces than one; and against
that diversity will be itself an universal[187]." The importance of
this fact appears, when we consider that, if any _mere_ particular
existed, all judgment and inference as to that particular would be
impossible, since all judgment and inference necessarily operate
by means of universal. But all reality is constructed from the
_This_ of immediate presentation, from which judgment and inference
necessarily spring. Owing, however, to the continuity and relativity
of space and time, no _This_ can be regarded either as simple or
as self-subsistent. Every _This_, on the one hand, can be analyzed
into _Thises_, and on the other hand, is found to be necessarily
related to other things, outside the limits of the given object of
sense-perception. This function of space and time is presupposed in
the following statement from Bosanquet's Logic (Vol. I. pp. 77-78):
"Reality is given for me _in_ present sensuous perception, and _in_
the immediate feeling of my own sentient existence that goes with
it. The real world, as a definite organized system, is _for me_ an
extension of this present sensation and self feeling by means of
judgment, and it is the essence of judgment to effect and sustain
such an extension.... The subject in every judgment of Perception
is some given spot or point in sensuous contact with the percipient
self. But, as all reality is continuous, the subject is not _merely_
this given spot or point."

=188.= This doctrine of Bradley and Bosanquet is the converse of
the epistemological doctrine I have to advocate. Owing to the
continuity and relativity of space and time, they say, we are able
to construct a systematic world, by judgment and inference, out of
that fragmentary and yet necessarily complex existence which is
given in sense-perception. My contention is, conversely, that since
all knowledge is necessarily derived by an extension of the _This_
of sense-perception, and since such extension is only possible if
the _This_ has that fragmentary and yet complex character conferred
by a form of externality, therefore some form of externality,
given with the _This_, is essential to all knowledge, and is thus
logically _ priori_. Bradley's argument, if sound, already proves
this contention; for while, on the one hand, he uses no properties of
space and time but those which belong to every form of externality,
he proves, on the other hand, that judgment and inference require
the _This_ to be neither single nor self-subsistent. But I will
endeavour, since the point is of fundamental importance, to
reproduce the proof, in a form more suited than Bradley's to the
epistemological question.

=189.= The essence of my contention is that, if experience is to be
possible, every sensational _This_ must, when attended to, be found,
on the one hand, resolvable into _Thises_, and on the other hand
dependent, for some of its adjectives, on external reference. The
second of these theses follows from the first, for if we take one
of the _Thises_ contained in the first _This_, we get a new _This_
necessarily related to the other _Thises_ which make up the original
_This_. I may, therefore, confine myself to the first proposition,
which affirms that the object of perception must contain a diversity,
not only of conceptual content, but of existence, and that this can
only be known if sense-perception contains, as an element, some form
of externality.

My premiss, in this argument, is that all knowledge involves a
recognition of diversity in relation, or, if we prefer it, of
identity in difference. This premiss I accept from Logic, as
resulting from the analysis of judgment and inference. To prove
such a premiss, would require a treatise on Logic; I must refer the
reader, therefore, to the works of Bradley and Bosanquet on the
subject. It follows at once, from my premiss, that knowledge would be
impossible, unless the object of attention could be complex, _i.e._
not a _mere_ particular. Now could the mental object--_i.e._, in this
connection, the object of a cognition--be complex, if the object of
immediate perception were always simple?

=190.= We might be inclined, at first sight, to answer this question
affirmatively. But several difficulties, I think, would prevent
such an answer. In the first place, knowledge must start from
perception. Hence, either we could have no knowledge except of our
present perception, or else we must be able to contrast and compare
it with some other perception. Now in the first case, since the
present perception, by hypothesis, is a mere particular, knowledge
of it is impossible, according to our premiss. But in the second
case, the other perception, with which we compare our first, must
have occurred at some other time, and with time, we have at once a
form of externality. But what is more, our present perception is
no longer a mere particular. For the power of comparing it with
another perception involves a point of identity between the two, and
thus renders both complex. Moreover, time must be continuous, and
the present, as Bradley points out, is no mere point of time[188].
Thus our present perception contains the complexity involved in
duration throughout the specious present: its mere particularity
and its simplicity are lost. Its self-subsistence is also lost, for
beyond the specious present, lie the past and the future, to which
our present perception thus unavoidably refers us. Time at least,
therefore, is essential to that identity in difference, which all
knowledge postulates.

=191.= But we have derived, from all this, no ground for affirming a
multiplicity of real things, or a form of externality of more than
one dimension, which, we saw, was necessary for the truth of two out
of our three axioms. This brings us to the question: Have we enough,
with time alone as a form of externality, for the possibility of
knowledge?

This question we must, I think, answer in the negative. With time
alone, we have seen, our presented object must be complex, but its
complexity must, if I may use such a phrase, be merely adjectival.
Without a second form of externality, only one thing can be given at
one moment[189], and this one thing, therefore, must constitute the
whole of our world. The object of past perception must--since our one
thing has nothing external to it, by which it could be created or
destroyed--be regarded as the same thing in a different state. The
complexity, therefore, will lie only in the changing states of our
one thing--it will be adjectival, not substantival. Moreover we have
the following dilemma: Either the one thing must be ourselves, or
else self-consciousness could never arise. But the chief difficulty
of such a world would lie in the changes of the thing. What could
cause these changes, since we should know of nothing external to our
thing? It would be like a Leibnitzian monad, without any God outside
it to prearrange its changes. Causality, in such a world, could not
be applied, and change would be wholly inexplicable.

Hence we require also the possibility of a diversity of
simultaneously existing things, not merely of successive adjectives;
and this, we have seen, cannot be given by time alone, but only by
a form of externality for simultaneous parts of one presentation.
We could never, in other words, infer the existence of diverse but
interrelated things, unless the object of sense-perception could have
substantival complexity, and for such complexity we require a form
of externality other than time. Such a form, moreover, as was shown
in Chapter III., Section A ( 135), can only fulfil its functions
if it has more than one dimension. In our actual world, this form
is given by space; in any world, knowable to beings with our laws
of thought, some such form, as we have now seen, must be given in
sense-perception.

This argument may be briefly summed up, by assuming the doctrine
of Bradley, that all knowledge is obtained by inference from the
_This_ of sense-perception. For, if this be so, the _This_--in
order that inference, which depends on identity in difference, may
be possible at all--must itself be complex, and must, on analysis,
reveal adjectives having a reference beyond itself. But this, as was
shown above, can only happen by means of a form of externality. This
establishes the  priori axioms of Geometry, as necessarily having
existential import and validity in any intelligible world.

=192.= The above argument, I hope, has explained why I hold it
possible to deduce, from a mere conception like that of a form
of externality, the logical apriority of certain axioms as to
experienced space. The Kantian argument--which was correct, if our
reasoning has been sound, in asserting that real diversity, in our
actual world, could only be known by the help of space--was only
mistaken, so far as its purely logical scope extends, in overlooking
the possibility of other forms of externality, which could, if they
existed, perform the same task with equal efficiency. In so far as
space differs, therefore, from these other conceptions of possible
intuitional forms, it is a mere experienced fact, while in so far as
its properties are those which all such forms must have, it is _
priori_ necessary to the possibility of experience.

I cannot hope, however, that no difficulty will remain, for the
reader, in such a deduction, from abstract conceptions, of the
properties of an actual _datum_ in sense-perception. Let us consider,
for example, such a property as impenetrability. To suppose two
things simultaneously in the same position in a form of externality,
is a logical contradiction; but can we say as much of actual space
and time? Is not the impossibility, here, a matter of experience
rather than of logic? Not if the above argument has been sound,
I reply. For in that case, we infer real diversity, _i.e._ the
existence of different things, only from difference of position in
space or time. It follows, that to suppose two things in the same
point of space and time, is still a logical contradiction: not
because we have constructed the data of sense out of logic, but
because logic is dependent, as regards its application, on the nature
of these data. This instance illustrates, what I am anxious to make
plain, that my argument has not attempted to construct the living
wealth of sense-perception out of "bloodless categories," but only to
point out that, unless sense-perception contained a certain element,
these categories would be powerless to grapple with it.

=193.= How we are to account for the fortunate realization of these
requirements--whether by a pre-established harmony, by Darwinian
adaptation to our environment, by the subjectivity of the necessary
element in sense-perception, or by a fundamental identity and unity
between ourselves and the rest of reality--is a further question,
belonging rather to metaphysics than to our present line of argument.
The _ priori_, we have said throughout, is that which is necessary
for the possibility of experience, and in this we have a purely
logical criterion, giving results which only Logic and Epistemology
can prove or disprove. What is subjective in experience, on the
contrary, is primarily a question for psychology, and should be
decided on psychological grounds alone. When these two questions have
been separately answered, but not till then, we may frame theories as
to the connection of the _ priori_ and the subjective; to allow such
theories to influence our decision, on either of the two previous
questions, is liable, surely, to confuse the issue, and prevent a
clear discrimination between fundamentally different points of view.

=194.= I come now to the second question with which this chapter
has to deal, the question, namely: What are we to do with the
contradictions which obtruded themselves in Chapter III., whenever we
came to a point which seemed fundamental? I shall treat this question
briefly, as I have little to add to answers with which we are all
familiar. I have only to prove, first, that the contradictions are
inevitable, and therefore form no objection to my argument; secondly,
that the first step in removing them is to restore the notion of
matter, as that which, in the data of sense-perception, is localized
and interrelated in space.

=195.= The contradictions in space are an ancient theme--as ancient,
in fact, as Zeno's refutation of motion. They are, roughly, of two
kinds, though the two kinds cannot be sharply divided. There are
the contradictions inherent in the notion of the continuum, and the
contradictions which spring from the fact that space, while it must,
to be knowable, be pure relativity, must also, it would seem, since
it is immediately experienced, be something more than mere relations.
The first class of contradictions has been encountered more
frequently in this essay, and is also, I think, the more definite,
and the more important for our present purpose. I doubt, however,
whether the two classes are really distinct; for any continuum,
I believe, in which the elements are not data, but intellectual
constructions resulting from analysis, can be shown to have the same
relational and yet not wholly relational character as belongs to
space.

The three following contradictions, which I shall discuss
successively, seem to me the most prominent in a theory of Geometry.

(1) Though the parts of space are intuitively distinguished, no
conception is adequate to differentiate them. Hence arises a
vain search for elements, by which the differentiation could be
accomplished, and for a whole, of which the parts of space are to be
components. Thus we get the point, or zero extension, as the spatial
element, and an infinite regress or a vicious circle in the search
for a whole.

(2) All positions being relative, positions can only be defined by
their relations, _i.e._ by the straight lines or planes through
them; but straight lines and planes, being all qualitatively similar,
can only be defined by the positions they relate. Hence, again, we
get a vicious circle.

(3) Spatial figures must be regarded as relations. But a relation
is necessarily indivisible, while spatial figures are necessarily
divisible _ad infinitum_.

=196.= (1) _Points._ The antinomy of the point--which arises wherever
a continuum is given, and elements have to be sought in it--is
fundamental to Geometry. It has been given, perhaps unintentionally,
by Veronese as the first axiom, in the form: "There are different
points. All points are identical" (_op. cit._ p. 226). We saw, in
discussing projective Geometry, that straight lines and planes must
be regarded, on the one hand as relations between points, and on the
other hand as made up of points[190]. We saw again, in dealing with
measurement, how space must be regarded as infinitely divisible,
and yet as mere relativity. But what is divisible and consists of
parts, as space does, must lead at last, by continued analysis, to
a simple and unanalyzable part, as the unit of differentiation. For
whatever can be divided, and has parts, possesses some thinghood,
and must, therefore, contain two ultimate units, the whole namely,
and the smallest element possessing thinghood. But in space this is
notoriously not the case. After hypostatizing space, as Geometry
is compelled to do, the mind imperatively demands elements, and
insists on having them, whether possible or not. Of this demand,
all the geometrical applications of the infinitesimal calculus are
evidence[191]. But what sort of elements do we thus obtain? Analysis,
being unable to find any earlier halting-place, finds its elements
in points, that is, in zero quanta of space. Such a conception is
a palpable contradiction, only rendered tolerable by its necessity
and familiarity. A point must be spatial, otherwise it would not
fulfil the function of a spatial element; but again it must contain
no space, for any finite extension is capable of further analysis.
Points can never be given in intuition, which has no concern with the
infinitesimal: they are a purely conceptual construction, arising
out of the need of terms between which spatial relations can hold.
If space be more than relativity, spatial relations must involve
spatial relata; but no relata appear, until we have analyzed our
spatial data down to nothing. The contradictory notion of the point,
as a thing in space without spatial magnitude, is the only outcome
of our search for spatial relata. This _reductio ad absurdum_ surely
suffices, by itself, to prove the essential relativity of space.

=197.= Thus Geometry is forced, since it wishes to regard space
as independent, to hypostatize its abstractions, and therefore to
invent a self-contradictory notion as the spatial element. A similar
absurdity appears, even more obviously, in the notion of a whole of
space. The antinomy may, therefore, be stated thus: Space, as we have
seen throughout, must, if knowledge of it is to be possible, be mere
relativity; but it must also, if _independent_ knowledge of it, such
as Geometry seeks, is to be possible, be something more than mere
relativity, since it is divisible and has parts. But we saw, in Chap.
III., Section A ( 133) that knowledge of a form of externality must
be logically independent of the particular matter filling the form.
How then are we to extricate ourselves from this dilemma?

The only way, I think, is, not to make Geometry dependent on
Physics, which we have seen to be erroneous[192], but to give every
geometrical proposition a certain reference to matter in general. And
at this point an important distinction must be made. We have hitherto
spoken of space as relational, and of spatial figures as relations.
But space, it would seem, is rather relativity than relations--itself
not a relation, it gives the bare possibility of relations between
diverse things[193]. As applied to a spatial figure, which can only
arise by a differentiation of space, and hence by the introduction
of some differentiating matter, the word relation is, perhaps, less
misleading than any other; as applied to empty undifferentiated
space, it seems by no means an accurate description.

But a bare possibility cannot exist, or be given in sense-perception!
What becomes, then, of the arguments of the first part of this
chapter? I reply, it is not empty space, but spatial figures, which
sense-perception reveals, and spatial figures, as we have just seen,
involve a differentiation of space, and therefore a reference to the
matter which is in space. It is spatial figures, also, and not empty
space, with which Geometry has to deal. The antinomy discussed above
arises then--so it would seem--from the attempt to deal with empty
space, rather than with spatial figures and the matter to which they
necessarily refer.

=198.= Let us see whether, by this change, we can overcome the
antinomy of the point. Spatial figures, we shall now say, are
relations between the matter which differentiates empty space. Their
divisibility, which seemed to contradict their relational character,
may be explained in two ways: first, as holding of the figures
considered as parts of empty space, which is itself not a relation;
second, as denoting the possibility of continuous change in the
relation expressed by the spatial figure. These two ways are, at
bottom, the same; for empty space is a possibility of relations, and
the figure, when viewed in connection with empty space, thus becomes
a _possible_ relation, with which other possible relations may be
contrasted or compared. But the second way of regarding divisibility
is the better way, since it introduces a reference to the matter
which differentiates empty space, without which, spatial figures,
and therefore Geometry, could not exist. It is empty space, then--so
we must conclude--which gives rise to the antinomy in question; for
empty space is a bare possibility of relations, undifferentiated and
homogeneous, and thus wholly destitute of parts or of thinghood.
To speak of parts of a possibility is nonsense; the parts and
differentiations arise only through a reference to the matter which
is differentiated in space.

=199.= But what nature must we ascribe to this matter, which is
to be involved in all geometrical propositions? In criticizing
Helmholtz (Chap. II.  73), it may be remembered, we decided that
Geometry refers to a peculiar and abstract kind of matter, which is
not regarded as possessing any causal qualities, as exerting or as
subject to the action of forces. And this is the matter, I think,
which we require for the needs of the moment. Not that we affirm,
of course, that actual matter can be destitute of the properties
with which Physics is cognizant, but that we abstract from these
properties, as being irrelevant to Geometry. All that we require, for
our immediate purpose, is a subject of that diversity which space
renders possible, or terms for those relations by which empty space,
if space is to be studied at all, must be differentiated. But how
must a matter, which is to fulfil this function, be regarded?

Empty space, we have said, is a possibility of diversity in
relation, but spatial figures, with which Geometry necessarily
deals, are the actual relations rendered possible by empty space.
Our matter, therefore, must supply the terms for these relations.
It must be differentiated, since such differentiation, as we have
seen, is the special work of space. We must find, therefore, in
our matter, that unit of differentiation, or atom[194], which in
space we could not find. This atom must be simple, _i.e._ it must
contain no real diversity; it must be a _This_ not resolvable into
_Thises_. Being simple, it can contain no relations within itself,
and consequently, since spatial figures are mere relations, it cannot
appear as a spatial figure; for every spatial figure involves some
diversity of matter. But our atom must have spatial relations with
other atoms, since to supply terms for these relations is its only
function. It is also capable of having these relations, since it is
differentiated from other atoms. Hence we obtain an unextended term
for spatial relations, precisely of the kind we require. So long as
we sought this term without reference to anything more than space,
the self-contradictory notion of the point was the only outcome
of our search; but now that we allow a reference to the matter
differentiated by space, we find at once the term which was needed,
namely, a non-spatial simple element, with spatial relations to other
elements. To Geometry such a term will appear, owing to its spatial
relations, as a point; but the contradiction of the point, as we now
see, is a result only of the undue abstraction with which Geometry
deals.

=200.= (2) _The circle in the definition of straight lines and
planes._ This difficulty need not long detain us, since we have
already, with the material atom, broken through the relativity
which caused our circle. Straight lines, in the purely geometrical
procedure, are defined only by points, and points only by straight
lines. But points, now, are replaced by material atoms: the duality
of points and lines, therefore, has disappeared, and the straight
line may be defined as the spatial relation between two unextended
atoms. These atoms have spatial adjectives, derived from their
relations to other atoms; but they have no _intrinsic_ spatial
adjectives, such as could belong to them if they had extension or
figure. Thus straight lines and planes are the true spatial units,
and points result only from the attempt to find, within space, those
terms for spatial relations which exist only in a more than spatial
matter. Straight lines, planes and volumes are the spatial relations
between two, three or four unextended atoms, and points are a merely
convenient geometrical fiction, by which possible atoms are replaced.
For, since space, as we saw, is a possibility, Geometry deals not
with actually realized spatial relations, but with the whole scheme
of possible relations.

=201.= (3) _Space is at once relational and more than relational._
We have already touched on the question how far space is other than
relations, but as this question is quite fundamental, as _relation_
is an ambiguous and dangerous word, as I have made constant use of
the relativity of space without attempting to define a relation, it
will be necessary to discuss this antinomy at length.

=202.= Now for this discussion it is essential to distinguish clearly
between empty space and spatial figures. Empty space, as a form
of externality, is not actual relations, but the possibility of
relations: if we ascribe existential import to it, as the ground,
in reality, of all diversity in relation, we at once have space as
something not itself relations, though giving the possibility of all
relations. In this sense, space is to be distinguished from spatial
order. Spatial order, it may be said, presupposes space, as that in
which this order is possible. Thus Stumpf says[195]: "There is no
order or relation without a positive absolute content, underlying
it, and making it possible to order anything in this manner. Why and
how should we otherwise distinguish one order from another?... To
distinguish different orders from one another, we must everywhere
recognize a particular absolute content, in relation to which the
order takes place. And so space, too, is not a mere order, but just
that by which the spatial order, side-by-sideness (_Nebeneinander_)
distinguishes itself from the rest."

May we not, then, resolve the antinomy very simply, by a reference to
this ambiguity of space? Bradley contends (Appearance and Reality,
pp. 36-7) that, on the one hand, space has parts, and is therefore
not mere relations, while on the other hand, when we try to say what
these parts are, we find them after all to be mere relations. But
cannot the space which has parts be regarded as empty space, Stumpf's
absolute underlying content, which is not mere relations, while the
parts, in so far as they turn out to be mere relations, are those
relations which constitute spatial order, not empty space? If this
can be maintained, the antinomy no longer exists.

But such an explanation, though I believe it to be a first step
towards a solution, will, I fear, itself demand almost as much
explanation as the original difficulty. For the connection of empty
space with spatial order is itself a question full of difficulty, to
be answered only after much labour.

=203.= Let us consider what this empty space is. (I speak of "empty"
space without necessarily implying the absence of matter, but only
to denote a space which is not a mere order of material things.)
Stumpf regards it as given in sense; Kant, in the last two arguments
of his metaphysical deduction, argues that it is an intuition, not
a concept, and must be known before spatial order becomes possible.
I wish to maintain, on the contrary, that it is wholly conceptual;
that space is given only as spatial order; that spatial relations,
being given, appear as more than mere relations, and so become
hypostatized; that when hypostatized, the whole collection of
them is regarded as contained in empty space; but that this empty
space itself, if it means more than the logical possibility of
space-relations, is an unnecessary and self-contradictory assumption.
Let us begin by considering Kant's arguments on this point.

Leibnitz had affirmed that space was only relations, while Newton
had maintained the objective reality of absolute space. Kant adopted
a middle course: he asserted absolute space, but regarded it as
purely subjective. The assertion of absolute space is the object of
his second argument; for if space were mere relations between things,
it would necessarily disappear with the disappearance of the things
in it; but this the second argument denies[196]. Now spatial order
obviously does disappear with matter, but absolute or empty space may
be supposed to remain. It is this, then, which Kant is arguing about,
and it is this which he affirms to be a pure intuition, necessarily
presupposed by spatial order[197].

=204.= But can we agree in regarding empty space, the "infinite
given whole," as really given? Must we not, in spite of Kant's
argument, regard it as wholly conceptual? It is not required, in
the first place, by the argument of the first half of this chapter,
which required only that every _This_ of sense-perception should
be resolvable into _Thises_, and thus involved only an order among
_Thises_, not anything given originally without reference to them
at all. In the second place, Kant's two arguments[198] designed to
prove that empty space is not conceptual, are inadequate to their
purpose. The argument that the parts of space are not contained
_under_ it, but _in_ it, proves certainly that space is not a general
conception, of which spatial figures are the instances; but it by
no means follows that empty space is not a conception. Empty space
is undifferentiated and homogeneous; parts of space, or spatial
figures, arise only by reference to some differentiating matter, and
thus belong rather to spatial order than to empty space. If empty
space be the pre-condition of spatial order, we cannot expect it
to be connected with spatial relations as genus with species. But
empty space may nevertheless be a universal conception; it may be
related to spatial order as the state to the citizens. These are not
instances of the state, but are contained in it; they also, in a
sense, presuppose it, for a man can only become a citizen by being
related to other citizens in a state[199].

The uniqueness of space, again, seems hardly a valid argument for
its intuitional nature; to regard it as an argument implies, indeed,
that all conceptions are abstracted from a series of instances--a
view which has been criticized in Chapter II. ( 77), and need not be
further discussed here[200]. There is no ground, therefore, in Kant's
two arguments for the intuitional nature of empty space, which can be
maintained against criticism.

=205.= Another ground for condemning empty space is to be found in
the mathematical antinomies. For it is no solution, as Lotze points
out (Metaphysik, Bk. II. Chap. I.,  106), to regard empty space as
purely subjective: contradictions in a necessary subjective intuition
form as great a difficulty as in anything else. But these antinomies
arise only in connection with empty space, not with spatial order
as an aggregate of relations. For only when space is regarded as
possessed of some thinghood, can a whole or a true element be
demanded. This we have seen already in connection with the Point.
When space is regarded, so far as it is valid, as only spatial order,
unbounded extension and infinite divisibility both disappear. What
is divided is not spatial relations, but matter; and if matter, as
we have seen that Geometry requires, consists of unextended atoms
with spatial relations, there is no reason to regard matter either as
infinitely divisible, or as consisting of atoms of finite extension.

=206.= But whence arises, on this view, the paradox that we cannot
but regard space as having more or less thinghood, and as divisible
_ad infinitum_? This must be explained, I think, as a psychological
illusion, unavoidably arising from the fact that spatial relations
are immediately presented. They thus have a peculiar psychical
quality, as immediate experiences, by which quality they can be
distinguished from time-relations or any other order in which things
may be arranged. To Stumpf, whose problem is psychological, such a
psychical quality would constitute an absolute underlying content,
and would fully justify his thesis; to us, however, whose problem is
epistemological, it would not do so, but would leave the _meaning_ of
the spatial element in sense-perception free from any implication
of an absolute or empty space[201]. May we not, then, abandon empty
space, and say: Spatial order consists of _felt_ relations, and _qu_
felt has, for Psychology, an existence not wholly resolvable into
relations, and unavoidably _seeming_ to be more than mere relations.
But when we examine the information, as to space, which we derive
from sense-perception, we find ourselves plunged in contradictions,
as soon as we allow this information to consist of more than
relations. This leaves spatial order alone in the field, and reduces
empty space to a mere name for the logical possibility of spatial
relations.

=207.= The apparent divisibility of the relations which constitute
spatial order, then, may be explained in two ways, though these are
at bottom equivalent. We may take the relation as considered in
connection with empty space, in which case it becomes more than a
relation; but being falsely hypostatized, it appears as a complex
thing, necessarily composed of elements, which elements, however,
nowhere emerge until we analyze the pseudo-thing down to nothing,
and arrive at the point. In this sense, the divisibility of spatial
relations is an unavoidable illusion. Or again, we may take the
relation in connection with the material atoms it relates. In this
case, other atoms may be imagined, differently localized by different
spatial relations. If they are localized on the straight line joining
two of the original atoms, this straight line appears as divided by
them. But the original relation is not really divided: all that has
happened is, that two or more equivalent relations have replaced
it, as two compounded relations of father and son may replace the
equivalent relation of grandfather and grandson. These two ways of
viewing the apparent divisibility are equivalent: for empty space, in
so far as it is not illusion, is a name for the aggregate of possible
space-relations. To regard a figure in empty space as divided,
therefore, means, if it means anything, to regard two or more other
possible relations as substituted for it, which gives the second way
of viewing the question.

The same reference to matter, then, by which the antinomy of the
Point was solved, solves also the antinomy as to the relational
nature of space. Space, if it is to be freed from contradictions,
must be regarded exclusively as spatial order, as relations between
unextended material atoms. Empty space, which arises, by an
inevitable illusion, out of the spatial element in sense-perception,
may be regarded, if we wish to retain it, as the bare principle of
relativity, the bare logical possibility of relations between diverse
things. In this sense, empty space is wholly conceptual; spatial
order alone is immediately experienced.

=208.= But in what sense does spatial order consist of relations?
We have hitherto spoken of externality as a relation, and in a
sense such a manner of speaking is justified. Externality, when
predicated of anything, is an adjective of that thing, and implies
a reference to some other thing. To this extent, then, externality
is analogous to other relations; and only to this extent, in our
previous arguments, has it been regarded as a relation. But when we
take account of further qualities of relations, externality begins to
appear, not so much as a relation, but rather as a necessary aspect
or element in every relation. And this is borne out by the necessity,
for the existence of relations, of some given form of externality.

Every relation, we may say, involves a diversity between the
related terms, but also some unity. Mere diversity does not give
a ground for that interaction, and that interdependence, which a
relation requires. Mere unity leaves the terms identical, and thus
destroys the reference of one to another required for a relation.
Mere externality, taken in abstraction, gives only the element of
diversity required for a relation, and is thus more abstract than any
actual relation. But mere diversity does not give that indivisible
whole of which any actual relation must consist, and is thus, when
regarded abstractly, not subject to the restrictions of ordinary
relations.

But with mere diversity, we seem to have returned to empty space, and
abandoned spatial order. Mere diversity, surely, is either complete
or non-existent; degrees of diversity, or a quantitative measure of
it, are nonsense. We cannot, therefore, reduce spatial order to mere
diversity. Two things, if they occupy different positions in space,
are necessarily diverse, but are as necessarily something more;
otherwise spatial order becomes unmeaning.

Empty space, then, in the above sense of the possibility of spatial
relations, contains only one aspect of a relation, namely the aspect
of diversity; but spatial order, by its reference to matter, becomes
more concrete, and contains also the element of unity, arising out
of the connection of the different material atoms. Spatial order,
then, consists of relations in the ordinary sense; its merely
spatial element, however--if one may make such a distinction--the
element, that is, which can be abstracted from matter and regarded
as constituting empty space, is only one aspect of a relation, but
an aspect which, in the concrete, must be inseparably bound up
with the other aspect. Here, once more, we see the ground of the
contradictions in empty space, and the reason why spatial order is
free from these contradictions.


_Conclusion._

=209.= We have now completed our review of the foundations of
Geometry. It will be well, before we take leave of the subject,
briefly to review and recapitulate the results we have won.

In the first chapter, we watched the development of a branch of
Mathematics designed, at first, only to establish the logical
independence of Euclid's axiom of parallels, and the possibility
of a self-consistent Geometry which dispensed with it. We found
the further development of the subject entangled, for a while, in
philosophical controversy; having shown one axiom to be superfluous,
the geometers of the second period hoped to prove the same conclusion
of all the others, but failed to construct any system free from three
fundamental axioms. Being concerned with analytical and metrical
Geometry, they tended to regard Algebra as _ priori_, but held that
those properties of spatial magnitudes, which were not deducible from
the laws of Algebra, must be empirical. In all this, they aimed as
much at discrediting Kant as at advancing Mathematics. But with the
third period, the interest in Philosophy diminishes, the opposition
to Euclid becomes less marked, and most important of all, measurement
is no longer regarded as fundamental, and space is dealt with by
descriptive rather than quantitative methods. But nevertheless,
three axioms, substantially the same as those retained in the second
period, are still retained by all geometers.

In the second chapter, we endeavoured, by a criticism of some
geometrical philosophies, to prepare the ground for a constructive
theory of Geometry. We saw that Kant, in applying the argument of
the Transcendental Aesthetic to space, had gone too far, since
its logical scope extended only to some form of externality in
general. We saw that Riemann, Helmholtz and Erdmann, misled by the
quantitative bias, overlooked the qualitative substratum required
by all judgments of quantity, and thus mistook the direction in
which the necessary axioms of Geometry are to be found. We rejected,
also, Helmholtz's view that Geometry depends on Physics, because we
found that Physics must assume a knowledge of Geometry before it
can become possible. But we admitted, in Geometry, a reference to
matter--not, however, to matter as empirically known in Physics, but
to a more abstract matter, whose sole function is to appear in space,
and supply the terms for spatial relations. We admitted, however,
besides this, that all _actual_ measurement must be effected by means
of _actual_ matter, and is only empirically possible, through the
empirical knowledge of approximately rigid bodies. In criticizing
Lotze, we saw that the most important sense, in which non-Euclidean
spaces are possible, is a philosophical sense, namely, that they are
not condemned by any _ priori_ argument as to the necessity of space
for experience, and that consequently, if they are not affirmed,
this must be on empirical grounds alone. Lotze's strictures on the
mathematical procedure of Metageometry we found to be wholly due to
ignorance of the subject.

Proceeding, in the third chapter, to a constructive theory of
Geometry, we saw that projective Geometry, which has no reference to
quantity, is necessarily true of any form of externality. Its three
axioms--homogeneity, dimensions, and the straight line--were all
deduced from the conception of a form of externality, and, since some
such form is necessary to experience, were all declared _ priori_.
In metrical Geometry, on the contrary, we found an empirical element,
arising out of the alternatives of Euclidean and non-Euclidean space.
Three _ priori_ axioms, common to these spaces, and necessary
conditions of the possibility of measurement, still remained; these
were the axiom of Free Mobility, the axiom that space has a finite
integral number of dimensions, and the axiom of distance. Except for
the new idea of motion, these were found equivalent to the projective
triad, and thus necessarily true of any form of externality. But
the remaining axioms of Euclid--the axiom of three dimensions, the
axiom that two straight lines can never enclose a space, and the
axiom of parallels--were regarded as empirical laws, derived from the
investigation and measurement of our actual space, and true only, as
far as the last two are concerned, within the limits set by errors of
observation.

In the present chapter, we completed our proof of the apriority
of the projective and equivalent metrical axioms, by showing the
necessity, for experience, of some form of externality, given by
sensation or intuition, and not merely inferred from other data.
Without this, we said, a knowledge of diverse but interrelated
things, the corner-stone of all experience, would be impossible.
Finally, we discussed the contradictions arising out of the
relativity and continuity of space, and endeavoured to overcome
them by a reference to matter. This matter, we found, must consist
of unextended atoms, localized by their spatial relations, and
appearing, in Geometry, as points. But the non-spatial adjectives
of matter, we contended, are irrelevant to Geometry, and its
causal properties may be left out of account. To deal with the new
contradictions, involved in such a notion of matter, would demand
a fresh treatise, leading us, through Kinematics, into the domains
of Dynamics and Physics. But to discuss the special difficulties
of space is all that is possible in an essay on the Foundations of
Geometry.

FOOTNOTES:

[178] Compare, with the following paragraphs, the admirable
discussion in Mr Hobhouse's Theory of Knowledge (Methuen 1896), Part
I. Chapter II.

[179] I speak of sense-perception instead of sensation, so as not to
prejudge the issue as to the sensational nature of space.

[180] See Vaihinger's Commentar, II. pp. 86-7, 168-171.

[181] See Caird, Critical Philosophy of Kant, Vol. I. p. 287.

[182] Ursprung der Raumvorstellung, pp. 12-30.

[183] See the references in Vaihinger's Commentar, II. p. 76 ff.

[184] Commentar, II. p. 71 ff.

[185] _E.g._ by Caird, _op. cit._ Vol. I. p. 286.

[186] I have no wish to deny, however, that space is essential in the
subsequent distinction of Self and not-Self.

[187] See also Book I. Chap II. passim; especially p. 51 ff. and pp.
70-1.

[188] Logic, p. 51 ff.

[189] For the _This_, on such a hypothesis, has a purely temporal
complexity, and is not resolvable into coexisting _Thises_.

[190] Chapter III. Section A, ( 131).

[191] Cf. Hannequin, Essai critique sur l'hypothse des atomes, Paris
1895, Chap. I. Section III.; especially p. 43.

[192] See Chapter II.  69 ff.

[193] See third antinomy below,  201 ff.

[194] This atom, of course, must not be confounded with the atom of
Chemistry.

[195] Ursprung der Raumvorstellung, p. 15.

[196] See Vaihinger's Commentar, II. pp. 189-190.

[197] See ibid. p. 224 ff. for Kant's inconsistencies on this point.

[198] The fourth and fifth in the first edition, the third and fourth
in the second.

[199] Cf. Vaihinger's Commentar, II. p. 218.

[200] Cf. Vaihinger's Commentar, II. p. 207.

[201] Cf. James, Psychology, Vol. II., p. 148 ff.




  Cambridge:

  PRINTED BY J. AND C. F. CLAY,
  AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.




  TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  Bold text is denoted by =equal signs=.

  A superscript is denoted by ^{x}. For example, y^{4} indicates y to
  the power 4.

  A subscript is denoted by {x}. For example, a{ik} indicates the ik-th
  element of array a.

  Algebraic expressions in the original text usually had the variables in
  italic. The italic underscore markup has been removed for readability,
  so for example: _dx_{i}_ = _d__x_{i}_ + _dx_{i}_
  has been changed to: dx{i} = dx{i} + dx{i}

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within
  the text and consultation of external sources.

  Except for those changes noted below, all misspellings in the text,
  and inconsistent or archaic usage, have been retained. For example,
  co-exist, coexist; every-day, everyday; connexion; assertorial;
  apodeictic; premisses.

   82, 'so Erdmannn confidently' replaced by 'so Erdmann confidently'.
   150 Footnote [157], 'Delboeuf' replaced by 'Delbuf' for consistency.
   152, 'one subdivison must' replaced by 'one sub-division must'.
   159 Footnote [167], 'Delboeuf' replaced by 'Delbuf' for consistency.
   204, 'and homogenous;' replaced by 'and homogeneous;'.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN ESSAY ON THE FOUNDATIONS OF GEOMETRY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given awayyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

     You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.
    
     You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
        works.
    
     You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
     You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenbergs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundations EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your states laws.

The Foundations business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundations website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of Political Ideals
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Political Ideals

Author: Bertrand Russell

Release date: December 1, 2003 [eBook #4776]
                Most recently updated: December 28, 2020

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Gordon Keener.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POLITICAL IDEALS ***




Produced by Gordon Keener.









POLITICAL IDEALS


by

Bertrand Russell




CONTENTS

   I: Political Ideals
  II: Capitalism and the Wage System
 III: Pitfalls in Socialism
  IV: Individual Liberty and Public Control
   V: National Independence and Internationalism




Chapter I: Political Ideals


In dark days, men need a clear faith and a well-grounded hope; and as
the outcome of these, the calm courage which takes no account of
hardships by the way.  The times through which we are passing have
afforded to many of us a confirmation of our faith.  We see that the
things we had thought evil are really evil, and we know more
definitely than we ever did before the directions in which men must
move if a better world is to arise on the ruins of the one which is
now hurling itself into destruction.  We see that men's political
dealings with one another are based on wholly wrong ideals, and can
only be saved by quite different ideals from continuing to be a source
of suffering, devastation, and sin.

Political ideals must be based upon ideals for the individual life.
The aim of politics should be to make the lives of individuals as good
as possible.  There is nothing for the politician to consider outside
or above the various men, women, and children who compose the world.
The problem of politics is to adjust the relations of human beings in
such a way that each severally may have as much of good in his
existence as possible.  And this problem requires that we should first
consider what it is that we think good in the individual life.

To begin with, we do not want all men to be alike.  We do not want to
lay down a pattern or type to which men of all sorts are to be made by
some means or another to approximate.  This is the ideal of the
impatient administrator.  A bad teacher will aim at imposing his
opinion, and turning out a set of pupils all of whom will give the
same definite answer on a doubtful point.  Mr. Bernard Shaw is said to
hold that _Troilus and Cressida_ is the best of Shakespeare's plays.
Although I disagree with this opinion, I should welcome it in a pupil
as a sign of individuality; but most teachers would not tolerate such
a heterodox view.  Not only teachers, but all commonplace persons in
authority, desire in their subordinates that kind of uniformity which
makes their actions easily predictable and never inconvenient.  The
result is that they crush initiative and individuality when they can,
and when they cannot, they quarrel with it.

It is not one ideal for all men, but a separate ideal for each
separate man, that has to be realized if possible.  Every man has it
in his being to develop into something good or bad: there is a best
possible for him, and a worst possible.  His circumstances will
determine whether his capacities for good are developed or crushed,
and whether his bad impulses are strengthened or gradually diverted
into better channels.

But although we cannot set up in any detail an ideal of character
which is to be universally applicable--although we cannot say, for
instance, that all men ought to be industrious, or self-sacrificing,
or fond of music--there are some broad principles which can be used to
guide our estimates as to what is possible or desirable.

We may distinguish two sorts of goods, and two corresponding sorts of
impulses.  There are goods in regard to which individual possession is
possible, and there are goods in which all can share alike.  The food
and clothing of one man is not the food and clothing of another; if
the supply is insufficient, what one man has is obtained at the
expense of some other man.  This applies to material goods generally,
and therefore to the greater part of the present economic life of the
world.  On the other hand, mental and spiritual goods do not belong to
one man to the exclusion of another.  If one man knows a science, that
does not prevent others from knowing it; on the contrary, it helps
them to acquire the knowledge.  If one man is a great artist or poet,
that does not prevent others from painting pictures or writing poems,
but helps to create the atmosphere in which such things are possible.
If one man is full of good-will toward others, that does not mean that
there is less good-will to be shared among the rest; the more
good-will one man has, the more he is likely to create among others.
In such matters there is no _possession_, because there is not a
definite amount to be shared; any increase anywhere tends to produce
an increase everywhere.

There are two kinds of impulses, corresponding to the two kinds of
goods.  There are _possessive_ impulses, which aim at acquiring or
retaining private goods that cannot be shared; these center in the
impulse of property.  And there are _creative_ or constructive impulses,
which aim at bringing into the world or making available for use the
kind of goods in which there is no privacy and no possession.

The best life is the one in which the creative impulses play the
largest part and the possessive impulses the smallest.  This is no new
discovery.  The Gospel says: "Take no thought, saying, What shall we
eat? or What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed?"
The thought we give to these things is taken away from matters of more
importance.  And what is worse, the habit of mind engendered by
thinking of these things is a bad one; it leads to competition, envy,
domination, cruelty, and almost all the moral evils that infest the
world.  In particular, it leads to the predatory use of force.
Material possessions can be taken by force and enjoyed by the robber.
Spiritual possessions cannot be taken in this way.  You may kill an
artist or a thinker, but you cannot acquire his art or his thought.
You may put a man to death because he loves his fellow-men, but you
will not by so doing acquire the love which made his happiness.  Force
is impotent in such matters; it is only as regards material goods that
it is effective.  For this reason the men who believe in force are the
men whose thoughts and desires are preoccupied with material goods.

The possessive impulses, when they are strong, infect activities which
ought to be purely creative.  A man who has made some valuable
discovery may be filled with jealousy of a rival discoverer.  If one
man has found a cure for cancer and another has found a cure for
consumption, one of them may be delighted if the other man's discovery
turns out a mistake, instead of regretting the suffering of patients
which would otherwise have been avoided.  In such cases, instead of
desiring knowledge for its own sake, or for the sake of its
usefulness, a man is desiring it as a means to reputation.  Every
creative impulse is shadowed by a possessive impulse; even the
aspirant to saintliness may be jealous of the more successful saint.
Most affection is accompanied by some tinge of jealousy, which is a
possessive impulse intruding into the creative region.  Worst of all,
in this direction, is the sheer envy of those who have missed
everything worth having in life, and who are instinctively bent on
preventing others from enjoying what they have not had.  There is
often much of this in the attitude of the old toward the young.

There is in human beings, as in plants and animals, a certain natural
impulse of growth, and this is just as true of mental as of physical
development.  Physical development is helped by air and nourishment
and exercise, and may be hindered by the sort of treatment which made
Chinese women's feet small.  In just the same way mental development
may be helped or hindered by outside influences.  The outside
influences that help are those that merely provide encouragement or
mental food or opportunities for exercising mental faculties.  The
influences that hinder are those that interfere with growth by
applying any kind of force, whether discipline or authority or fear or
the tyranny of public opinion or the necessity of engaging in some
totally incongenial occupation.  Worst of all influences are those
that thwart or twist a man's fundamental impulse, which is what shows
itself as conscience in the moral sphere; such influences are likely
to do a man an inward danger from which he will never recover.

Those who realize the harm that can be done to others by any use of
force against them, and the worthlessness of the goods that can be
acquired by force, will be very full of respect for the liberty of
others; they will not try to bind them or fetter them; they will be
slow to judge and swift to sympathize; they will treat every human
being with a kind of tenderness, because the principle of good in him
is at once fragile and infinitely precious.  They will not condemn
those who are unlike themselves; they will know and feel that
individuality brings differences and uniformity means death.  They
will wish each human being to be as much a living thing and as little
a mechanical product as it is possible to be; they will cherish in
each one just those things which the harsh usage of a ruthless world
would destroy.  In one word, all their dealings with others will be
inspired by a deep impulse of _reverence_.

What we shall desire for individuals is now clear: strong creative
impulses, overpowering and absorbing the instinct of possession;
reverence for others; respect for the fundamental creative impulse in
ourselves.  A certain kind of self-respect or native pride is
necessary to a good life; a man must not have a sense of utter inward
defeat if he is to remain whole, but must feel the courage and the
hope and the will to live by the best that is in him, whatever outward
or inward obstacles it may encounter.  So far as it lies in a man's
own power, his life will realize its best possibilities if it has
three things: creative rather than possessive impulses, reverence for
others, and respect for the fundamental impulse in himself.

Political and social institutions are to be judged by the good or harm
that they do to individuals.  Do they encourage creativeness rather
than possessiveness?  Do they embody or promote a spirit of reverence
between human beings?  Do they preserve self-respect?

In all these ways the institutions under which we live are very far
indeed from what they ought to be.

Institutions, and especially economic systems, have a profound
influence in molding the characters of men and women.  They may
encourage adventure and hope, or timidity and the pursuit of safety.
They may open men's minds to great possibilities, or close them
against everything but the risk of obscure misfortune.  They may make
a man's happiness depend upon what he adds to the general possessions
of the world, or upon what he can secure for himself of the private
goods in which others cannot share.  Modern capitalism forces the
wrong decision of these alternatives upon all who are not heroic or
exceptionally fortunate.

Men's impulses are molded, partly by their native disposition, partly
by opportunity and environment, especially early environment.  Direct
preaching can do very little to change impulses, though it can lead
people to restrain the direct expression of them, often with the
result that the impulses go underground and come to the surface again
in some contorted form.  When we have discovered what kinds of impulse
we desire, we must not rest content with preaching, or with trying to
produce the outward manifestation without the inner spring; we must
try rather to alter institutions in the way that will, of itself,
modify the life of impulse in the desired direction.

At present our institutions rest upon two things: property and power.
Both of these are very unjustly distributed; both, in the actual
world, are of great importance to the happiness of the individual.
Both are possessive goods; yet without them many of the goods in which
all might share are hard to acquire as things are now.

Without property, as things are, a man has no freedom, and no security
for the necessities of a tolerable life; without power, he has no
opportunity for initiative.  If men are to have free play for their
creative impulses, they must be liberated from sordid cares by a
certain measure of security, and they must have a sufficient share of
power to be able to exercise initiative as regards the course and
conditions of their lives.

Few men can succeed in being creative rather than possessive in a
world which is wholly built on competition, where the great majority
would fall into utter destitution if they became careless as to the
acquisition of material goods, where honor and power and respect are
given to wealth rather than to wisdom, where the law embodies and
consecrates the injustice of those who have toward those who have not.
In such an environment even those whom nature has endowed with great
creative gifts become infected with the poison of competition.  Men
combine in groups to attain more strength in the scramble for material
goods, and loyalty to the group spreads a halo of quasi-idealism round
the central impulse of greed.  Trade-unions and the Labor party are no
more exempt from this vice than other parties and other sections of
society; though they are largely inspired by the hope of a radically
better world.  They are too often led astray by the immediate object
of securing for themselves a large share of material goods.  That this
desire is in accordance with justice, it is impossible to deny; but
something larger and more constructive is needed as a political ideal,
if the victors of to-morrow are not to become the oppressors of the
day after.  The inspiration and outcome of a reforming movement ought
to be freedom and a generous spirit, not niggling restrictions and
regulations.

The present economic system concentrates initiative in the hands of a
small number of very rich men.  Those who are not capitalists have,
almost always, very little choice as to their activities when once
they have selected a trade or profession; they are not part of the
power that moves the mechanism, but only a passive portion of the
machinery.  Despite political democracy, there is still an
extraordinary degree of difference in the power of self-direction
belonging to a capitalist and to a man who has to earn his living.
Economic affairs touch men's lives, at most times, much more
intimately than political questions.  At present the man who has no
capital usually has to sell himself to some large organization, such
as a railway company, for example.  He has no voice in its management,
and no liberty in politics except what his trade-union can secure for
him.  If he happens to desire a form of liberty which is not thought
important by his trade-union, he is powerless; he must submit or
starve.

Exactly the same thing happens to professional men.  Probably a
majority of journalists are engaged in writing for newspapers whose
politics they disagree with; only a man of wealth can own a large
newspaper, and only an accident can enable the point of view or the
interests of those who are not wealthy to find expression in a
newspaper.  A large part of the best brains of the country are in the
civil service, where the condition of their employment is silence
about the evils which cannot be concealed from them.  A Nonconformist
minister loses his livelihood if his views displease his congregation;
a member of Parliament loses his seat if he is not sufficiently supple
or sufficiently stupid to follow or share all the turns and twists of
public opinion.  In every walk of life, independence of mind is
punished by failure, more and more as economic organizations grow
larger and more rigid.  Is it surprising that men become increasingly
docile, increasingly ready to submit to dictation and to forego the
right of thinking for themselves?  Yet along such lines civilization
can only sink into a Byzantine immobility.

Fear of destitution is not a motive out of which a free creative life
can grow, yet it is the chief motive which inspires the daily work of
most wage-earners.  The hope of possessing more wealth and power than
any man ought to have, which is the corresponding motive of the rich,
is quite as bad in its effects; it compels men to close their minds
against justice, and to prevent themselves from thinking honestly on
social questions while in the depths of their hearts they uneasily
feel that their pleasures are bought by the miseries of others.  The
injustices of destitution and wealth alike ought to be rendered
impossible.  Then a great fear would be removed from the lives of the
many, and hope would have to take on a better form in the lives of the
few.

But security and liberty are only the negative conditions for good
political institutions.  When they have been won, we need also the
positive condition: encouragement of creative energy.  Security alone
might produce a smug and stationary society; it demands creativeness
as its counterpart, in order to keep alive the adventure and interest
of life, and the movement toward perpetually new and better things.
There can be no final goal for human institutions; the best are those
that most encourage progress toward others still better.  Without
effort and change, human life cannot remain good.  It is not a
finished Utopia that we ought to desire, but a world where imagination
and hope are alive and active.

It is a sad evidence of the weariness mankind has suffered from
excessive toil that his heavens have usually been places where nothing
ever happened or changed.  Fatigue produces the illusion that only
rest is needed for happiness; but when men have rested for a time,
boredom drives them to renewed activity.  For this reason, a happy
life must be one in which there is activity.  If it is also to be a
useful life, the activity ought to be as far as possible creative, not
merely predatory or defensive.  But creative activity requires
imagination and originality, which are apt to be subversive of the
_status quo_.  At present, those who have power dread a disturbance of
the _status quo_, lest their unjust privileges should be taken away.
In combination with the instinct for conventionality,[1] which man
shares with the other gregarious animals, those who profit by the
existing order have established a system which punishes originality
and starves imagination from the moment of first going to school down
to the time of death and burial.  The whole spirit in which education
is conducted needs to be changed, in order that children may be
encouraged to think and feel for themselves, not to acquiesce
passively in the thoughts and feelings of others.  It is not rewards
after the event that will produce initiative, but a certain mental
atmosphere.  There have been times when such an atmosphere existed:
the great days of Greece, and Elizabethan England, may serve as
examples.  But in our own day the tyranny of vast machine-like
organizations, governed from above by men who know and care little for
the lives of those whom they control, is killing individuality and
freedom of mind, and forcing men more and more to conform to a uniform
pattern.

[1] In England this is called "a sense of humor."

Vast organizations are an inevitable element in modern life, and it is
useless to aim at their abolition, as has been done by some reformers,
for instance, William Morris.  It is true that they make the
preservation of individuality more difficult, but what is needed is a
way of combining them with the greatest possible scope for individual
initiative.

One very important step toward this end would be to render democratic
the government of every organization.  At present, our legislative
institutions are more or less democratic, except for the important
fact that women are excluded.  But our administration is still purely
bureaucratic, and our economic organizations are monarchical or
oligarchic.  Every limited liability company is run by a small number
of self-appointed or coopted directors.  There can be no real
freedom or democracy until the men who do the work in a business also
control its management.

Another measure which would do much to increase liberty would be an
increase of self-government for subordinate groups, whether
geographical or economic or defined by some common belief, like
religious sects.  A modern state is so vast and its machinery is so
little understood that even when a man has a vote he does not feel
himself any effective part of the force which determines its policy.
Except in matters where he can act in conjunction with an
exceptionally powerful group, he feels himself almost impotent, and
the government remains a remote impersonal circumstance, which must be
simply endured, like the weather.  By a share in the control of
smaller bodies, a man might regain some of that sense of personal
opportunity and responsibility which belonged to the citizen of a
city-state in ancient Greece or medieval Italy.

When any group of men has a strong corporate consciousness--such as
belongs, for example, to a nation or a trade or a religious
body--liberty demands that it should be free to decide for itself all
matters which are of great importance to the outside world.  This is
the basis of the universal claim for national independence.  But
nations are by no means the only groups which ought to have
self-government for their internal concerns.  And nations, like other
groups, ought not to have complete liberty of action in matters which
are of equal concern to foreign nations.  Liberty demands
self-government, but not the right to interfere with others.  The
greatest degree of liberty is not secured by anarchy.  The
reconciliation of liberty with government is a difficult problem, but
it is one which any political theory must face.

The essence of government is the use of force in accordance with law
to secure certain ends which the holders of power consider desirable.
The coercion of an individual or a group by force is always in itself
more or less harmful.  But if there were no government, the result
would not be an absence of force in men's relations to each other; it
would merely be the exercise of force by those who had strong
predatory instincts, necessitating either slavery or a perpetual
readiness to repel force with force on the part of those whose
instincts were less violent.  This is the state of affairs at present
in international relations, owing to the fact that no international
government exists.  The results of anarchy between states should
suffice to persuade us that anarchism has no solution to offer for the
evils of the world.

There is probably one purpose, and only one, for which the use of
force by a government is beneficent, and that is to diminish the total
amount of force used m the world.  It is clear, for example, that the
legal prohibition of murder diminishes the total amount of violence in
the world.  And no one would maintain that parents should have
unlimited freedom to ill-treat their children.  So long as some men
wish to do violence to others, there cannot be complete liberty, for
either the wish to do violence must be restrained, or the victims must
be left to suffer.  For this reason, although individuals and
societies should have the utmost freedom as regards their own affairs,
they ought not to have complete freedom as regards their dealings with
others.  To give freedom to the strong to oppress the weak is not the
way to secure the greatest possible amount of freedom in the world.
This is the basis of the socialist revolt against the kind of freedom
which used to be advocated by _laissez-faire_ economists.

Democracy is a device--the best so far invented--for diminishing as
much as possible the interference of governments with liberty.  If a
nation is divided into two sections which cannot both have their way,
democracy theoretically insures that the majority shall have their
way.  But democracy is not at all an adequate device unless it is
accompanied by a very great amount of devolution.  Love of uniformity,
or the mere pleasure of interfering, or dislike of differing tastes
and temperaments, may often lead a majority to control a minority in
matters which do not really concern the majority.  We should none of
us like to have the internal affairs of Great Britain settled by a
parliament of the world, if ever such a body came into existence.
Nevertheless, there are matters which such a body could settle much
better than any existing instrument of government.

The theory of the legitimate use of force in human affairs, where a
government exists, seems clear.  Force should only be used against
those who attempt to use force against others, or against those who
will not respect the law in cases where a common decision is necessary
and a minority are opposed to the action of the majority.  These seem
legitimate occasions for the use of force; and they should be
legitimate occasions in international affairs, if an international
government existed.  The problem of the legitimate occasions for the
use of force in the absence of a government is a different one, with
which we are not at present concerned.

Although a government must have the power to use force, and may on
occasion use it legitimately, the aim of the reformers to have such
institutions as will diminish the need for actual coercion will be
found to have this effect.  Most of us abstain, for instance, from
theft, not because it is illegal, but because we feel no desire to
steal.  The more men learn to live creatively rather than
possessively, the less their wishes will lead them to thwart others or
to attempt violent interference with their liberty.  Most of the
conflicts of interests, which lead individuals or organizations into
disputes, are purely imaginary, and would be seen to be so if men
aimed more at the goods in which all can share, and less at those
private possessions that are the source of strife.  In proportion as
men live creatively, they cease to wish to interfere with others by
force.  Very many matters in which, at present, common action is
thought indispensable, might well be left to individual decision.  It
used to be thought absolutely necessary that all the inhabitants of a
country should have the same religion, but we now know that there is
no such necessity.  In like manner it will be found, as men grow more
tolerant in their instincts, that many uniformities now insisted upon
are useless and even harmful.

Good political institutions would weaken the impulse toward force and
domination in two ways: first, by increasing the opportunities for the
creative impulses, and by shaping education so as to strengthen these
impulses; secondly, by diminishing the outlets for the possessive
instincts.  The diffusion of power, both in the political and the
economic sphere, instead of its concentration in the hands of
officials and captains of industry, would greatly diminish the
opportunities for acquiring the habit of command, out of which the
desire for exercising tyranny is apt to spring.  Autonomy, both for
districts and for organizations, would leave fewer occasions when
governments were called upon to make decisions as to other people's
concerns.  And the abolition of capitalism and the wage system would
remove the chief incentive to fear and greed, those correlative
passions by which all free life is choked and gagged.

Few men seem to realize how many of the evils from which we suffer are
wholly unnecessary, and that they could be abolished by a united
effort within a few years.  If a majority in every civilized country
so desired, we could, within twenty years, abolish all abject poverty,
quite half the illness in the world, the whole economic slavery which
binds down nine tenths of our population; we could fill the world with
beauty and joy, and secure the reign of universal peace.  It is only
because men are apathetic that this is not achieved, only because
imagination is sluggish, and what always has been is regarded as what
always must be.  With good-will, generosity, intelligence, these
things could be brought about.




Chapter II: Capitalism and the Wage System


I

The world is full of preventible evils which most men would be glad to
see prevented.

Nevertheless, these evils persist, and nothing effective is done
toward abolishing them.

This paradox produces astonishment in inexperienced reformers, and too
often produces disillusionment in those who have come to know the
difficulty of changing human institutions.

War is recognized as an evil by an immense majority in every civilized
country; but this recognition does not prevent war.

The unjust distribution of wealth must be obviously an evil to those
who are not prosperous, and they are nine tenths of the population.
Nevertheless it continues unabated.

The tyranny of the holders of power is a source of needless suffering
and misfortune to very large sections of mankind; but power remains in
few hands, and tends, if anything, to grow more concentrated.

I wish first to study the evils of our present institutions, and the
causes of the very limited success of reformers in the past, and then
to suggest reasons for the hope of a more lasting and permanent
success in the near future.

The war has come as a challenge to all who desire a better world.  The
system which cannot save mankind from such an appalling disaster is at
fault somewhere, and cannot be amended in any lasting way unless the
danger of great wars in the future can be made very small.

But war is only the final flower of an evil tree.  Even in times of
peace, most men live lives of monotonous labor, most women are
condemned to a drudgery which almost kills the possibility of
happiness before youth is past, most children are allowed to grow up
in ignorance of all that would enlarge their thoughts or stimulate
their imagination.  The few who are more fortunate are rendered
illiberal by their unjust privileges, and oppressive through fear of
the awakening indignation of the masses.  From the highest to the
lowest, almost all men are absorbed in the economic struggle: the
struggle to acquire what is their due or to retain what is not their
due.  Material possessions, in fact or in desire, dominate our
outlook, usually to the exclusion of all generous and creative
impulses.  Possessiveness--the passion to have and to hold--is the
ultimate source of war, and the foundation of all the ills from which
the political world is suffering.  Only by diminishing the strength of
this passion and its hold upon our daily lives can new institutions
bring permanent benefit to mankind.

Institutions which will diminish the sway of greed are possible, but
only through a complete reconstruction of our whole economic system.
Capitalism and the wage system must be abolished; they are twin
monsters which are eating up the life of the world.  In place of them
we need a system which will hold in cheek men's predatory impulses,
and will diminish the economic injustice that allows some to be rich
in idleness while others are poor in spite of unremitting labor; but
above all we need a system which will destroy the tyranny of the
employer, by making men at the same time secure against destitution
and able to find scope for individual initiative in the control of the
industry by which they live.  A better system can do all these things,
and can be established by the democracy whenever it grows weary of
enduring evils which there is no reason to endure.

We may distinguish four purposes at which an economic system may aim:
first, it may aim at the greatest possible production of goods and at
facilitating technical progress; second, it may aim at securing
distributive justice; third, it may aim at giving security against
destitution; and, fourth, it may aim at liberating creative impulses
and diminishing possessive impulses.

Of these four purposes the last is the most important.  Security is
chiefly important as a means to it.  State socialism, though it might
give material security and more justice than we have at present, would
probably fail to liberate creative impulses or produce a progressive
society.

Our present system fails in all four purposes.  It is chiefly defended
on the ground that it achieves the first of the four purposes, namely,
the greatest possible production of material goods, but it only does
this in a very short-sighted way, by methods which are wasteful in the
long run both of human material and of natural resources.

Capitalistic enterprise involves a ruthless belief in the importance
of increasing material production to the utmost possible extent now
and in the immediate future.  In obedience to this belief, new
portions of the earth's surface are continually brought under the sway
of industrialism.  Vast tracts of Africa become recruiting grounds for
the labor required in the gold and diamond mines of the Rand,
Rhodesia, and Kimberley; for this purpose, the population is
demoralized, taxed, driven into revolt, and exposed to the
contamination of European vice and disease.  Healthy and vigorous
races from Southern Europe are tempted to America, where sweating and
slum life reduce their vitality if they do not actually cause their
death.  What damage is done to our own urban populations by the
conditions under which they live, we all know.  And what is true of
the human riches of the world is no less true of the physical
resources.  The mines, forests, and wheat-fields of the world are all
being exploited at a rate which must practically exhaust them at no
distant date.  On the side of material production, the world is living
too fast; in a kind of delirium, almost all the energy of the world
has rushed into the immediate production of something, no matter what,
and no matter at what cost.  And yet our present system is defended on
the ground that it safeguards progress!

It cannot be said that our present economic system is any more
successful in regard to the other three objects which ought to be
aimed at.  Among the many obvious evils of capitalism and the wage
system, none are more glaring than that they encourage predatory
instincts, that they allow economic injustice, and that they give
great scope to the tyranny of the employer.

As to predatory instincts, we may say, broadly speaking, that in a
state of nature there would be two ways of acquiring riches--one by
production, the other by robbery.  Under our existing system, although
what is recognized as robbery is forbidden, there are nevertheless
many ways of becoming rich without contributing anything to the wealth
of the community.  Ownership of land or capital, whether acquired or
inherited, gives a legal right to a permanent income.  Although most
people have to produce in order to live, a privileged minority are
able to live in luxury without producing anything at all.  As these
are the men who are not only the most fortunate but also the most
respected, there is a general desire to enter their ranks, and a
widespread unwillingness to face the fact that there is no
justification whatever for incomes derived in this way.  And apart
from the passive enjoyment of rent or interest, the methods of
acquiring wealth are very largely predatory.  It is not, as a rule, by
means of useful inventions, or of any other action which increases the
general wealth of the community, that men amass fortunes; it is much
more often by skill in exploiting or circumventing others.  Nor is it
only among the rich that our present regime promotes a narrowly
acquisitive spirit.  The constant risk of destitution compels most men
to fill a great part of their time and thought with the economic
struggle.  There is a theory that this increases the total output of
wealth by the community.  But for reasons to which I shall return
later, I believe this theory to be wholly mistaken.

Economic injustice is perhaps the most obvious evil of our present
system.  It would be utterly absurd to maintain that the men who
inherit great wealth deserve better of the community than those who
have to work for their living.  I am not prepared to maintain that
economic justice requires an exactly equal income for everybody.  Some
kinds of work require a larger income for efficiency than others do;
but there is economic injustice as soon as a man has more than his
share, unless it is because his efficiency in his work requires it, or
as a reward for some definite service.  But this point is so obvious
that it needs no elaboration.

The modern growth of monopolies in the shape of trusts, cartels,
federations of employers and so on has greatly increased the power of
the capitalist to levy toll on the community.  This tendency will not
cease of itself, but only through definite action on the part of those
who do not profit by the capitalist regime.  Unfortunately the
distinction between the proletariat and the capitalist is not so sharp
as it was in the minds of socialist theorizers.  Trade-unions have
funds in various securities; friendly societies are large capitalists;
and many individuals eke out their wages by invested savings.  All
this increases the difficulty of any clear-cut radical change in our
economic system.  But it does not diminish the desirability of such a
change.

Such a system as that suggested by the French syndicalists, in which
each trade would be self-governing and completely independent, without
the control of any central authority, would not secure economic
justice.  Some trades are in a much stronger bargaining position than
others.  Coal and transport, for example, could paralyze the national
life, and could levy blackmail by threatening to do so.  On the other
hand, such people as school teachers, for example, could rouse very
little terror by the threat of a strike and would be in a very weak
bargaining position.  Justice can never be secured by any system of
unrestrained force exercised by interested parties in their own
interests.  For this reason the abolition of the state, which the
syndicalists seem to desire, would be a measure not compatible with
economic justice.

The tyranny of the employer, which at present robs the greater part of
most men's lives of all liberty and all initiative, is unavoidable so
long as the employer retains the right of dismissal with consequent
loss of pay.  This right is supposed to be essential in order that men
may have an incentive to work thoroughly.  But as men grow more
civilized, incentives based on hope become increasingly preferable to
those that are based on fear.  It would be far better that men should
be rewarded for working well than that they should be punished for
working badly.  This system is already in operation in the civil
service, where a man is only dismissed for some exceptional degree of
vice or virtue, such as murder or illegal abstention from it.
Sufficient pay to ensure a livelihood ought to be given to every
person who is willing to work, independently of the question whether
the particular work at which he is skilled is wanted at the moment or
not.  If it is not wanted, some new trade which is wanted ought to be
taught at the public expense.  Why, for example, should a hansom-cab
driver be allowed to suffer on account of the introduction of taxies?
He has not committed any crime, and the fact that his work is no
longer wanted is due to causes entirely outside his control.  Instead
of being allowed to starve, he ought to be given instruction in motor
driving or in whatever other trade may seem most suitable.  At
present, owing to the fact that all industrial changes tend to cause
hardships to some section of wage-earners, there is a tendency to
technical conservatism on the part of labor, a dislike of innovations,
new processes, and new methods.  But such changes, if they are in the
permanent interest of the community, ought to be carried out without
allowing them to bring unmerited loss to those sections of the
community whose labor is no longer wanted in the old form.  The
instinctive conservatism of mankind is sure to make all processes of
production change more slowly than they should.  It is a pity to add
to this by the avoidable conservatism which is forced upon organized
labor at present through the unjust workings of a change.

It will be said that men will not work well if the fear of dismissal
does not spur them on.  I think it is only a small percentage of whom
this would be true at present.  And those of whom it would be true
might easily become industrious if they were given more congenial work
or a wiser training.  The residue who cannot be coaxed into industry
by any such methods are probably to be regarded as pathological cases,
requiring medical rather than penal treatment.  And against this
residue must be set the very much larger number who are now ruined in
health or in morale by the terrible uncertainty of their livelihood
and the great irregularity of their employment.  To very many,
security would bring a quite new possibility of physical and moral
health.

The most dangerous aspect of the tyranny of the employer is the power
which it gives him of interfering with men's activities outside their
working hours.  A man may be dismissed because the employer dislikes
his religion or his politics, or chooses to think his private life
immoral.  He may be dismissed because he tries to produce a spirit of
independence among his fellow employees.  He may fail completely to
find employment merely on the ground that he is better educated than
most and therefore more dangerous.  Such cases actually occur at
present.  This evil would not be remedied, but rather intensified,
under state socialism, because, where the State is the only employer,
there is no refuge from its prejudices such as may now accidentally
arise through the differing opinions of different men.  The State
would be able to enforce any system of beliefs it happened to like,
and it is almost certain that it would do so.  Freedom of thought
would be penalized, and all independence of spirit would die out.

Any rigid system would involve this evil.  It is very necessary that
there should be diversity and lack of complete systematization.
Minorities must be able to live and develop their opinions freely.  If
this is not secured, the instinct of persecution and conformity will
force all men into one mold and make all vital progress impossible.

For these reasons, no one ought to be allowed to suffer destitution so
long as he or she is _willing_ to work.  And no kind of inquiry ought
to be made into opinion or private life.  It is only on this basis
that it is possible to build up an economic system not founded upon
tyranny and terror.


II

The power of the economic reformer is limited by the technical
productivity of labor.  So long as it was necessary to the bare
subsistence of the human race that most men should work very long
hours for a pittance, so long no civilization was possible except an
aristocratic one; if there were to be men with sufficient leisure for
any mental life, there had to be others who were sacrificed for the
good of the few.  But the time when such a system was necessary has
passed away with the progress of machinery.  It would be possible now,
if we had a wise economic system, for all who have mental needs to
find satisfaction for them.  By a few hours a day of manual work, a
man can produce as much as is necessary for his own subsistence; and
if he is willing to forgo luxuries, that is all that the community has
a right to demand of him.  It ought to be open to all who so desire to
do short hours of work for little pay, and devote their leisure to
whatever pursuit happens to attract them.  No doubt the great majority
of those who chose this course would spend their time in mere
amusement, as most of the rich do at present.  But it could not be
said, in such a society, that they were parasites upon the labor of
others.  And there would be a minority who would give their hours of
nominal idleness to science or art or literature, or some other
pursuit out of which fundamental progress may come.  In all such
matters, organization and system can only do harm.  The one thing that
can be done is to provide opportunity, without repining at the waste
that results from most men failing to make good use of the
opportunity.

But except in cases of unusual laziness or eccentric ambition, most
men would elect to do a full day's work for a full day's pay.  For
these, who would form the immense majority, the important thing is
that ordinary work should, as far as possible, afford interest and
independence and scope for initiative.  These things are more
important than income, as soon as a certain minimum has been reached.
They can be secured by gild socialism, by industrial self-government
subject to state control as regards the relations of a trade to the
rest of the community.  So far as I know, they cannot be secured in
any other way.

Guild socialism, as advocated by Mr. Orage and the "New Age," is
associated with a polemic against "political" action, and in favor of
direct economic action by trade-unions.  It shares this with
syndicalism, from which most of what is new in it is derived.  But I
see no reason for this attitude; political and economic action seem to
me equally necessary, each in its own time and place.  I think there
is danger in the attempt to use the machinery of the present
capitalist state for socialistic purposes.  But there is need of
political action to transform the machinery of the state, side by side
with the transformation which we hope to see in economic institutions.
In this country, neither transformation is likely to be brought about
by a sudden revolution; we must expect each to come step by step, if
at all, and I doubt if either could or should advance very far without
the other.

The economic system we should ultimately wish to see would be one in
which the state would be the sole recipient of economic rent, while
private capitalistic enterprises should be replaced by self-governing
combinations of those who actually do the work.  It ought to be
optional whether a man does a whole day's work for a whole day's pay,
or half a day's work for half a day's pay, except in cases where such
an arrangement would cause practical inconvenience.  A man's pay
should not cease through the accident of his work being no longer
needed, but should continue so long as he is willing to work, a new
trade being taught him at the public expense, if necessary.
Unwillingness to work should be treated medically or educationally,
when it could not be overcome by a change to some more congenial
occupation.

The workers in a given industry should all be combined in one
autonomous unit, and their work should not be subject to any outside
control.  The state should fix the price at which they produce, but
should leave the industry self-governing in all other respects.  In
fixing prices, the state should, as far as possible, allow each
industry to profit by any improvements which it might introduce into
its own processes, but should endeavor to prevent undeserved loss or
gain through changes in external economic conditions.  In this way
there would be every incentive to progress, with the least possible
danger of unmerited destitution.  And although large economic
organizations will continue, as they are bound to do, there will be a
diffusion of power which will take away the sense of individual
impotence from which men and women suffer at present.


III

Some men, though they may admit that such a system would be desirable,
will argue that it is impossible to bring it about, and that therefore
we must concentrate on more immediate objects.

I think it must be conceded that a political party ought to have
proximate aims, measures which it hopes to carry in the next session
or the next parliament, as well as a more distant goal.  Marxian
socialism, as it existed in Germany, seemed to me to suffer in this
way: although the party was numerically powerful, it was politically
weak, because it had no minor measures to demand while waiting for the
revolution.  And when, at last, German socialism was captured by those
who desired a less impracticable policy, the modification which
occurred was of exactly the wrong kind: acquiescence in bad policies,
such as militarism and imperialism, rather than advocacy of partial
reforms which, however inadequate, would still have been steps in the
right direction.

A similar defect was inherent in the policy of French syndicalism as
it existed before the war.  Everything was to wait for the general
strike; after adequate preparation, one day the whole proletariat
would unanimously refuse to work, the property owners would
acknowledge their defeat, and agree to abandon all their privileges
rather than starve.  This is a dramatic conception; but love of drama
is a great enemy of true vision.  Men cannot be trained, except under
very rare circumstances, to do something suddenly which is very
different from what they have been doing before.  If the general
strike were to succeed, the victors, despite their anarchism, would be
compelled at once to form an administration, to create a new police
force to prevent looting and wanton destruction, to establish a
provisional government issuing dictatorial orders to the various
sections of revolutionaries.  Now the syndicalists are opposed in
principle to all political action; they would feel that they were
departing from their theory in taking the necessary practical steps,
and they would be without the required training because of their
previous abstention from politics.  For these reasons it is likely
that, even after a syndicalist revolution, actual power would fall
into the hands of men who were not really syndicalists.

Another objection to a program which is to be realized suddenly at
some remote date by a revolution or a general strike is that
enthusiasm flags when there is nothing to do meanwhile, and no partial
success to lessen the weariness of waiting.  The only sort of movement
which can succeed by such methods is one where the sentiment and the
program are both very simple, as is the case in rebellions of
oppressed nations.  But the line of demarcation between capitalist and
wage-earner is not sharp, like the line between Turk and Armenian, or
between an Englishman and a native of India.  Those who have advocated
the social revolution have been mistaken in their political methods,
chiefly because they have not realized how many people there are in
the community whose sympathies and interests lie half on the side of
capital, half on the side of labor.  These people make a clear-cut
revolutionary policy very difficult.

For these reasons, those who aim at an economic reconstruction which
is not likely to be completed to-morrow must, if they are to have any
hope of success, be able to approach their goal by degrees, through
measures which are of some use in themselves, even if they should not
ultimately lead to the desired end.  There must be activities which
train men for those that they are ultimately to carry out, and there
must be possible achievements in the near future, not only a vague
hope of a distant paradise.

But although I believe that all this is true, I believe no less firmly
that really vital and radical reform requires some vision beyond the
immediate future, some realization of what human beings might make of
human life if they chose.  Without some such hope, men will not have
the energy and enthusiasm necessary to overcome opposition, or the
steadfastness to persist when their aims are for the moment unpopular.
Every man who has really sincere desire for any great amelioration in
the conditions of life has first to face ridicule, then persecution,
then cajolery and attempts at subtle corruption.  We know from painful
experience how few pass unscathed through these three ordeals.  The
last especially, when the reformer is shown all the kingdoms of the
earth, is difficult, indeed almost impossible, except for those who
have made their ultimate goal vivid to themselves by clear and
definite thought.

Economic systems are concerned essentially with the production and
distribution of material goods.  Our present system is wasteful on the
production side, and unjust on the side of distribution.  It involves
a life of slavery to economic forces for the great majority of the
community, and for the minority a degree of power over the lives of
others which no man ought to have.  In a good community the production
of the necessaries of existence would be a mere preliminary to the
important and interesting part of life, except for those who find a
pleasure in some part of the work of producing necessaries.  It is not
in the least necessary that economic needs should dominate man as they
do at present.  This is rendered necessary at present, partly by the
inequalities of wealth, partly by the fact that things of real value,
such as a good education, are difficult to acquire, except for the
well-to-do.

Private ownership of land and capital is not defensible on grounds of
justice, or on the ground that it is an economical way of producing
what the community needs.  But the chief objections to it are that it
stunts the lives of men and women, that it enshrines a ruthless
possessiveness in all the respect which is given to success, that it
leads men to fill the greater part of their time and thought with the
acquisition of purely material goods, and that it affords a terrible
obstacle to the advancement of civilization and creative energy.

The approach to a system free from these evils need not be sudden; it
is perfectly possible to proceed step by step towards economic freedom
and industrial self-government.  It is not true that there is any
outward difficulty in creating the kind of institutions that we have
been considering.  If organized labor wishes to create them, nothing
could stand in its way.  The difficulty involved is merely the
difficulty of inspiring men with hope, of giving them enough
imagination to see that the evils from which they suffer are
unnecessary, and enough thought to understand how the evils are to be
cured.  This is a difficulty which can be overcome by time and energy.
But it will not be overcome if the leaders of organized labor have no
breadth of outlook, no vision, no hopes beyond some slight superficial
improvement within the framework of the existing system.
Revolutionary action may be unnecessary, but revolutionary thought is
indispensable, and, as the outcome of thought, a rational and
constructive hope.




Chapter III: Pitfalls in Socialism


I

In its early days, socialism was a revolutionary movement of which the
object was the liberation of the wage-earning classes and the
establishment of freedom and justice.  The passage from capitalism to
the new regime was to be sudden and violent: capitalists were to be
expropriated without compensation, and their power was not to be
replaced by any new authority.

Gradually a change came over the spirit of socialism.  In France,
socialists became members of the government, and made and unmade
parliamentary majorities.  In Germany, social democracy grew so strong
that it became impossible for it to resist the temptation to barter
away some of its intransigeance in return for government recognition
of its claims.  In England, the Fabians taught the advantage of reform
as against revolution, and of conciliatory bargaining as against
irreconcilable antagonism.

The method of gradual reform has many merits as compared to the method
of revolution, and I have no wish to preach revolution.  But gradual
reform has certain dangers, to wit, the ownership or control of
businesses hitherto in private hands, and by encouraging legislative
interference for the benefit of various sections of the wage-earning
classes.  I think it is at least doubtful whether such measures do
anything at all to contribute toward the ideals which inspired the
early socialists and still inspire the great majority of those who
advocate some form of socialism.

Let us take as an illustration such a measure as state purchase of
railways.  This is a typical object of state socialism, thoroughly
practicable, already achieved in many countries, and clearly the sort
of step that must be taken in any piecemeal approach to complete
collectivism.  Yet I see no reason to believe that any real advance
toward democracy, freedom, or economic justice is achieved when a
state takes over the railways after full compensation to the
shareholders.

Economic justice demands a diminution, if not a total abolition, of
the proportion of the national income which goes to the recipients of
rent and interest.  But when the holders of railway shares are given
government stock to replace their shares, they are given the prospect
of an income in perpetuity equal to what they might reasonably expect
to have derived from their shares.  Unless there is reason to expect a
great increase in the earnings of railways, the whole operation does
nothing to alter the distribution of wealth.  This could only be
effected if the present owners were expropriated, or paid less than
the market value, or given a mere life-interest as compensation.  When
full value is given, economic justice is not advanced in any degree.

There is equally little advance toward freedom.  The men employed on
the railway have no more voice than they had before in the management
of the railway, or in the wages and conditions of work.  Instead of
having to fight the directors, with the possibility of an appeal to
the government, they now have to fight the government directly; and
experience does not lead to the view that a government department has
any special tenderness toward the claims of labor.  If they strike,
they have to contend against the whole organized power of the state,
which they can only do successfully if they happen to have a strong
public opinion on their side.  In view of the influence which the
state can always exercise on the press, public opinion is likely to be
biased against them, particularly when a nominally progressive
government is in power.  There will no longer be the possibility of
divergences between the policies of different railways.  Railway men
in England derived advantages for many years from the comparatively
liberal policy of the North Eastern Railway, which they were able to
use as an argument for a similar policy elsewhere.  Such possibilities
are excluded by the dead uniformity of state administration.

And there is no real advance toward democracy.  The administration of
the railways will be in the hands of officials whose bias and
associations separate them from labor, and who will develop an
autocratic temper through the habit of power.  The democratic
machinery by which these officials are nominally controlled is
cumbrous and remote, and can only be brought into operation on
first-class issues which rouse the interest of the whole nation.  Even
then it is very likely that the superior education of the officials
and the government, combined with the advantages of their position,
will enable them to mislead the public as to the issues, and alienate
the general sympathy even from the most excellent cause.

I do not deny that these evils exist at present; I say only that they
will not be remedied by such measures as the nationalization of
railways in the present economic and political environment.  A greater
upheaval, and a greater change in men's habits of mind, is necessary
for any really vital progress.


II

State socialism, even in a nation which possesses the form of
political democracy, is not a truly democratic system.  The way in
which it fails to be democratic may be made plain by an analogy from
the political sphere.  Every democrat recognizes that the Irish ought
to have self-government for Irish affairs, and ought not to be told
that they have no grievance because they share in the Parliament of
the United Kingdom.  It is essential to democracy that any group of
citizens whose interests or desires separate them at all widely from
the rest of the community should be free to decide their internal
affairs for themselves.  And what is true of national or local groups
is equally true of economic groups, such as miners or railway men.
The national machinery of general elections is by no means sufficient
to secure for groups of this kind the freedom which they ought to
have.

The power of officials, which is a great and growing danger in the
modern state, arises from the fact that the majority of the voters,
who constitute the only ultimate popular control over officials, are
as a rule not interested in any one particular question, and are
therefore not likely to interfere effectively against an official who
is thwarting the wishes of the minority who are interested.  The
official is nominally subject to indirect popular control, but not to
the control of those who are directly affected by his action.  The
bulk of the public will either never hear about the matter in dispute,
or, if they do hear, will form a hasty opinion based upon inadequate
information, which is far more likely to come from the side of the
officials than from the section of the community which is affected by
the question at issue.  In an important political issue, some degree
of knowledge is likely to be diffused in time; but in other matters
there is little hope that this will happen.

It may be said that the power of officials is much less dangerous than
the power of capitalists, because officials have no economic interests
that are opposed to those of wage-earners.  But this argument involves
far too simple a theory of political human nature--a theory which
orthodox socialism adopted from the classical political economy, and
has tended to retain in spite of growing evidence of its falsity.
Economic self-interest, and even economic class-interest, is by no
means the only important political motive.  Officials, whose salary is
generally quite unaffected by their decisions on particular questions,
are likely, if they are of average honesty, to decide according to
their view of the public interest; but their view will none the less
have a bias which will often lead them wrong.  It is important to
understand this bias before entrusting our destinies too unreservedly
to government departments.

The first thing to observe is that, in any very large organization,
and above all in a great state, officials and legislators are usually
very remote from those whom they govern, and not imaginatively
acquainted with the conditions of life to which their decisions will
be applied.  This makes them ignorant of much that they ought to know,
even when they are industrious and willing to learn whatever can be
taught by statistics and blue-books.  The one thing they understand
intimately is the office routine and the administrative rules.  The
result is an undue anxiety to secure a uniform system.  I have heard
of a French minister of education taking out his watch, and remarking,
"At this moment all the children of such and such an age in France are
learning so and so." This is the ideal of the administrator, an ideal
utterly fatal to free growth, initiative, experiment, or any far
reaching innovation.  Laziness is not one of the motives recognized in
textbooks on political theory, because all ordinary knowledge of human
nature is considered unworthy of the dignity of these works; yet we
all know that laziness is an immensely powerful motive with all but a
small minority of mankind.

Unfortunately, in this case laziness is reinforced by love of power,
which leads energetic officials to create the systems which lazy
officials like to administer.  The energetic official inevitably
dislikes anything that he does not control.  His official sanction
must be obtained before anything can be done.  Whatever he finds in
existence he wishes to alter in some way, so as to have the
satisfaction of feeling his power and making it felt.  If he is
conscientious, he will think out some perfectly uniform and rigid
scheme which he believes to be the best possible, and he will then
impose this scheme ruthlessly, whatever promising growths he may have
to lop down for the sake of symmetry.  The result inevitably has
something of the deadly dullness of a new rectangular town, as
compared with the beauty and richness of an ancient city which has
lived and grown with the separate lives and individualities of many
generations.  What has grown is always more living than what has been
decreed; but the energetic official will always prefer the tidiness of
what he has decreed to the apparent disorder of spontaneous growth.

The mere possession of power tends to produce a love of power, which
is a very dangerous motive, because the only sure proof of power
consists in preventing others from doing what they wish to do.  The
essential theory of democracy is the diffusion of power among the
whole people, so that the evils produced by one man's possession of
great power shall be obviated.  But the diffusion of power through
democracy is only effective when the voters take an interest in the
question involved.  When the question does not interest them, they do
not attempt to control the administration, and all actual power passes
into the hands of officials.

For this reason, the true ends of democracy are not achieved by state
socialism or by any system which places great power in the hands of
men subject to no popular control except that which is more or less
indirectly exercised through parliament.

Any fresh survey of men's political actions shows that, in those who
have enough energy to be politically effective, love of power is a
stronger motive than economic self-interest.  Love of power actuates
the great millionaires, who have far more money than they can spend,
but continue to amass wealth merely in order to control more and more
of the world's finance.[2]  Love of power is obviously the ruling
motive of many politicians.  It is also the chief cause of wars, which
are admittedly almost always a bad speculation from the mere point of
view of wealth.  For this reason, a new economic system which merely
attacks economic motives and does not interfere with the concentration
of power is not likely to effect any very great improvement in the
world.  This is one of the chief reasons for regarding state socialism
with suspicion.

[2] Cf. J. A. Hobson, "The Evolution of Modern Capitalism."


III

The problem of the distribution of power is a more difficult one than
the problem of the distribution of wealth.  The machinery of
representative government has concentrated on _ultimate_ power as the
only important matter, and has ignored immediate executive power.
Almost nothing has been done to democratize administration.
Government officials, in virtue of their income, security, and social
position, are likely to be on the side of the rich, who have been
their daily associates ever since the time of school and college.  And
whether or not they are on the side of the rich, they are not likely,
for the reasons we have been considering, to be genuinely in favor of
progress.  What applies to government officials applies also to
members of Parliament, with the sole difference that they have had to
recommend themselves to a constituency.  This, however, only adds
hypocrisy to the other qualities of a ruling caste.  Whoever has stood
in the lobby of the House of Commons watching members emerge with
wandering eye and hypothetical smile, until the constituent is espied,
his arm taken, "my dear fellow" whispered in his ear, and his steps
guided toward the inner precincts--whoever, observing this, has
realized that these are the arts by which men become and remain
legislators, can hardly fail to feel that democracy as it exists is
not an absolutely perfect instrument of government.  It is a painful
fact that the ordinary voter, at any rate in England, is quite blind
to insincerity.  The man who does not care about any definite
political measures can generally be won by corruption or flattery,
open or concealed; the man who is set on securing reforms will
generally prefer an ambitious windbag to a man who desires the public
good without possessing a ready tongue.  And the ambitious windbag, as
soon as he has become a power by the enthusiasm he has aroused, will
sell his influence to the governing clique, sometimes openly,
sometimes by the more subtle method of intentionally failing at a
crisis.  This is part of the normal working of democracy as embodied
in representative institutions.  Yet a cure must be found if democracy
is not to remain a farce.

One of the sources of evil in modern large democracies is the fact
that most of the electorate have no direct or vital interest in most
of the questions that arise.  Should Welsh children be allowed the use
of the Welsh language in schools?  Should gipsies be compelled to
abandon their nomadic life at the bidding of the education
authorities?  Should miners have an eight-hour day?  Should Christian
Scientists be compelled to call in doctors in case of serious illness?
These are matters of passionate interest to certain sections of the
community, but of very little interest to the great majority.  If they
are decided according to the wishes of the numerical majority, the
intense desires of a minority will be overborne by the very slight and
uninformed whims of the indifferent remainder.  If the minority are
geographically concentrated, so that they can decide elections in a
certain number of constituencies, like the Welsh and the miners, they
have a good chance of getting their way, by the wholly beneficent
process which its enemies describe as log-rolling.  But if they are
scattered and politically feeble, like the gipsies and the Christian
Scientists, they stand a very poor chance against the prejudices of
the majority.  Even when they are geographically concentrated, like
the Irish, they may fail to obtain their wishes, because they arouse
some hostility or some instinct of domination in the majority.  Such a
state of affairs is the negation of all democratic principles.

The tyranny of the majority is a very real danger.  It is a mistake to
suppose that the majority is necessarily right.  On every new question
the majority is always wrong at first.  In matters where the state
must act as a whole, such as tariffs, for example, decision by
majorities is probably the best method that can be devised.  But there
are a great many questions in which there is no need of a uniform
decision.  Religion is recognized as one of these.  Education ought to
be one, provided a certain minimum standard is attained.  Military
service clearly ought to be one.  Wherever divergent action by
different groups is possible without anarchy, it ought to be
permitted.  In such cases it will be found by those who consider past
history that, whenever any new fundamental issue arises, the majority
are in the wrong, because they are guided by prejudice and habit.
Progress comes through the gradual effect of a minority in converting
opinion and altering custom.  At one time--not so very long ago--it
was considered monstrous wickedness to maintain that old women ought
not to be burnt as witches.  If those who held this opinion had been
forcibly suppressed, we should still be steeped in medieval
superstition.  For such reasons, it is of the utmost importance that
the majority should refrain from imposing its will as regards matters
in which uniformity is not absolutely necessary.


IV

The cure for the evils and dangers which we have been considering is a
very great extension of devolution and federal government.  Wherever
there is a national consciousness, as in Wales and Ireland, the area
in which it exists ought to be allowed to decide all purely local
affairs without external interference.  But there are many matters
which ought to be left to the management, not of local groups, but of
trade groups, or of organizations embodying some set of opinions.  In
the East, men are subject to different laws according to the religion
they profess.  Something of this kind is necessary if any semblance of
liberty is to exist where there is great divergence in beliefs.

Some matters are essentially geographical; for instance, gas and
water, roads, tariffs, armies and navies.  These must be decided by an
authority representing an area.  How large the area ought to be,
depends upon accidents of topography and sentiment, and also upon the
nature of the matter involved.  Gas and water require a small area,
roads a somewhat larger one, while the only satisfactory area for an
army or a navy is the whole planet, since no smaller area will prevent
war.

But the proper unit in most economic questions, and also in most
questions that are intimately concerned with personal opinions, is not
geographical at all.  The internal management of railways ought not to
be in the hands of the geographical state, for reasons which we have
already considered.  Still less ought it to be in the hands of a set
of irresponsible capitalists.  The only truly democratic system would
be one which left the internal management of railways in the hands of
the men who work on them.  These men should elect the general manager,
and a parliament of directors if necessary.  All questions of wages,
conditions of labor, running of trains, and acquisition of material,
should be in the hands of a body responsible only to those actually
engaged in the work of the railway.

The same arguments apply to other large trades: mining, iron and
steel, cotton, and so on.  British trade-unionism, it seems to me, has
erred in conceiving labor and capital as both permanent forces, which
were to be brought to some equality of strength by the organization of
labor.  This seems to me too modest an ideal.  The ideal which I
should wish to substitute involves the conquest of democracy and
self-government in the economic sphere as in the political sphere, and
the total abolition of the power now wielded by the capitalist.  The
man who works on a railway ought to have a voice in the government of
the railway, just as much as the man who works in a state has a right
to a voice in the management of his state.  The concentration of
business initiative in the hands of the employers is a great evil, and
robs the employees of their legitimate share of interest in the larger
problems of their trade.

French syndicalists were the first to advocate the system of trade
autonomy as a better solution than state socialism.  But in their view
the trades were to be independent, almost like sovereign states at
present.  Such a system would not promote peace, any more than it does
at present in international relations.  In the affairs of any body of
men, we may broadly distinguish what may be called questions of home
politics from questions of foreign politics.  Every group sufficiently
well-marked to constitute a political entity ought to be autonomous in
regard to internal matters, but not in regard to those that directly
affect the outside world.  If two groups are both entirely free as
regards their relations to each other, there is no way of averting the
danger of an open or covert appeal to force.  The relations of a group
of men to the outside world ought, whenever possible, to be controlled
by a neutral authority.  It is here that the state is necessary for
adjusting the relations between different trades.  The men who make
some commodity should be entirely free as regards hours of labor,
distribution of the total earnings of the trade, and all questions of
business management.  But they should not be free as regards the price
of what they produce, since price is a matter concerning their
relations to the rest of the community.  If there were nominal freedom
in regard to price, there would be a danger of a constant tug-of-war,
in which those trades which were most immediately necessary to the
existence of the community could always obtain an unfair advantage.
Force is no more admirable in the economic sphere than in dealings
between states.  In order to secure the maximum of freedom with the
minimum of force, the universal principle is: _Autonomy within each
politically important group, and a neutral authority for deciding
questions involving relations between groups_.  The neutral authority
should, of course, rest on a democratic basis, but should, if
possible, represent a constituency wider than that of the groups
concerned.  In international affairs the only adequate authority would
be one representing all civilized nations.

In order to prevent undue extension of the power of such authorities,
it is desirable and necessary that the various autonomous groups
should be very jealous of their liberties, and very ready to resist by
political means any encroachments upon their independence.  State
socialism does not tolerate such groups, each with their own officials
responsible to the group.  Consequently it abandons the internal
affairs of a group to the control of men not responsible to that group
or specially aware of its needs.  This opens the door to tyranny and
to the destruction of initiative.  These dangers are avoided by a
system which allows any group of men to combine for any given purpose,
provided it is not predatory, and to claim from the central authority
such self-government as is necessary to the carrying out of the
purpose.  Churches of various denominations afford an instance.  Their
autonomy was won by centuries of warfare and persecution.  It is to be
hoped that a less terrible struggle will be required to achieve the
same result in the economic sphere.  But whatever the obstacles, I
believe the importance of liberty is as great in the one case as it
has been admitted to be in the other.




Chapter IV: Individual Liberty and Public Control


I

Society cannot exist without law and order, and cannot advance except
through the initiative of vigorous innovators.  Yet law and order are
always hostile to innovations, and innovators are almost always, to
some extent, anarchists.  Those whose minds are dominated by fear of a
relapse towards barbarism will emphasize the importance of law and
order, while those who are inspired by the hope of an advance towards
civilization will usually be more conscious of the need of individual
initiative.  Both temperaments are necessary, and wisdom lies in
allowing each to operate freely where it is beneficent.  But those who
are on the side of law and order, since they are reinforced by custom
and the instinct for upholding the _status quo_, have no need of a
reasoned defense.  It is the innovators who have difficulty in being
allowed to exist and work.  Each generation believes that this
difficulty is a thing of the past, but each generation is only
tolerant of _past_ innovations.  Those of its own day are met with the
same persecution as though the principle of toleration had never been
heard of.

"In early society," says Westermarck, "customs are not only moral
rules, but the only moral rules ever thought of.  The savage strictly
complies with the Hegelian command that no man must have a private
conscience.  The following statement, which refers to the Tinnevelly
Shanars, may be quoted as a typical example: 'Solitary individuals
amongst them rarely adopt any new opinions, or any new course of
procedure.  They follow the multitude to do evil, and they follow the
multitude to do good.  They think in herds.'"[3]

[3] "The Origin and Development of the Moral Ideas," 2d edition,
Vol. I, p. 119.

Those among ourselves who have never thought a thought or done a deed
in the slightest degree different from the thoughts and deeds of our
neighbors will congratulate themselves on the difference between us
and the savage.  But those who have ever attempted any real innovation
cannot help feeling that the people they know are not so very unlike
the Tinnevelly Shanars.

Under the influence of socialism, even progressive opinion, in recent
years, has been hostile to individual liberty.  Liberty is associated,
in the minds of reformers, with _laissez-faire_, the Manchester School,
and the exploitation of women and children which resulted from what
was euphemistically called "free competition." All these things were
evil, and required state interference; in fact, there is need of an
immense increase of state action in regard to cognate evils which
still exist.  In everything that concerns the economic life of the
community, as regards both distribution and conditions of production,
what is required is more public control, not less--how much more, I
do not profess to know.

Another direction in which there is urgent need of the substitution of
law and order for anarchy is international relations.  At present,
each sovereign state has complete individual freedom, subject only to
the sanction of war.  This individual freedom will have to be
curtailed in regard to external relations if wars are ever to cease.

But when we pass outside the sphere of material possessions, we find
that the arguments in favor of public control almost entirely
disappear.

Religion, to begin with, is recognized as a matter in which the state
ought not to interfere.  Whether a man is Christian, Mahometan, or Jew
is a question of no public concern, so long as he obeys the laws; and
the laws ought to be such as men of all religions can obey.  Yet even
here there are limits.  No civilized state would tolerate a religion
demanding human sacrifice.  The English in India put an end to suttee,
in spite of a fixed principle of non-interference with native
religious customs.  Perhaps they were wrong to prevent suttee, yet
almost every European would have done the same.  We cannot _effectively_
doubt that such practices ought to be stopped, however we may theorize
in favor of religious liberty.

In such cases, the interference with liberty is imposed from without
by a higher civilization.  But the more common case, and the more
interesting, is when an independent state interferes on behalf of
custom against individuals who are feeling their way toward more
civilized beliefs and institutions.

"In New South Wales," says Westermarck, "the first-born of every lubra
used to be eaten by the tribe 'as part of a religious ceremony.' In
the realm of Khai-muh, in China, according to a native account, it was
customary to kill and devour the eldest son alive.  Among certain
tribes in British Columbia the first child is often sacrificed to the
sun.  The Indians of Florida, according to Le Moyne de Morgues,
sacrificed the first-born son to the chief....'"[4]

[4] _Op cit._, p. 459.

There are pages and pages of such instances.

There is nothing analogous to these practices among ourselves.  When
the first-born in Florida was told that his king and country needed
him, this was a mere mistake, and with us mistakes of this kind do not
occur.  But it is interesting to inquire how these superstitions died
out, in such cases, for example, as that of Khai-muh, where foreign
compulsion is improbable.  We may surmise that some parents, under the
selfish influence of parental affection, were led to doubt whether the
sun would really be angry if the eldest child were allowed to live.
Such rationalism would be regarded as very dangerous, since it was
calculated to damage the harvest.  For generations the opinion would
be cherished in secret by a handful of cranks, who would not be able
to act upon it.  At last, by concealment or flight, a few parents
would save their children from the sacrifice.  Such parents would be
regarded as lacking all public spirit, and as willing to endanger the
community for their private pleasure.  But gradually it would appear
that the state remained intact, and the crops were no worse than in
former years.  Then, by a fiction, a child would be deemed to have
been sacrificed if it was solemnly dedicated to agriculture or some
other work of national importance chosen by the chief.  It would be
many generations before the child would be allowed to choose its own
occupation after it had grown old enough to know its own tastes and
capacities.  And during all those generations, children would be
reminded that only an act of grace had allowed them to live at all,
and would exist under the shadow of a purely imaginary duty to the
state.

The position of those parents who first disbelieved in the utility of
infant sacrifice illustrates all the difficulties which arise in
connection with the adjustment of individual freedom to public
control.  The authorities, believing the sacrifice necessary for the
good of the community, were bound to insist upon it; the parents,
believing it useless, were equally bound to do everything in their
power toward saving the child.  How ought both parties to act in such
a case?

The duty of the skeptical parent is plain: to save the child by any
possible means, to preach the uselessness of the sacrifice in season
and out of season, and to endure patiently whatever penalty the law
may indict for evasion.  But the duty of the authorities is far less
clear.  So long as they remain firmly persuaded that the universal
sacrifice of the first-born is indispensable, they are bound to
persecute those who seek to undermine this belief.  But they will, if
they are conscientious, very carefully examine the arguments of
opponents, and be willing in advance to admit that these arguments
_may_ be sound.  They will carefully search their own hearts to see
whether hatred of children or pleasure in cruelty has anything to do
with their belief.  They will remember that in the past history of
Khai-muh there are innumerable instances of beliefs, now known to be
false, on account of which those who disagreed with the prevalent view
were put to death.  Finally they will reflect that, though errors
which are traditional are often wide-spread, new beliefs seldom win
acceptance unless they are nearer to the truth than what they replace;
and they will conclude that a new belief is probably either an
advance, or so unlikely to become common as to be innocuous.  All
these considerations will make them hesitate before they resort to
punishment.


II

The study of past times and uncivilized races makes it clear beyond
question that the customary beliefs of tribes or nations are almost
invariably false.  It is difficult to divest ourselves completely of
the customary beliefs of our own age and nation, but it is not very
difficult to achieve a certain degree of doubt in regard to them.  The
Inquisitor who burnt men at the stake was acting with true humanity if
all his beliefs were correct; but if they were in error at any point,
he was inflicting a wholly unnecessary cruelty.  A good working maxim
in such matters is this: Do not trust customary beliefs so far as to
perform actions which must be disastrous unless the beliefs in
question are wholly true.  The world would be utterly bad, in the
opinion of the average Englishman, unless he could say "Britannia
rules the waves"; in the opinion of the average German, unless he
could say "Deutschland ueber alles." For the sake of these beliefs,
they are willing to destroy European civilization.  If the beliefs
should happen to be false, their action is regrettable.

One fact which emerges from these considerations is that no obstacle
should be placed in the way of thought and its expression, nor yet in
the way of statements of fact.  This was formerly common ground among
liberal thinkers, though it was never quite realized in the practice
of civilized countries.  But it has recently become, throughout
Europe, a dangerous paradox, on account of which men suffer
imprisonment or starvation.  For this reason it has again become worth
stating.  The grounds for it are so evident that I should be ashamed
to repeat them if they were not universally ignored.  But in the
actual world it is very necessary to repeat them.

To attain complete truth is not given to mortals, but to advance
toward it by successive steps is not impossible.  On any matter of
general interest, there is usually, in any given community at any
given time, a received opinion, which is accepted as a matter of
course by all who give no special thought to the matter.  Any
questioning of the received opinion rouses hostility, for a number of
reasons.

The most important of these is the instinct of conventionality, which
exists in all gregarious animals and often leads them to put to death
any markedly peculiar member of the herd.

The next most important is the feeling of insecurity aroused by doubt
as to the beliefs by which we are in the habit of regulating our
lives.  Whoever has tried to explain the philosophy of Berkeley to a
plain man will have seen in its unadulterated form the anger aroused
by this feeling.  What the plain man derives from Berkeley's
philosophy at a first hearing is an uncomfortable suspicion that
nothing is solid, so that it is rash to sit on a chair or to expect
the floor to sustain us.  Because this suspicion is uncomfortable, it
is irritating, except to those who regard the whole argument as merely
nonsense.  And in a more or less analogous way any questioning of what
has been taken for granted destroys the feeling of standing on solid
ground, and produces a condition of bewildered fear.

A third reason which makes men dislike novel opinions is that vested
interests are bound up with old beliefs.  The long fight of the church
against science, from Giordano Bruno to Darwin, is attributable to
this motive among others.  The horror of socialism which existed in
the remote past was entirely attributable to this cause.  But it would
be a mistake to assume, as is done by those who seek economic motives
everywhere, that vested interests are the principal source of anger
against novelties in thought.  If this were the case, intellectual
progress would be much more rapid than it is.

The instinct of conventionality, horror of uncertainty, and vested
interests, all militate against the acceptance of a new idea.  And it
is even harder to think of a new idea than to get it accepted; most
people might spend a lifetime in reflection without ever making a
genuinely original discovery.

In view of all these obstacles, it is not likely that any society at
any time will suffer from a plethora of heretical opinions.  Least of
all is this likely in a modern civilized society, where the conditions
of life are in constant rapid change, and demand, for successful
adaptation, an equally rapid change in intellectual outlook.  There
should be an attempt, therefore, to encourage, rather than discourage,
the expression of new beliefs and the dissemination of knowledge
tending to support them.  But the very opposite is, in fact, the case.
From childhood upward, everything is done to make the minds of men and
women conventional and sterile.  And if, by misadventure, some spark
of imagination remains, its unfortunate possessor is considered
unsound and dangerous, worthy only of contempt in time of peace and of
prison or a traitor's death in time of war.  Yet such men are known to
have been in the past the chief benefactors of mankind, and are the
very men who receive most honor as soon as they are safely dead.

The whole realm of thought and opinion is utterly unsuited to public
control; it ought to be as free, and as spontaneous as is possible to
those who know what others have believed.  The state is justified in
insisting that children shall be educated, but it is not justified in
forcing their education to proceed on a uniform plan and to be
directed to the production of a dead level of glib uniformity.
Education, and the life of the mind generally, is a matter in which
individual initiative is the chief thing needed; the function of the
state should begin and end with insistence on some kind of education,
and, if possible, a kind which promotes mental individualism, not a
kind which happens to conform to the prejudices of government
officials.


III

Questions of practical morals raise more difficult problems than
questions of mere opinion.  The thugs honestly believe it their duty
to commit murders, but the government does not acquiesce.  The
conscientious objectors honestly hold the opposite opinion, and again
the government does not acquiesce.  Killing is a state prerogative; it
is equally criminal to do it unbidden and not to do it when bidden.
The same applies to theft, unless it is on a large scale or by one who
is already rich.  Thugs and thieves are men who use force in their
dealings with their neighbors, and we may lay it down broadly that the
private use of force should be prohibited except in rare cases,
however conscientious may be its motive.  But this principle will not
justify compelling men to use force at the bidding of the state, when
they do not believe it justified by the occasion.  The punishment of
conscientious objectors seems clearly a violation of individual
liberty within its legitimate sphere.

It is generally assumed without question that the state has a right to
punish certain kinds of sexual irregularity.  No one doubts that the
Mormons sincerely believed polygamy to be a desirable practice, yet
the United States required them to abandon its legal recognition, and
probably any other Christian country would have done likewise.
Nevertheless, I do not think this prohibition was wise.  Polygamy is
legally permitted in many parts of the world, but is not much
practised except by chiefs and potentates.  If, as Europeans generally
believe, it is an undesirable custom, it is probable that the Mormons
would have soon abandoned it, except perhaps for a few men of
exceptional position.  If, on the other hand, it had proved a
successful experiment, the world would have acquired a piece of
knowledge which it is now unable to possess.  I think in all such
cases the law should only intervene when there is some injury
inflicted without the consent of the injured person.

It is obvious that men and women would not tolerate having their wives
or husbands selected by the state, whatever eugenists might have to
say in favor of such a plan.  In this it seems clear that ordinary
public opinion is in the right, not because people choose wisely, but
because any choice of their own is better than a forced marriage.
What applies to marriage ought also to apply to the choice of a trade
or profession; although some men have no marked preferences, most men
greatly prefer some occupations to others, and are far more likely to
be useful citizens if they follow their preferences than if they are
thwarted by a public authority.

The case of the man who has an intense conviction that he ought to do
a certain kind of work is peculiar, and perhaps not very common; but
it is important because it includes some very important individuals.
Joan of Arc and Florence Nightingale defied convention in obedience to
a feeling of this sort; reformers and agitators in unpopular causes,
such as Mazzini, have belonged to this class; so have many men of
science.  In cases of this kind the individual conviction deserves the
greatest respect, even if there seems no obvious justification for it.
Obedience to the impulse is very unlikely to do much harm, and may
well do great good.  The practical difficulty is to distinguish such
impulses from desires which produce similar manifestations.  Many
young people wish to be authors without having an impulse to write any
particular book, or wish to be painters without having an impulse to
create any particular picture.  But a little experience will usually
show the difference between a genuine and a spurious impulse; and
there is less harm in indulging the spurious impulse for a time than
in thwarting the impulse which is genuine.  Nevertheless, the plain
man almost always has a tendency to thwart the genuine impulse,
because it seems anarchic and unreasonable, and is seldom able to give
a good account of itself in advance.

What is markedly true of some notable personalities is true, in a
lesser degree, of almost every individual who has much vigor or force
of life; there is an impulse towards activity of some kind, as a rule
not very definite in youth, but growing gradually more sharply
outlined under the influence of education and opportunity.  The direct
impulse toward a kind of activity for its own sake must be
distinguished from the desire for the expected effects of the
activity.  A young man may desire the rewards of great achievement
without having any spontaneous impulse toward the activities which
lead to achievement.  But those who actually achieve much, although
they may desire the rewards, have also something in their nature which
inclines them to choose a certain kind of work as the road which they
must travel if their ambition is to be satisfied.  This artist's
impulse, as it may be called, is a thing of infinite value to the
individual, and often to the world; to respect it in oneself and in
others makes up nine tenths of the good life.  In most human beings it
is rather frail, rather easily destroyed or disturbed; parents and
teachers are too often hostile to it, and our economic system crushes
out its last remnants in young men and young women.  The result is
that human beings cease to be individual, or to retain the native
pride that is their birthright; they become machine-made, tame,
convenient for the bureaucrat and the drill-sergeant, capable of being
tabulated in statistics without anything being omitted.  This is the
fundamental evil resulting from lack of liberty; and it is an evil
which is being continually intensified as population grows more dense
and the machinery of organization grows more efficient.

The things that men desire are many and various: admiration,
affection, power, security, ease, outlets for energy, are among the
commonest of motives.  But such abstractions do not touch what makes
the difference between one man and another.  Whenever I go to the
zoological gardens, I am struck by the fact that all the movements of
a stork have some common quality, differing from the movements of a
parrot or an ostrich.  It is impossible to put in words what the
common quality is, and yet we feel that each thing an animal does is
the sort of thing we might expect that animal to do.  This indefinable
quality constitutes the individuality of the animal, and gives rise to
the pleasure we feel in watching the animal's actions.  In a human
being, provided he has not been crushed by an economic or governmental
machine, there is the same kind of individuality, a something
distinctive without which no man or woman can achieve much of
importance, or retain the full dignity which is native to human
beings.  It is this distinctive individuality that is loved by the
artist, whether painter or writer.  The artist himself, and the man
who is creative in no matter what direction, has more of it than the
average man.  Any society which crushes this quality, whether
intentionally or by accident, must soon become utterly lifeless and
traditional, without hope of progress and without any purpose in its
being.  To preserve and strengthen the impulse that makes
individuality should be the foremost object of all political
institutions.


IV

We now arrive at certain general principles in regard to individual
liberty and public control.

The greater part of human impulses may be divided into two classes,
those which are possessive and those which are constructive or
creative.  Social institutions are the garments or embodiments of
impulses, and may be classified roughly according to the impulses
which they embody.  Property is the direct expression of
possessiveness; science and art are among the most direct expressions
of creativeness.  Possessiveness is either defensive or aggressive; it
seeks either to retain against a robber, or to acquire from a present
holder.  In either case an attitude of hostility toward others is of
its essence.  It would be a mistake to suppose that defensive
possessiveness is always justifiable, while the aggressive kind is
always blameworthy; where there is great injustice in the _status
quo_, the exact opposite may be the case, and ordinarily neither is
justifiable.

State interference with the actions of individuals is necessitated by
possessiveness.  Some goods can be acquired or retained by force,
while others cannot.  A wife can be acquired by force, as the Romans
acquired the Sabine women; but a wife's affection cannot be acquired
in this way.  There is no record that the Romans desired the affection
of the Sabine women; and those in whom possessive impulses are strong
tend to care chiefly for the goods that force can secure.  All
material goods belong to this class.  Liberty in regard to such goods,
if it were unrestricted, would make the strong rich and the weak poor.
In a capitalistic society, owing to the partial restraints imposed by
law, it makes cunning men rich and honest men poor, because the force
of the state is put at men's disposal, not according to any just or
rational principle, but according to a set of traditional maxims of
which the explanation is purely historical.

In all that concerns possession and the use of force, unrestrained
liberty involves anarchy and injustice.  Freedom to kill, freedom to
rob, freedom to defraud, no longer belong to individuals, though they
still belong to great states, and are exercised by them in the name of
patriotism.  Neither individuals nor states ought to be free to exert
force on their own initiative, except in such sudden emergencies as
will subsequently be admitted in justification by a court of law.  The
reason for this is that the exertion of force by one individual
against another is always an evil on both sides, and can only be
tolerated when it is compensated by some overwhelming resultant good.
In order to minimize the amount of force actually exerted in the
world, it is necessary that there should be a public authority, a
repository of practically irresistible force, whose function should be
primarily to repress the private use of force.  A use of force is
_private_ when it is exerted by one of the interested parties, or by
his friends or accomplices, not by a public neutral authority
according to some rule which is intended to be in the public interest.

The regime of private property under which we live does much too
little to restrain the private use of force.  When a man owns a piece
of land, for example, he may use force against trespassers, though
they must not use force against him.  It is clear that some
restriction of the liberty of trespass is necessary for the
cultivation of the land.  But if such powers are to be given to an
individual, the state ought to satisfy itself that he occupies no more
land than he is warranted in occupying in the public interest, and
that the share of the produce of the land that comes to him is no more
than a just reward for his labors.  Probably the only way in which
such ends can be achieved is by state ownership of land.  The
possessors of land and capital are able at present, by economic
pressure, to use force against those who have no possessions.  This
force is sanctioned by law, while force exercised by the poor against
the rich is illegal.  Such a state of things is unjust, and does not
diminish the use of private force as much as it might be diminished.

The whole realm of the possessive impulses, and of the use of force to
which they give rise, stands in need of control by a public neutral
authority, in the interests of liberty no less than of justice.
Within a nation, this public authority will naturally be the state; in
relations between nations, if the present anarchy is to cease, it will
have to be some international parliament.

But the motive underlying the public control of men's possessive
impulses should always be the increase of liberty, both by the
prevention of private tyranny and by the liberation of creative
impulses.  If public control is not to do more harm than good, it must
be so exercised as to leave the utmost freedom of private initiative
in all those ways that do not involve the private use of force.  In
this respect all governments have always failed egregiously, and there
is no evidence that they are improving.

The creative impulses, unlike those that are possessive, are directed
to ends in which one man's gain is not another man's loss.  The man
who makes a scientific discovery or writes a poem is enriching others
at the same time as himself.  Any increase in knowledge or good-will
is a gain to all who are affected by it, not only to the actual
possessor.  Those who feel the joy of life are a happiness to others
as well as to themselves.  Force cannot create such things, though it
can destroy them; no principle of distributive justice applies to
them, since the gain of each is the gain of all.  For these reasons,
the creative part of a man's activity ought to be as free as possible
from all public control, in order that it may remain spontaneous and
full of vigor.  The only function of the state in regard to this part
of the individual life should be to do everything possible toward
providing outlets and opportunities.

In every life a part is governed by the community, and a part by
private initiative.  The part governed by private initiative is
greatest in the most important individuals, such as men of genius and
creative thinkers.  This part ought only to be restricted when it is
predatory; otherwise, everything ought to be done to make it as great
and as vigorous as possible.  The object of education ought not to be
to make all men think alike, but to make each think in the way which
is the fullest expression of his own personality.  In the choice of a
means of livelihood all young men and young women ought, as far as
possible, to be able to choose what is attractive to them; if no
money-making occupation is attractive, they ought to be free to do
little work for little pay, and spend their leisure as they choose.
Any kind of censure on freedom of thought or on the dissemination of
knowledge is, of course, to be condemned utterly.

Huge organizations, both political and economic, are one of the
distinguishing characteristics of the modern world.  These
organizations have immense power, and often use their power to
discourage originality in thought and action.  They ought, on the
contrary, to give the freest scope that is possible without producing
anarchy or violent conflict.  They ought not to take cognizance of any
part of a man's life except what is concerned with the legitimate
objects of public control, namely, possessions and the use of force.
And they ought, by devolution, to leave as large a share of control as
possible in the hands of individuals and small groups.  If this is not
done, the men at the head of these vast organizations will infallibly
become tyrannous through the habit of excessive power, and will in
time interfere in ways that crush out individual initiative.

The problem which faces the modern world is the combination of
individual initiative with the increase in the scope and size of
organizations.  Unless it is solved, individuals will grow less and
less full of life and vigor, and more and more passively submissive to
conditions imposed upon them.  A society composed of such individuals
cannot be progressive or add much to the world's stock of mental and
spiritual possessions.  Only personal liberty and the encouragement of
initiative can secure these things.  Those who resist authority when
it encroaches upon the legitimate sphere of the individual are
performing a service to society, however little society may value it.
In regard to the past, this is universally acknowledged; but it is no
less true in regard to the present and the future.




Chapter V: National Independence and Internationalism


In the relations between states, as in the relations of groups within
a single state, what is to be desired is independence for each as
regards internal affairs, and law rather than private force as regards
external affairs.  But as regards groups within a state, it is
internal independence that must be emphasized, since that is what is
lacking; subjection to law has been secured, on the whole, since the
end of the Middle Ages.  In the relations between states, on the
contrary, it is law and a central government that are lacking, since
independence exists for external as for internal affairs.  The stage
we have reached in the affairs of Europe corresponds to the stage
reached in our internal affairs during the Wars of the Roses, when
turbulent barons frustrated the attempt to make them keep the king's
peace.  Thus, although the goal is the same in the two cases, the
steps to be taken in order to achieve it are quite different.

There can be no good international system until the boundaries of
states coincide as nearly as possible with the boundaries of nations.

But it is not easy to say what we mean by a nation.  Are the Irish a
nation?  Home Rulers say yes, Unionists say no.  Are the Ulstermen a
nation?  Unionists say yes, Home Rulers say no.  In all such cases it
is a party question whether we are to call a group a nation or not.  A
German will tell you that the Russian Poles are a nation, but as for
the Prussian Poles, they, of course, are part of Prussia.  Professors
can always be hired to prove, by arguments of race or language or
history, that a group about which there is a dispute is, or is not, a
nation, as may be desired by those whom the professors serve.  If we
are to avoid all these controversies, we must first of all endeavor to
find some definition of a nation.

A nation is not to be defined by affinities of language or a common
historical origin, though these things often help to produce a nation.
Switzerland is a nation, despite diversities of race, religion, and
language.  England and Scotland now form one nation, though they did
not do so at the time of the Civil War.  This is shown by Cromwell's
saying, in the height of the conflict, that he would rather be subject
to the domain of the royalists than to that of the Scotch.  Great
Britain was one state before it was one nation; on the other hand,
Germany was one nation before it was one state.

What constitutes a nation is a sentiment and an instinct, a sentiment
of similarity and an instinct of belonging to the same group or herd.
The instinct is an extension of the instinct which constitutes a flock
of sheep, or any other group of gregarious animals.  The sentiment
which goes with this is like a milder and more extended form of family
feeling.  When we return to England after being on the Continent, we
feel something friendly in the familiar ways, and it is easy to
believe that Englishmen on the whole are virtuous, while many
foreigners are full of designing wickedness.

Such feelings make it easy to organize a nation into a state.  It is
not difficult, as a rule, to acquiesce in the orders of a national
government.  We feel that it is our government, and that its decrees
are more or less the same as those which we should have given if we
ourselves had been the governors.  There is an instinctive and usually
unconscious sense of a common purpose animating the members of a
nation.  This becomes especially vivid when there is war or a danger
of war.  Any one who, at such a time, stands out against the orders of
his government feels an inner conflict quite different from any that
he would feel in standing out against the orders of a foreign
government in whose power he might happen to find himself.  If he
stands out, he does so with some more or less conscious hope that his
government may in time come to think as he does; whereas, in standing
out against a foreign government, no such hope is necessary.  This
group instinct, however it may have arisen, is what constitutes a
nation, and what makes it important that the boundaries of nations
should also be the boundaries of states.

National sentiment is a fact, and should be taken account of by
institutions.  When it is ignored, it is intensified and becomes a
source of strife.  It can only be rendered harmless by being given
free play, so long as it is not predatory.  But it is not, in itself,
a good or admirable feeling.  There is nothing rational and nothing
desirable in a limitation of sympathy which confines it to a fragment
of the human race.  Diversities of manners and customs and traditions
are, on the whole, a good thing, since they enable different nations
to produce different types of excellence.  But in national feeling
there is always latent or explicit an element of hostility to
foreigners.  National feeling, as we know it, could not exist in a
nation which was wholly free from external pressure of a hostile kind.

And group feeling produces a limited and often harmful kind of
morality.  Men come to identify the good with what serves the
interests of their own group, and the bad with what works against
those interests, even if it should happen to be in the interests of
mankind as a whole.  This group morality is very much in evidence
during war, and is taken for granted in men's ordinary thought.
Although almost all Englishmen consider the defeat of Germany
desirable for the good of the world, yet nevertheless most of them
honor a German for fighting for his country, because it has not
occurred to them that his actions ought to be guided by a morality
higher than that of the group.

A man does right, as a rule, to have his thoughts more occupied with
the interests of his own nation than with those of others, because his
actions are more likely to affect his own nation.  But in time of war,
and in all matters which are of equal concern to other nations and to
his own, a man ought to take account of the universal welfare, and not
allow his survey to be limited by the interest, or supposed interest,
of his own group or nation.

So long as national feeling exists, it is very important that each
nation should be self-governing as regards its internal affairs.
Government can only be carried on by force and tyranny if its subjects
view it with hostile eyes, and they will so view it if they feel that
it belongs to an alien nation.  This principle meets with difficulties
in cases where men of different nations live side by side in the same
area, as happens in some parts of the Balkans.  There are also
difficulties in regard to places which, for some geographical reason,
are of great international importance, such as the Suez Canal and the
Panama Canal.  In such cases the purely local desires of the
inhabitants may have to give way before larger interests.  But in
general, at any rate as applied to civilized communities, the
principle that the boundaries of nations ought to coincide with the
boundaries of states has very few exceptions.

This principle, however, does not decide how the relations between
states are to be regulated, or how a conflict of interests between
rival states is to be decided.  At present, every great state claims
absolute sovereignty, not only in regard to its internal affairs but
also in regard to its external actions.  This claim to absolute
sovereignty leads it into conflict with similar claims on the part of
other great states.  Such conflicts at present can only be decided by
war or diplomacy, and diplomacy is in essence nothing but the threat
of war.  There is no more justification for the claim to absolute
sovereignty on the part of a state than there would be for a similar
claim on the part of an individual.  The claim to absolute sovereignty
is, in effect, a claim that all external affairs are to be regulated
purely by force, and that when two nations or groups of nations are
interested in a question, the decision shall depend solely upon which
of them is, or is believed to be, the stronger.  This is nothing but
primitive anarchy, "the war of all against all," which Hobbes asserted
to be the original state of mankind.

There cannot be secure peace in the world, or any decision of
international questions according to international law, until states
are willing to part with their absolute sovereignty as regards their
external relations, and to leave the decision in such matters to some
international instrument of government.[5]  An international government
will have to be legislative as well as judicial.  It is not enough
that there should be a Hague tribunal, deciding matters according to
some already existing system of international law; it is necessary
also that there should be a body capable of enacting international
law, and this body will have to have the power of transferring
territory from one state to another, when it is persuaded that
adequate grounds exist for such a transference.  Friends of peace will
make a mistake if they unduly glorify the _status quo_.  Some nations
grow, while others dwindle; the population of an area may change its
character by emigration and immigration.  There is no good reason why
states should resent changes in their boundaries under such
conditions, and if no international authority has power to make
changes of this kind, the temptations to war will sometimes become
irresistible.

[5] For detailed scheme of international government see "International
Government," by L. Woolf. Allen & Unwin.

The international authority ought to possess an army and navy, and
these ought to be the only army and navy in existence.  The only
legitimate use of force is to diminish the total amount of force
exercised in the world.  So long as men are free to indulge their
predatory instincts, some men or groups of men will take advantage of
this freedom for oppression and robbery.  Just as the police are
necessary to prevent the use of force by private citizens, so an
international police will be necessary to prevent the lawless use of
force by separate states.

But I think it is reasonable to hope that if ever an international
government, possessed of the only army and navy in the world, came
into existence, the need of force to enact obedience to its decisions
would be very temporary.  In a short time the benefits resulting from
the substitution of law for anarchy would become so obvious that the
international government would acquire an unquestioned authority, and
no state would dream of rebelling against its decisions.  As soon as
this stage had been reached, the international army and navy would
become unnecessary.

We have still a very long road to travel before we arrive at the
establishment of an international authority, but it is not very
difficult to foresee the steps by which this result will be gradually
reached.  There is likely to be a continual increase in the practice
of submitting disputes to arbitration, and in the realization that the
supposed conflicts of interest between different states are mainly
illusory.  Even where there is a real conflict of interest, it must in
time become obvious that neither of the states concerned would suffer
as much by giving way as by fighting.  With the progress of
inventions, war, when it does occur, is bound to become increasingly
destructive.  The civilized races of the world are faced with the
alternative of cooperation or mutual destruction.  The present war
is making this alternative daily more evident.  And it is difficult to
believe that, when the enmities which it has generated have had time
to cool, civilized men will deliberately choose to destroy
civilization, rather than acquiesce in the abolition of war.

The matters in which the interests of nations are supposed to clash
are mainly three: tariffs, which are a delusion; the exploitation of
inferior races, which is a crime; pride of power and dominion, which
is a schoolboy folly.

The economic argument against tariffs is familiar, and I shall not
repeat it.  The only reason why it fails to carry conviction is the
enmity between nations.  Nobody proposes to set up a tariff between
England and Scotland, or between Lancashire and Yorkshire.  Yet the
arguments by which tariffs between nations are supported might be used
just as well to defend tariffs between counties.  Universal free trade
would indubitably be of economic benefit to mankind, and would be
adopted to-morrow if it were not for the hatred and suspicion which
nations feel one toward another.  From the point of view of preserving
the peace of the world, free trade between the different civilized
states is not so important as the open door in their dependencies.
The desire for exclusive markets is one of the most potent causes of
war.

Exploiting what are called "inferior races" has become one of the main
objects of European statecraft.  It is not only, or primarily, trade
that is desired, but opportunities for investment; finance is more
concerned in the matter than industry.  Rival diplomatists are very
often the servants, conscious or unconscious, of rival groups of
financiers.  The financiers, though themselves of no particular
nation, understand the art of appealing to national prejudice, and of
inducing the taxpayer to incur expenditure of which they reap the
benefit.  The evils which they produce at home, and the devastation
that they spread among the races whom they exploit, are part of the
price which the world has to pay for its acquiescence in the
capitalist regime.

But neither tariffs nor financiers would be able to cause serious
trouble, if it were not for the sentiment of national pride.  National
pride might be on the whole beneficent, if it took the direction of
emulation in the things that are important to civilization.  If we
prided ourselves upon our poets, our men of science, or the justice
and humanity of our social system, we might find in national pride a
stimulus to useful endeavors.  But such matters play a very small
part.  National pride, as it exists now, is almost exclusively
concerned with power and dominion, with the extent of territory that a
nation owns, and with its capacity for enforcing its will against the
opposition of other nations.  In this it is reinforced by group
morality.  To nine citizens out of ten it seems self-evident, whenever
the will of their own nation clashes with that of another, that their
own nation must be in the right.  Even if it were not in the right on
the particular issue, yet it stands in general for so much nobler
ideals than those represented by the other nation to the dispute, that
any increase in its power is bound to be for the good of mankind.
Since all nations equally believe this of themselves, all are equally
ready to insist upon the victory of their own side in any dispute in
which they believe that they have a good hope of victory.  While this
temper persists, the hope of international cooperation must remain
dim.

If men could divest themselves of the sentiment of rivalry and
hostility between different nations, they would perceive that the
matters in which the interests of different nations coincide
immeasurably outweigh those in which they clash; they would perceive,
to begin with, that trade is not to be compared to warfare; that the
man who sells you goods is not doing you an injury.  No one considers
that the butcher and the baker are his enemies because they drain him
of money.  Yet as soon as goods come from a foreign country, we are
asked to believe that we suffer a terrible injury in purchasing them.
No one remembers that it is by means of goods exported that we
purchase them.  But in the country to which we export, it is the goods
we send which are thought dangerous, and the goods we buy are
forgotten.  The whole conception of trade, which has been forced upon
us by manufacturers who dreaded foreign competition, by trusts which
desired to secure monopolies, and by economists poisoned by the virus
of nationalism, is totally and absolutely false.  Trade results simply
from division of labor.  A man cannot himself make all the goods of
which he has need, and therefore he must exchange his produce with
that of other people.  What applies to the individual, applies in
exactly the same way to the nation.  There is no reason to desire that
a nation should itself produce all the goods of which it has need; it
is better that it should specialize upon those goods which it can
produce to most advantage, and should exchange its surplus with the
surplus of other goods produced by other countries.  There is no use
in sending goods out of the country except in order to get other goods
in return.  A butcher who is always willing to part with his meat but
not willing to take bread from the baker, or boots from the bootmaker,
or clothes from the tailor, would soon find himself in a sorry plight.
Yet he would be no more foolish than the protectionist who desires
that we should send goods abroad without receiving payment in the
shape of goods imported from abroad.

The wage system has made people believe that what a man needs is work.
This, of course, is absurd.  What he needs is the goods produced by
work, and the less work involved in making a given amount of goods,
the better.  But owing to our economic system, every economy in
methods of production enables employers to dismiss some of their
employees, and to cause destitution, where a better system would
produce only an increase of wages or a diminution in the hours of work
without any corresponding diminution of wages.

Our economic system is topsyturvy.  It makes the interest of the
individual conflict with the interest of the community in a thousand
ways in which no such conflict ought to exist.  Under a better system
the benefits of free trade and the evils of tariffs would be obvious
to all.

Apart from trade, the interests of nations coincide in all that makes
what we call civilization.  Inventions and discoveries bring benefit
to all.  The progress of science is a matter of equal concern to the
whole civilized world.  Whether a man of science is an Englishman, a
Frenchman, or a German is a matter of no real importance.  His
discoveries are open to all, and nothing but intelligence is required
in order to profit by them.  The whole world of art and literature and
learning is international; what is done in one country is not done for
that country, but for mankind.  If we ask ourselves what are the
things that raise mankind above the brutes, what are the things that
make us think the human race more valuable than any species of
animals, we shall find that none of them are things in which any one
nation can have exclusive property, but all are things in which the
whole world can share.  Those who have any care for these things,
those who wish to see mankind fruitful in the work which men alone can
do, will take little account of national boundaries, and have little
care to what state a man happens to owe allegiance.

The importance of international cooperation outside the sphere of
politics has been brought home to me by my own experience.  Until
lately I was engaged in teaching a new science which few men in the
world were able to teach.  My own work in this science was based
chiefly upon the work of a German and an Italian.  My pupils came from
all over the civilized world: France, Germany, Austria, Russia,
Greece, Japan, China, India, and America.  None of us was conscious of
any sense of national divisions.  We felt ourselves an outpost of
civilization, building a new road into the virgin forest of the
unknown.  All cooperated in the common task, and in the interest of
such a work the political enmities of nations seemed trivial,
temporary, and futile.

But it is not only in the somewhat rarefied atmosphere of abstruse
science that international cooperation is vital to the progress of
civilization.  All our economic problems, all the questions of
securing the rights of labor, all the hopes of freedom at home and
humanity abroad, rest upon the creation of international good-will.

So long as hatred, suspicion, and fear dominate the feelings of men
toward each other, so long we cannot hope to escape from the tyranny
of violence and brute force.  Men must learn to be conscious of the
common interests of mankind in which all are at one, rather than of
those supposed interests in which the nations are divided.  It is not
necessary, or even desirable, to obliterate the differences of manners
and custom and tradition between different nations.  These differences
enable each nation to make its own distinctive contribution to the sum
total of the world's civilization.

What is to be desired is not cosmopolitanism, not the absence of all
national characteristics that one associates with couriers,
_wagon-lit_ attendants, and others, who have had everything
distinctive obliterated by multiple and trivial contacts with men of
every civilized country.  Such cosmopolitanism is the result of loss,
not gain.  The international spirit which we should wish to see
produced will be something added to love of country, not something
taken away.  Just as patriotism does not prevent a man from feeling
family affection, so the international spirit ought not to prevent a
man from feeling affection for his own country.  But it will somewhat
alter the character of that affection.  The things which he will
desire for his own country will no longer be things which can only be
acquired at the expense of others, but rather those things in which
the excellence of any one country is to the advantage of all the
world.  He will wish his own country to be great in the arts of peace,
to be eminent in thought and science, to be magnanimous and just and
generous.  He will wish it to help mankind on the way toward that
better world of liberty and international concord which must be
realized if any happiness is to be left to man.  He will not desire
for his country the passing triumphs of a narrow possessiveness, but
rather the enduring triumph of having helped to embody in human
affairs something of that spirit of brotherhood which Christ taught
and which the Christian churches have forgotten.  He will see that
this spirit embodies not only the highest morality, but also the
truest wisdom, and the only road by which the nations, torn and
bleeding with the wounds which scientific madness has inflicted, can
emerge into a life where growth is possible and joy is not banished at
the frenzied call of unreal and fictitious duties.  Deeds inspired by
hate are not duties, whatever pain and self-sacrifice they may
involve.  Life and hope for the world are to be found only in the
deeds of love.











*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POLITICAL IDEALS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given awayyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

     You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.
    
     You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
        works.
    
     You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
     You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenbergs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundations EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your states laws.

The Foundations business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundations website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



The Project Gutenberg eBook of Mysticism and Logic and Other Essays
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Mysticism and Logic and Other Essays

Author: Bertrand Russell

Release date: May 12, 2008 [eBook #25447]
                Most recently updated: May 5, 2012

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Jeannie Howse, Adrian Mastronardi and the
        Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
        (This file was produced from images generously made
        available by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MYSTICISM AND LOGIC AND OTHER ESSAYS ***




Produced by Jeannie Howse, Adrian Mastronardi and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)






       *       *       *       *       *

    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Transcriber's Note:                                       |
    |                                                           |
    | Inconsistent hyphenation in the original document has     |
    | been preserved.                                           |
    |                                                           |
    | Mathematical equations and variables are marked with      |
    | [Math:] to reduce confusion between underscores used for  |
    | italics and underscores used to indicate subscripts.      |
    | Subscripts are indicated with underscores, with the       |
    | subscripted character marked with {}'s, i.e.: x_{t}       |
    |                                                           |
    | Greek letters have been transliterated and marked with    |
    | []'s, i.e.: [alpha]                                       |
    |                                                           |
    | Obvious typographical errors have been corrected. For     |
    | a complete list, please see the end of this document.     |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *




BERTRAND RUSSELL

MYSTICISM AND
LOGIC

AND OTHER ESSAYS




_LONDON_
GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD
RUSKIN HOUSE MUSEUM STREET




MYSTICISM AND LOGIC
AND OTHER ESSAYS




BY BERTRAND RUSSELL

_The ABC of Relativity_
_The Analysis of Matter_
_Human Society in Ethics and Politics_
_The Impact of Science on Society_
_New Hopes for a Changing World_
_Authority and the Individual_
_Human Knowledge_
_History of Western Philosophy_
_The Principles of Mathematics_
_Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy_
_The Analysis of Mind_
_Our Knowledge of the External World_
_An Outline of Philosophy_
_The Philosophy of Leibniz_
_An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth_
_Logic and Knowledge_
_The Problems of Philosophy_
_Principia Mathematica_

_Common Sense and Nuclear Warfare_
_Why I am Not a Christian_
_Portraits from Memory_
_My Philosophical Development_
_Unpopular Essays_
_Power_
_In Praise of Idleness_
_The Conquest of Happiness_
_Sceptical Essays_
_The Scientific Outlook_
_Marriage and Morals_
_Education and the Social Order_
_On Education_

_Freedom and Organization_
_Principles of Social Reconstruction_
_Roads to Freedom_
_Practice and Theory of Bolshevism_

_Satan in The Suburbs_
_Nightmares of Eminent Persons_




_First published as "Philosophical Essays"_      _October 1910_
_Second Edition as "Mysticism and Logic"_       _December 1917_
_Third Impression_                                 _April 1918_
_Fourth Impression_                             _February 1919_
_Fifth Impression_                               _October 1921_
_Sixth Impression_                                _August 1925_
_Seventh Impression_                             _January 1932_
_Eighth Impression_                                      _1949_
_Ninth Impression_                                       _1950_
_Tenth Impression_                                       _1951_
_Eleventh Impression_                                    _1959_

  _This book is copyright under the Berne Convention. Apart from any
  fair dealing for the purpose of private study, research, criticism
  or review, as permitted under the Copyright Act, 1956, no portion
  may be reproduced by any process without written permission.
  Enquiry should be made to the publisher._


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
_by Taylor Garnett Evans & Co. Ltd.,
Watford, Herts._




PREFACE


The following essays have been written and published at various times,
and my thanks are due to the previous publishers for the permission to
reprint them.

The essay on "Mysticism and Logic" appeared in the _Hibbert Journal_
for July, 1914. "The Place of Science in a Liberal Education" appeared
in two numbers of _The New Statesman_, May 24 and 31, 1913. "The Free
Man's Worship" and "The Study of Mathematics" were included in a
former collection (now out of print), _Philosophical Essays_, also
published by Messrs. Longmans, Green & Co. Both were written in 1902;
the first appeared originally in the _Independent Review_ for 1903,
the second in the _New Quarterly_, November, 1907. In theoretical
Ethics, the position advocated in "The Free Man's Worship" is not
quite identical with that which I hold now: I feel less convinced than
I did then of the objectivity of good and evil. But the general
attitude towards life which is suggested in that essay still seems to
me, in the main, the one which must be adopted in times of stress and
difficulty by those who have no dogmatic religious beliefs, if inward
defeat is to be avoided.

The essay on "Mathematics and the Metaphysicians" was written in 1901,
and appeared in an American magazine, _The International Monthly_,
under the title "Recent Work in the Philosophy of Mathematics." Some
points in this essay require modification in view of later work.
These are indicated in footnotes. Its tone is partly explained by the
fact that the editor begged me to make the article "as romantic as
possible."

All the above essays are entirely popular, but those that follow are
somewhat more technical. "On Scientific Method in Philosophy" was the
Herbert Spencer lecture at Oxford in 1914, and was published by the
Clarendon Press, which has kindly allowed me to include it in this
collection. "The Ultimate Constituents of Matter" was an address to
the Manchester Philosophical Society, early in 1915, and was published
in the _Monist_ in July of that year. The essay on "The Relation of
Sense-data to Physics" was written in January, 1914, and first
appeared in No. 4 of that year's volume of _Scientia_, an
International Review of Scientific Synthesis, edited by M. Eugenio
Rignano, published monthly by Messrs. Williams and Norgate, London,
Nicola Zanichelli, Bologna, and Flix Alcan, Paris. The essay "On the
Notion of Cause" was the presidential address to the Aristotelian
Society in November, 1912, and was published in their _Proceedings_
for 1912-13. "Knowledge by Acquaintance and Knowledge by Description"
was also a paper read before the Aristotelian Society, and published
in their _Proceedings_ for 1910-11.

  LONDON,
    _September, 1917_




CONTENTS


_Chapter_                                                  _Page_

   I. _Mysticism and Logic_                                     1

  II. _The Place of Science in a Liberal Education_            33

 III. _A Free Man's Worship_                                   46

  IV. _The Study of Mathematics_                               58

   V. _Mathematics and the Metaphysicians_                     74

  VI. _On Scientific Method in Philosophy_                     97

 VII. _The Ultimate Constituents of Matter_                   125

VIII. _The Relation of Sense-data to Physics_                 145

  IX. _On the Notion of Cause_                                180

   X. _Knowledge by Acquaintance and Knowledge by
       Description_                                           209




MYSTICISM AND LOGIC AND OTHER ESSAYS




I

MYSTICISM AND LOGIC


Metaphysics, or the attempt to conceive the world as a whole by means
of thought, has been developed, from the first, by the union and
conflict of two very different human impulses, the one urging men
towards mysticism, the other urging them towards science. Some men
have achieved greatness through one of these impulses alone, others
through the other alone: in Hume, for example, the scientific impulse
reigns quite unchecked, while in Blake a strong hostility to science
co-exists with profound mystic insight. But the greatest men who have
been philosophers have felt the need both of science and of mysticism:
the attempt to harmonise the two was what made their life, and what
always must, for all its arduous uncertainty, make philosophy, to some
minds, a greater thing than either science or religion.

Before attempting an explicit characterisation of the scientific and
the mystical impulses, I will illustrate them by examples from two
philosophers whose greatness lies in the very intimate blending which
they achieved. The two philosophers I mean are Heraclitus and Plato.

Heraclitus, as every one knows, was a believer in universal flux: time
builds and destroys all things. From the few fragments that remain, it
is not easy to discover how he arrived at his opinions, but there are
some sayings that strongly suggest scientific observation as the
source.

"The things that can be seen, heard, and learned," he says, "are what
I prize the most." This is the language of the empiricist, to whom
observation is the sole guarantee of truth. "The sun is new every
day," is another fragment; and this opinion, in spite of its
paradoxical character, is obviously inspired by scientific reflection,
and no doubt seemed to him to obviate the difficulty of understanding
how the sun can work its way underground from west to east during the
night. Actual observation must also have suggested to him his central
doctrine, that Fire is the one permanent substance, of which all
visible things are passing phases. In combustion we see things change
utterly, while their flame and heat rise up into the air and vanish.

"This world, which is the same for all," he says, "no one of gods or
men has made; but it was ever, is now, and ever shall be, an
ever-living Fire, with measures kindling, and measures going out."

"The transformations of Fire are, first of all, sea; and half of the
sea is earth, half whirlwind."

This theory, though no longer one which science can accept, is
nevertheless scientific in spirit. Science, too, might have inspired
the famous saying to which Plato alludes: "You cannot step twice into
the same rivers; for fresh waters are ever flowing in upon you." But
we find also another statement among the extant fragments: "We step
and do not step into the same rivers; we are and are not."

The comparison of this statement, which is mystical, with the one
quoted by Plato, which is scientific, shows how intimately the two
tendencies are blended in the system of Heraclitus. Mysticism is, in
essence, little more than a certain intensity and depth of feeling in
regard to what is believed about the universe; and this kind of
feeling leads Heraclitus, on the basis of his science, to strangely
poignant sayings concerning life and the world, such as:

"Time is a child playing draughts, the kingly power is a child's."

It is poetic imagination, not science, which presents Time as despotic
lord of the world, with all the irresponsible frivolity of a child. It
is mysticism, too, which leads Heraclitus to assert the identity of
opposites: "Good and ill are one," he says; and again: "To God all
things are fair and good and right, but men hold some things wrong and
some right."

Much of mysticism underlies the ethics of Heraclitus. It is true that
a scientific determinism alone might have inspired the statement:
"Man's character is his fate"; but only a mystic would have said:

"Every beast is driven to the pasture with blows"; and again:

"It is hard to fight with one's heart's desire. Whatever it wishes to
get, it purchases at the cost of soul"; and again:

"Wisdom is one thing. It is to know the thought by which all things
are steered through all things."[1]

Examples might be multiplied, but those that have been given are
enough to show the character of the man: the facts of science, as they
appeared to him, fed the flame in his soul, and in its light he saw
into the depths of the world by the reflection of his own dancing
swiftly penetrating fire. In such a nature we see the true union of
the mystic and the man of science--the highest eminence, as I think,
that it is possible to achieve in the world of thought.

In Plato, the same twofold impulse exists, though the mystic impulse
is distinctly the stronger of the two, and secures ultimate victory
whenever the conflict is sharp. His description of the cave is the
classical statement of belief in a knowledge and reality truer and
more real than that of the senses:

  "Imagine[2] a number of men living in an underground cavernous
  chamber, with an entrance open to the light, extending along the
  entire length of the cavern, in which they have been confined, from
  their childhood, with their legs and necks so shackled that they
  are obliged to sit still and look straight forwards, because their
  chains render it impossible for them to turn their heads round: and
  imagine a bright fire burning some way off, above and behind them,
  and an elevated roadway passing between the fire and the prisoners,
  with a low wall built along it, like the screens which conjurors
  put up in front of their audience, and above which they exhibit
  their wonders.

  I have it, he replied.

  Also figure to yourself a number of persons walking behind this
  wall, and carrying with them statues of men, and images of other
  animals, wrought in wood and stone and all kinds of materials,
  together with various other articles, which overtop the wall; and,
  as you might expect, let some of the passers-by be talking, and
  others silent.

  You are describing a strange scene, and strange prisoners.

  They resemble us, I replied.

  Now consider what would happen if the course of nature brought them
  a release from their fetters, and a remedy for their foolishness,
  in the following manner. Let us suppose that one of them has been
  released, and compelled suddenly to stand up, and turn his neck
  round and walk with open eyes towards the light; and let us suppose
  that he goes through all these actions with pain, and that the
  dazzling splendour renders him incapable of discerning those
  objects of which he used formerly to see the shadows. What answer
  should you expect him to make, if some one were to tell him that in
  those days he was watching foolish phantoms, but that now he is
  somewhat nearer to reality, and is turned towards things more real,
  and sees more correctly; above all, if he were to point out to him
  the several objects that are passing by, and question him, and
  compel him to answer what they are? Should you not expect him to be
  puzzled, and to regard his old visions as truer than the objects
  now forced upon his notice?

  Yes, much truer....

  Hence, I suppose, habit will be necessary to enable him to perceive
  objects in that upper world. At first he will be most successful in
  distinguishing shadows; then he will discern the reflections of men
  and other things in water, and afterwards the realities; and after
  this he will raise his eyes to encounter the light of the moon and
  stars, finding it less difficult to study the heavenly bodies and
  the heaven itself by night, than the sun and the sun's light by
  day.

  Doubtless.

  Last of all, I imagine, he will be able to observe and contemplate
  the nature of the sun, not as it _appears_ in water or on alien
  ground, but as it is in itself in its own territory.

  Of course.

  His next step will be to draw the conclusion, that the sun is the
  author of the seasons and the years, and the guardian of all things
  in the visible world, and in a manner the cause of all those things
  which he and his companions used to see.

  Obviously, this will be his next step....

  Now this imaginary case, my dear Glancon, you must apply in all its
  parts to our former statements, by comparing the region which the
  eye reveals to the prison house, and the light of the fire therein
  to the power of the sun: and if, by the upward ascent and the
  contemplation of the upper world, you understand the mounting of
  the soul into the intellectual region, you will hit the tendency of
  my own surmises, since you desire to be told what they are; though,
  indeed, God only knows whether they are correct. But, be that as it
  may, the view which I take of the subject is to the following
  effect. In the world of knowledge, the essential Form of Good is
  the limit of our enquiries, and can barely be perceived; but, when
  perceived, we cannot help concluding that it is in every case the
  source of all that is bright and beautiful,--in the visible world
  giving birth to light and its master, and in the intellectual world
  dispensing, immediately and with full authority, truth and
  reason;--and that whosoever would act wisely, either in private or
  in public, must set this Form of Good before his eyes."

But in this passage, as throughout most of Plato's teaching, there is
an identification of the good with the truly real, which became
embodied in the philosophical tradition, and is still largely
operative in our own day. In thus allowing a legislative function to
the good, Plato produced a divorce between philosophy and science,
from which, in my opinion, both have suffered ever since and are still
suffering. The man of science, whatever his hopes may be, must lay
them aside while he studies nature; and the philosopher, if he is to
achieve truth, must do the same. Ethical considerations can only
legitimately appear when the truth has been ascertained: they can and
should appear as determining our feeling towards the truth, and our
manner of ordering our lives in view of the truth, but not as
themselves dictating what the truth is to be.

There are passages in Plato--among those which illustrate the
scientific side of his mind--where he seems clearly aware of this. The
most noteworthy is the one in which Socrates, as a young man, is
explaining the theory of ideas to Parmenides.

After Socrates has explained that there is an idea of the good, but
not of such things as hair and mud and dirt, Parmenides advises him
"not to despise even the meanest things," and this advice shows the
genuine scientific temper. It is with this impartial temper that the
mystic's apparent insight into a higher reality and a hidden good has
to be combined if philosophy is to realise its greatest possibilities.
And it is failure in this respect that has made so much of idealistic
philosophy thin, lifeless, and insubstantial. It is only in marriage
with the world that our ideals can bear fruit: divorced from it, they
remain barren. But marriage with the world is not to be achieved by an
ideal which shrinks from fact, or demands in advance that the world
shall conform to its desires.

Parmenides himself is the source of a peculiarly interesting strain
of mysticism which pervades Plato's thought--the mysticism which may
be called "logical" because it is embodied in theories on logic. This
form of mysticism, which appears, so far as the West is concerned, to
have originated with Parmenides, dominates the reasonings of all the
great mystical metaphysicians from his day to that of Hegel and his
modern disciples. Reality, he says, is uncreated, indestructible,
unchanging, indivisible; it is "immovable in the bonds of mighty
chains, without beginning and without end; since coming into being and
passing away have been driven afar, and true belief has cast them
away." The fundamental principle of his inquiry is stated in a
sentence which would not be out of place in Hegel: "Thou canst not
know what is not--that is impossible--nor utter it; for it is the same
thing that can be thought and that can be." And again: "It needs must
be that what can be thought and spoken of is; for it is possible for
it to be, and it is not possible for what is nothing to be." The
impossibility of change follows from this principle; for what is past
can be spoken of, and therefore, by the principle, still is.

Mystical philosophy, in all ages and in all parts of the world, is
characterised by certain beliefs which are illustrated by the
doctrines we have been considering.

There is, first, the belief in insight as against discursive analytic
knowledge: the belief in a way of wisdom, sudden, penetrating,
coercive, which is contrasted with the slow and fallible study of
outward appearance by a science relying wholly upon the senses. All
who are capable of absorption in an inward passion must have
experienced at times the strange feeling of unreality in common
objects, the loss of contact with daily things, in which the solidity
of the outer world is lost, and the soul seems, in utter loneliness,
to bring forth, out of its own depths, the mad dance of fantastic
phantoms which have hitherto appeared as independently real and
living. This is the negative side of the mystic's initiation: the
doubt concerning common knowledge, preparing the way for the reception
of what seems a higher wisdom. Many men to whom this negative
experience is familiar do not pass beyond it, but for the mystic it is
merely the gateway to an ampler world.

The mystic insight begins with the sense of a mystery unveiled, of a
hidden wisdom now suddenly become certain beyond the possibility of a
doubt. The sense of certainty and revelation comes earlier than any
definite belief. The definite beliefs at which mystics arrive are the
result of reflection upon the inarticulate experience gained in the
moment of insight. Often, beliefs which have no real connection with
this moment become subsequently attracted into the central nucleus;
thus in addition to the convictions which all mystics share, we find,
in many of them, other convictions of a more local and temporary
character, which no doubt become amalgamated with what was essentially
mystical in virtue of their subjective certainty. We may ignore such
inessential accretions, and confine ourselves to the beliefs which all
mystics share.

The first and most direct outcome of the moment of illumination is
belief in the possibility of a way of knowledge which may be called
revelation or insight or intuition, as contrasted with sense, reason,
and analysis, which are regarded as blind guides leading to the morass
of illusion. Closely connected with this belief is the conception of a
Reality behind the world of appearance and utterly different from it.
This Reality is regarded with an admiration often amounting to
worship; it is felt to be always and everywhere close at hand, thinly
veiled by the shows of sense, ready, for the receptive mind, to shine
in its glory even through the apparent folly and wickedness of Man.
The poet, the artist, and the lover are seekers after that glory: the
haunting beauty that they pursue is the faint reflection of its sun.
But the mystic lives in the full light of the vision: what others
dimly seek he knows, with a knowledge beside which all other knowledge
is ignorance.

The second characteristic of mysticism is its belief in unity, and its
refusal to admit opposition or division anywhere. We found Heraclitus
saying "good and ill are one"; and again he says, "the way up and the
way down is one and the same." The same attitude appears in the
simultaneous assertion of contradictory propositions, such as: "We
step and do not step into the same rivers; we are and are not." The
assertion of Parmenides, that reality is one and indivisible, comes
from the same impulse towards unity. In Plato, this impulse is less
prominent, being held in check by his theory of ideas; but it
reappears, so far as his logic permits, in the doctrine of the primacy
of the Good.

A third mark of almost all mystical metaphysics is the denial of the
reality of Time. This is an outcome of the denial of division; if all
is one, the distinction of past and future must be illusory. We have
seen this doctrine prominent in Parmenides; and among moderns it is
fundamental in the systems of Spinoza and Hegel.

The last of the doctrines of mysticism which we have to consider is
its belief that all evil is mere appearance, an illusion produced by
the divisions and oppositions of the analytic intellect. Mysticism
does not maintain that such things as cruelty, for example, are good,
but it denies that they are real: they belong to that lower world of
phantoms from which we are to be liberated by the insight of the
vision. Sometimes--for example in Hegel, and at least verbally in
Spinoza--not only evil, but good also, is regarded as illusory, though
nevertheless the emotional attitude towards what is held to be Reality
is such as would naturally be associated with the belief that Reality
is good. What is, in all cases, ethically characteristic of mysticism
is absence of indignation or protest, acceptance with joy, disbelief
in the ultimate truth of the division into two hostile camps, the good
and the bad. This attitude is a direct outcome of the nature of the
mystical experience: with its sense of unity is associated a feeling
of infinite peace. Indeed it may be suspected that the feeling of
peace produces, as feelings do in dreams, the whole system of
associated beliefs which make up the body of mystic doctrine. But this
is a difficult question, and one on which it cannot be hoped that
mankind will reach agreement.

Four questions thus arise in considering the truth or falsehood of
mysticism, namely:

  I. Are there two ways of knowing, which may be called respectively
  reason and intuition? And if so, is either to be preferred to the
  other?

  II. Is all plurality and division illusory?

  III. Is time unreal?

  IV. What kind of reality belongs to good and evil?

On all four of these questions, while fully developed mysticism seems
to me mistaken, I yet believe that, by sufficient restraint, there is
an element of wisdom to be learned from the mystical way of feeling,
which does not seem to be attainable in any other manner. If this is
the truth, mysticism is to be commended as an attitude towards life,
not as a creed about the world. The meta-physical creed, I shall
maintain, is a mistaken outcome of the emotion, although this emotion,
as colouring and informing all other thoughts and feelings, is the
inspirer of whatever is best in Man. Even the cautious and patient
investigation of truth by science, which seems the very antithesis of
the mystic's swift certainty, may be fostered and nourished by that
very spirit of reverence in which mysticism lives and moves.


I. REASON AND INTUITION[3]

Of the reality or unreality of the mystic's world I know nothing. I
have no wish to deny it, nor even to declare that the insight which
reveals it is not a genuine insight. What I do wish to maintain--and
it is here that the scientific attitude becomes imperative--is that
insight, untested and unsupported, is an insufficient guarantee of
truth, in spite of the fact that much of the most important truth is
first suggested by its means. It is common to speak of an opposition
between instinct and reason; in the eighteenth century, the opposition
was drawn in favour of reason, but under the influence of Rousseau and
the romantic movement instinct was given the preference, first by
those who rebelled against artificial forms of government and thought,
and then, as the purely rationalistic defence of traditional theology
became increasingly difficult, by all who felt in science a menace to
creeds which they associated with a spiritual outlook on life and the
world. Bergson, under the name of "intuition," has raised instinct to
the position of sole arbiter of metaphysical truth. But in fact the
opposition of instinct and reason is mainly illusory. Instinct,
intuition, or insight is what first leads to the beliefs which
subsequent reason confirms or confutes; but the confirmation, where it
is possible, consists, in the last analysis, of agreement with other
beliefs no less instinctive. Reason is a harmonising, controlling
force rather than a creative one. Even in the most purely logical
realm, it is insight that first arrives at what is new.

Where instinct and reason do sometimes conflict is in regard to single
beliefs, held instinctively, and held with such determination that no
degree of inconsistency with other beliefs leads to their abandonment.
Instinct, like all human faculties, is liable to error. Those in whom
reason is weak are often unwilling to admit this as regards
themselves, though all admit it in regard to others. Where instinct is
least liable to error is in practical matters as to which right
judgment is a help to survival: friendship and hostility in others,
for instance, are often felt with extraordinary discrimination through
very careful disguises. But even in such matters a wrong impression
may be given by reserve or flattery; and in matters less directly
practical, such as philosophy deals with, very strong instinctive
beliefs are sometimes wholly mistaken, as we may come to know through
their perceived inconsistency with other equally strong beliefs. It is
such considerations that necessitate the harmonising mediation of
reason, which tests our beliefs by their mutual compatibility, and
examines, in doubtful cases, the possible sources of error on the one
side and on the other. In this there is no opposition to instinct as a
whole, but only to blind reliance upon some one interesting aspect of
instinct to the exclusion of other more commonplace but not less
trustworthy aspects. It is such one-sidedness, not instinct itself,
that reason aims at correcting.

These more or less trite maxims may be illustrated by application to
Bergson's advocacy of "intuition" as against "intellect." There are,
he says, "two profoundly different ways of knowing a thing. The first
implies that we move round the object: the second that we enter into
it. The first depends on the point of view at which we are placed and
on the symbols by which we express ourselves. The second neither
depends on a point of view nor relies on any symbol. The first kind of
knowledge may be said to stop at the _relative_; the second, in those
cases where it is possible, to attain the _absolute_."[4] The second
of these, which is intuition, is, he says, "the kind of _intellectual
sympathy_ by which one places oneself within an object in order to
coincide with what is unique in it and therefore inexpressible" (p.
6). In illustration, he mentions self-knowledge: "there is one
reality, at least, which we all seize from within, by intuition and
not by simple analysis. It is our own personality in its flowing
through time--our self which endures" (p. 8). The rest of Bergson's
philosophy consists in reporting, through the imperfect medium of
words, the knowledge gained by intuition, and the consequent complete
condemnation of all the pretended knowledge derived from science and
common sense.

This procedure, since it takes sides in a conflict of instinctive
beliefs, stands in need of justification by proving the greater
trustworthiness of the beliefs on one side than of those on the other.
Bergson attempts this justification in two ways, first by explaining
that intellect is a purely practical faculty to secure biological
success, secondly by mentioning remarkable feats of instinct in
animals and by pointing out characteristics of the world which, though
intuition can apprehend them, are baffling to intellect as he
interprets it.

Of Bergson's theory that intellect is a purely practical faculty,
developed in the struggle for survival, and not a source of true
beliefs, we may say, first, that it is only through intellect that we
know of the struggle for survival and of the biological ancestry of
man: if the intellect is misleading, the whole of this merely inferred
history is presumably untrue. If, on the other hand, we agree with him
in thinking that evolution took place as Darwin believed, then it is
not only intellect, but all our faculties, that have been developed
under the stress of practical utility. Intuition is seen at its best
where it is directly useful, for example in regard to other people's
characters and dispositions. Bergson apparently holds that capacity
for this kind of knowledge is less explicable by the struggle for
existence than, for example, capacity for pure mathematics. Yet the
savage deceived by false friendship is likely to pay for his mistake
with his life; whereas even in the most civilised societies men are
not put to death for mathematical incompetence. All the most striking
of his instances of intuition in animals have a very direct survival
value. The fact is, of course, that both intuition and intellect have
been developed because they are useful, and that, speaking broadly,
they are useful when they give truth and become harmful when they give
falsehood. Intellect, in civilised man, like artistic capacity, has
occasionally been developed beyond the point where it is useful to the
individual; intuition, on the other hand, seems on the whole to
diminish as civilisation increases. It is greater, as a rule, in
children than in adults, in the uneducated than in the educated.
Probably in dogs it exceeds anything to be found in human beings. But
those who see in these facts a recommendation of intuition ought to
return to running wild in the woods, dyeing themselves with woad and
living on hips and haws.

Let us next examine whether intuition possesses any such infallibility
as Bergson claims for it. The best instance of it, according to him,
is our acquaintance with ourselves; yet self-knowledge is proverbially
rare and difficult. Most men, for example, have in their nature
meannesses, vanities, and envies of which they are quite unconscious,
though even their best friends can perceive them without any
difficulty. It is true that intuition has a convincingness which is
lacking to intellect: while it is present, it is almost impossible to
doubt its truth. But if it should appear, on examination, to be at
least as fallible as intellect, its greater subjective certainty
becomes a demerit, making it only the more irresistibly deceptive.
Apart from self-knowledge, one of the most notable examples of
intuition is the knowledge people believe themselves to possess of
those with whom they are in love: the wall between different
personalities seems to become transparent, and people think they see
into another soul as into their own. Yet deception in such cases is
constantly practised with success; and even where there is no
intentional deception, experience gradually proves, as a rule, that
the supposed insight was illusory, and that the slower more groping
methods of the intellect are in the long run more reliable.

Bergson maintains that intellect can only deal with things in so far
as they resemble what has been experienced in the past, while
intuition has the power of apprehending the uniqueness and novelty
that always belong to each fresh moment. That there is something
unique and new at every moment, is certainly true; it is also true
that this cannot be fully expressed by means of intellectual concepts.
Only direct acquaintance can give knowledge of what is unique and new.
But direct acquaintance of this kind is given fully in sensation, and
does not require, so far as I can see, any special faculty of
intuition for its apprehension. It is neither intellect nor intuition,
but sensation, that supplies new data; but when the data are new in
any remarkable manner, intellect is much more capable of dealing with
them than intuition would be. The hen with a brood of ducklings no
doubt has intuition which seems to place her inside them, and not
merely to know them analytically; but when the ducklings take to the
water, the whole apparent intuition is seen to be illusory, and the
hen is left helpless on the shore. Intuition, in fact, is an aspect
and development of instinct, and, like all instinct, is admirable in
those customary surroundings which have moulded the habits of the
animal in question, but totally incompetent as soon as the
surroundings are changed in a way which demands some non-habitual mode
of action.

The theoretical understanding of the world, which is the aim of
philosophy, is not a matter of great practical importance to animals,
or to savages, or even to most civilised men. It is hardly to be
supposed, therefore, that the rapid, rough and ready methods of
instinct or intuition will find in this field a favourable ground for
their application. It is the older kinds of activity, which bring out
our kinship with remote generations of animal and semi-human
ancestors, that show intuition at its best. In such matters as
self-preservation and love, intuition will act sometimes (though not
always) with a swiftness and precision which are astonishing to the
critical intellect. But philosophy is not one of the pursuits which
illustrate our affinity with the past: it is a highly refined, highly
civilised pursuit, demanding, for its success, a certain liberation
from the life of instinct, and even, at times, a certain aloofness
from all mundane hopes and fears. It is not in philosophy, therefore,
that we can hope to see intuition at its best. On the contrary, since
the true objects of philosophy, and the habit of thought demanded for
their apprehension, are strange, unusual, and remote, it is here, more
almost than anywhere else, that intellect proves superior to
intuition, and that quick unanalysed convictions are least deserving
of uncritical acceptance.

In advocating the scientific restraint and balance, as against the
self-assertion of a confident reliance upon intuition, we are only
urging, in the sphere of knowledge, that largeness of contemplation,
that impersonal disinterestedness, and that freedom from practical
preoccupations which have been inculcated by all the great religions
of the world. Thus our conclusion, however it may conflict with the
explicit beliefs of many mystics, is, in essence, not contrary to the
spirit which inspires those beliefs, but rather the outcome of this
very spirit as applied in the realm of thought.


II. UNITY AND PLURALITY

One of the most convincing aspects of the mystic illumination is the
apparent revelation of the oneness of all things, giving rise to
pantheism in religion and to monism in philosophy. An elaborate logic,
beginning with Parmenides, and culminating in Hegel and his followers,
has been gradually developed, to prove that the universe is one
indivisible Whole, and that what seem to be its parts, if considered
as substantial and self-existing, are mere illusion. The conception
of a Reality quite other than the world of appearance, a reality one,
indivisible, and unchanging, was introduced into Western philosophy by
Parmenides, not, nominally at least, for mystical or religious
reasons, but on the basis of a logical argument as to the
impossibility of not-being, and most subsequent metaphysical systems
are the outcome of this fundamental idea.

The logic used in defence of mysticism seems to be faulty as logic,
and open to technical criticisms, which I have explained elsewhere. I
shall not here repeat these criticisms, since they are lengthy and
difficult, but shall instead attempt an analysis of the state of mind
from which mystical logic has arisen.

Belief in a reality quite different from what appears to the senses
arises with irresistible force in certain moods, which are the source
of most mysticism, and of most metaphysics. While such a mood is
dominant, the need of logic is not felt, and accordingly the more
thoroughgoing mystics do not employ logic, but appeal directly to the
immediate deliverance of their insight. But such fully developed
mysticism is rare in the West. When the intensity of emotional
conviction subsides, a man who is in the habit of reasoning will
search for logical grounds in favour of the belief which he finds in
himself. But since the belief already exists, he will be very
hospitable to any ground that suggests itself. The paradoxes
apparently proved by his logic are really the paradoxes of mysticism,
and are the goal which he feels his logic must reach if it is to be in
accordance with insight. The resulting logic has rendered most
philosophers incapable of giving any account of the world of science
and daily life. If they had been anxious to give such an account, they
would probably have discovered the errors of their logic; but most of
them were less anxious to understand the world of science and daily
life than to convict it of unreality in the interests of a
super-sensible "real" world.

It is in this way that logic has been pursued by those of the great
philosophers who were mystics. But since they usually took for granted
the supposed insight of the mystic emotion, their logical doctrines
were presented with a certain dryness, and were believed by their
disciples to be quite independent of the sudden illumination from
which they sprang. Nevertheless their origin clung to them, and they
remained--to borrow a useful word from Mr. Santayana--"malicious" in
regard to the world of science and common sense. It is only so that we
can account for the complacency with which philosophers have accepted
the inconsistency of their doctrines with all the common and
scientific facts which seem best established and most worthy of
belief.

The logic of mysticism shows, as is natural, the defects which are
inherent in anything malicious. The impulse to logic, not felt while
the mystic mood is dominant, reasserts itself as the mood fades, but
with a desire to retain the vanishing insight, or at least to prove
that it _was_ insight, and that what seems to contradict it is
illusion. The logic which thus arises is not quite disinterested or
candid, and is inspired by a certain hatred of the daily world to
which it is to be applied. Such an attitude naturally does not tend to
the best results. Everyone knows that to read an author simply in
order to refute him is not the way to understand him; and to read the
book of Nature with a conviction that it is all illusion is just as
unlikely to lead to understanding. If our logic is to find the common
world intelligible, it must not be hostile, but must be inspired by a
genuine acceptance such as is not usually to be found among
metaphysicians.


III. TIME

The unreality of time is a cardinal doctrine of many metaphysical
systems, often nominally based, as already by Parmenides, upon logical
arguments, but originally derived, at any rate in the founders of new
systems, from the certainty which is born in the moment of mystic
insight. As a Persian Sufi poet says:

    "Past and future are what veil God from our sight.
    Burn up both of them with fire! How long
    Wilt thou be partitioned by these segments as a reed?"[5]

The belief that what is ultimately real must be immutable is a very
common one: it gave rise to the metaphysical notion of substance, and
finds, even now, a wholly illegitimate satisfaction in such scientific
doctrines as the conservation of energy and mass.

It is difficult to disentangle the truth and the error in this view.
The arguments for the contention that time is unreal and that the
world of sense is illusory must, I think, be regarded as fallacious.
Nevertheless there is some sense--easier to feel than to state--in
which time is an unimportant and superficial characteristic of
reality. Past and future must be acknowledged to be as real as the
present, and a certain emancipation from slavery to time is essential
to philosophic thought. The importance of time is rather practical
than theoretical, rather in relation to our desires than in relation
to truth. A truer image of the world, I think, is obtained by
picturing things as entering into the stream of time from an eternal
world outside, than from a view which regards time as the devouring
tyrant of all that is. Both in thought and in feeling, even though
time be real, to realise the unimportance of time is the gate of
wisdom.

That this is the case may be seen at once by asking ourselves why our
feelings towards the past are so different from our feelings towards
the future. The reason for this difference is wholly practical: our
wishes can affect the future but not the past, the future is to some
extent subject to our power, while the past is unalterably fixed. But
every future will some day be past: if we see the past truly now, it
must, when it was still future, have been just what we now see it to
be, and what is now future must be just what we shall see it to be
when it has become past. The felt difference of quality between past
and future, therefore, is not an intrinsic difference, but only a
difference in relation to us: to impartial contemplation, it ceases to
exist. And impartiality of contemplation is, in the intellectual
sphere, that very same virtue of disinterestedness which, in the
sphere of action, appears as justice and unselfishness. Whoever wishes
to see the world truly, to rise in thought above the tyranny of
practical desires, must learn to overcome the difference of attitude
towards past and future, and to survey the whole stream of time in one
comprehensive vision.

The kind of way in which, as it seems to me, time ought not to enter
into our theoretic philosophical thought, may be illustrated by the
philosophy which has become associated with the idea of evolution, and
which is exemplified by Nietzsche, pragmatism, and Bergson. This
philosophy, on the basis of the development which has led from the
lowest forms of life up to man, sees in _progress_ the fundamental law
of the universe, and thus admits the difference between _earlier_ and
_later_ into the very citadel of its contemplative outlook. With its
past and future history of the world, conjectural as it is, I do not
wish to quarrel. But I think that, in the intoxication of a quick
success, much that is required for a true understanding of the
universe has been forgotten. Something of Hellenism, something, too,
of Oriental resignation, must be combined with its hurrying Western
self-assertion before it can emerge from the ardour of youth into the
mature wisdom of manhood. In spite of its appeals to science, the true
scientific philosophy, I think, is something more arduous and more
aloof, appealing to less mundane hopes, and requiring a severer
discipline for its successful practice.

Darwin's _Origin of Species_ persuaded the world that the difference
between different species of animals and plants is not the fixed
immutable difference that it appears to be. The doctrine of natural
kinds, which had rendered classification easy and definite, which was
enshrined in the Aristotelian tradition, and protected by its supposed
necessity for orthodox dogma, was suddenly swept away for ever out of
the biological world. The difference between man and the lower
animals, which to our human conceit appears enormous, was shown to be
a gradual achievement, involving intermediate being who could not with
certainty be placed either within or without the human family. The sun
and the planets had already been shown by Laplace to be very probably
derived from a primitive more or less undifferentiated nebula. Thus
the old fixed landmarks became wavering and indistinct, and all sharp
outlines were blurred. Things and species lost their boundaries, and
none could say where they began or where they ended.

But if human conceit was staggered for a moment by its kinship with
the ape, it soon found a way to reassert itself, and that way is the
"philosophy" of evolution. A process which led from the amoeba to Man
appeared to the philosophers to be obviously a progress--though
whether the amoeba would agree with this opinion is not known. Hence
the cycle of changes which science had shown to be the probable
history of the past was welcomed as revealing a law of development
towards good in the universe--an evolution or unfolding of an idea
slowly embodying itself in the actual. But such a view, though it
might satisfy Spencer and those whom we may call Hegelian
evolutionists, could not be accepted as adequate by the more
whole-hearted votaries of change. An ideal to which the world
continuously approaches is, to these minds, too dead and static to be
inspiring. Not only the aspiration, but the ideal too, must change and
develop with the course of evolution: there must be no fixed goal, but
a continual fashioning of fresh needs by the impulse which is life and
which alone gives unity to the process.

Life, in this philosophy, is a continuous stream, in which all
divisions are artificial and unreal. Separate things, beginnings and
endings, are mere convenient fictions: there is only smooth unbroken
transition. The beliefs of to-day may count as true to-day, if they
carry us along the stream; but to-morrow they will be false, and must
be replaced by new beliefs to meet the new situation. All our thinking
consists of convenient fictions, imaginary congealings of the stream:
reality flows on in spite of all our fictions, and though it can be
lived, it cannot be conceived in thought. Somehow, without explicit
statement, the assurance is slipped in that the future, though we
cannot foresee it, will be better than the past or the present: the
reader is like the child which expects a sweet because it has been
told to open its mouth and shut its eyes. Logic, mathematics, physics
disappear in this philosophy, because they are too "static"; what is
real is no impulse and movement towards a goal which, like the
rainbow, recedes as we advance, and makes every place different when
it reaches it from what it appeared to be at a distance.

I do not propose to enter upon a technical examination of this
philosophy. I wish only to maintain that the motives and interests
which inspire it are so exclusively practical, and the problems with
which it deals are so special, that it can hardly be regarded as
touching any of the questions that, to my mind, constitute genuine
philosophy.

The predominant interest of evolutionism is in the question of human
destiny, or at least of the destiny of Life. It is more interested in
morality and happiness than in knowledge for its own sake. It must be
admitted that the same may be said of many other philosophies, and
that a desire for the kind of knowledge which philosophy can give is
very rare. But if philosophy is to attain truth, it is necessary first
and foremost that philosophers should acquire the disinterested
intellectual curiosity which characterises the genuine man of science.
Knowledge concerning the future--which is the kind of knowledge that
must be sought if we are to know about human destiny--is possible
within certain narrow limits. It is impossible to say how much the
limits may be enlarged with the progress of science. But what is
evident is that any proposition about the future belongs by its
subject-matter to some particular science, and is to be ascertained,
if at all, by the methods of that science. Philosophy is not a short
cut to the same kind of results as those of the other sciences: if it
is to be a genuine study, it must have a province of its own, and aim
at results which the other sciences can neither prove nor disprove.

Evolutionism, in basing itself upon the notion of _progress_, which is
change from the worse to the better, allows the notion of time, as it
seems to me, to become its tyrant rather than its servant, and thereby
loses that impartiality of contemplation which is the source of all
that is best in philosophic thought and feeling. Metaphysicians, as we
saw, have frequently denied altogether the reality of time. I do not
wish to do this; I wish only to preserve the mental outlook which
inspired the denial, the attitude which, in thought, regards the past
as having the same reality as the present and the same importance as
the future. "In so far," says Spinoza,[6] "as the mind conceives a
thing according to the dictate of reason, it will be equally affected
whether the idea is that of a future, past, or present thing." It is
this "conceiving according to the dictate of reason" that I find
lacking in the philosophy which is based on evolution.


IV. GOOD AND EVIL

Mysticism maintains that all evil is illusory, and sometimes maintains
the same view as regards good, but more often holds that all Reality
is good. Both views are to be found in Heraclitus: "Good and ill are
one," he says, but again, "To God all things are fair and good and
right, but men hold some things wrong and some right." A similar
twofold position is to be found in Spinoza, but he uses the word
"perfection" when he means to speak of the good that is not merely
human. "By reality and perfection I mean the same thing," he says;[7]
but elsewhere we find the definition: "By _good_ I shall mean that
which we certainly know to be useful to us."[8] Thus perfection
belongs to Reality in its own nature, but goodness is relative to
ourselves and our needs, and disappears in an impartial survey. Some
such distinction, I think, is necessary in order to understand the
ethical outlook of mysticism: there is a lower mundane kind of good
and evil, which divides the world of appearance into what seem to be
conflicting parts; but there is also a higher, mystical kind of good,
which belongs to Reality and is not opposed by any correlative kind of
evil.

It is difficult to give a logically tenable account of this position
without recognising that good and evil are subjective, that what is
good is merely that towards which we have one kind of feeling, and
what is evil is merely that towards which we have another kind of
feeling. In our active life, where we have to exercise choice, and to
prefer this to that of two possible acts, it is necessary to have a
distinction of good and evil, or at least of better and worse. But
this distinction, like everything pertaining to action, belongs to
what mysticism regards as the world of illusion, if only because it is
essentially concerned with time. In our contemplative life, where
action is not called for, it is possible to be impartial, and to
overcome the ethical dualism which action requires. So long as we
remain _merely_ impartial, we may be content to say that both the good
and the evil of action are illusions. But if, as we must do if we have
the mystic vision, we find the whole world worthy of love and worship,
if we see

    "The earth, and every common sight....
    Apparell'd in celestial light,"

we shall say that there is a higher good than that of action, and that
this higher good belongs to the whole world as it is in reality. In
this way the twofold attitude and the apparent vacillation of
mysticism are explained and justified.

The possibility of this universal love and joy in all that exists is
of supreme importance for the conduct and happiness of life, and gives
inestimable value to the mystic emotion, apart from any creeds which
may be built upon it. But if we are not to be led into false beliefs,
it is necessary to realise exactly _what_ the mystic emotion reveals.
It reveals a possibility of human nature--a possibility of a nobler,
happier, freer life than any that can be otherwise achieved. But it
does not reveal anything about the non-human, or about the nature of
the universe in general. Good and bad, and even the higher good that
mysticism finds everywhere, are the reflections of our own emotions on
other things, not part of the substance of things as they are in
themselves. And therefore an impartial contemplation, freed from all
pre-occupation with Self, will not judge things good or bad, although
it is very easily combined with that feeling of universal love which
leads the mystic to say that the whole world is good.

The philosophy of evolution, through the notion of progress, is bound
up with the ethical dualism of the worse and the better, and is thus
shut out, not only from the kind of survey which discards good and
evil altogether from its view, but also from the mystical belief in
the goodness of everything. In this way the distinction of good and
evil, like time, becomes a tyrant in this philosophy, and introduces
into thought the restless selectiveness of action. Good and evil, like
time, are, it would seem, not general or fundamental in the world of
thought, but late and highly specialised members of the intellectual
hierarchy.

Although, as we saw, mysticism can be interpreted so as to agree with
the view that good and evil are not intellectually fundamental, it
must be admitted that here we are no longer in verbal agreement with
most of the great philosophers and religious teachers of the past. I
believe, however, that the elimination of ethical considerations from
philosophy is both scientifically necessary and--though this may seem
a paradox--an ethical advance. Both these contentions must be briefly
defended.

The hope of satisfaction to our more human desires--the hope of
demonstrating that the world has this or that desirable ethical
characteristic--is not one which, so far as I can see, a scientific
philosophy can do anything whatever to satisfy. The difference between
a good world and a bad one is a difference in the particular
characteristics of the particular things that exist in these worlds:
it is not a sufficiently abstract difference to come within the
province of philosophy. Love and hate, for example, are ethical
opposites, but to philosophy they are closely analogous attitudes
towards objects. The general form and structure of those attitudes
towards objects which constitute mental phenomena is a problem for
philosophy, but the difference between love and hate is not a
difference of form or structure, and therefore belongs rather to the
special science of psychology than to philosophy. Thus the ethical
interests which have often inspired philosophers must remain in the
background: some kind of ethical interest may inspire the whole study,
but none must obtrude in the detail or be expected in the special
results which are sought.

If this view seems at first sight disappointing, we may remind
ourselves that a similar change has been found necessary in all the
other sciences. The physicist or chemist is not now required to prove
the ethical importance of his ions or atoms; the biologist is not
expected to prove the utility of the plants or animals which he
dissects. In pre-scientific ages this was not the case. Astronomy, for
example, was studied because men believed in astrology: it was thought
that the movements of the planets had the most direct and important
bearing upon the lives of human beings. Presumably, when this belief
decayed and the disinterested study of astronomy began, many who had
found astrology absorbingly interesting decided that astronomy had too
little human interest to be worthy of study. Physics, as it appears in
Plato's Timus for example, is full of ethical notions: it is an
essential part of its purpose to show that the earth is worthy of
admiration. The modern physicist, on the contrary, though he has no
wish to deny that the earth is admirable, is not concerned, as
physicist, with its ethical attributes: he is merely concerned to find
out facts, not to consider whether they are good or bad. In
psychology, the scientific attitude is even more recent and more
difficult than in the physical sciences: it is natural to consider
that human nature is either good or bad, and to suppose that the
difference between good and bad, so all-important in practice, must be
important in theory also. It is only during the last century that an
ethically neutral psychology has grown up; and here too, ethical
neutrality has been essential to scientific success.

In philosophy, hitherto, ethical neutrality has been seldom sought and
hardly ever achieved. Men have remembered their wishes, and have
judged philosophies in relation to their wishes. Driven from the
particular sciences, the belief that the notions of good and evil must
afford a key to the understanding of the world has sought a refuge in
philosophy. But even from this last refuge, if philosophy is not to
remain a set of pleasing dreams, this belief must be driven forth. It
is a commonplace that happiness is not best achieved by those who
seek it directly; and it would seem that the same is true of the good.
In thought, at any rate, those who forget good and evil and seek only
to know the facts are more likely to achieve good than those who view
the world through the distorting medium of their own desires.

We are thus brought back to our seeming paradox, that a philosophy
which does not seek to impose upon the world its own conceptions of
good and evil is not only more likely to achieve truth, but is also
the outcome of a higher ethical standpoint than one which, like
evolutionism and most traditional systems, is perpetually appraising
the universe and seeking to find in it an embodiment of present
ideals. In religion, and in every deeply serious view of the world and
of human destiny, there is an element of submission, a realisation of
the limits of human power, which is somewhat lacking in the modern
world, with its quick material successes and its insolent belief in
the boundless possibilities of progress. "He that loveth his life
shall lose it"; and there is danger lest, through a too confident love
of life, life itself should lose much of what gives it its highest
worth. The submission which religion inculcates in action is
essentially the same in spirit as that which science teaches in
thought; and the ethical neutrality by which its victories have been
achieved is the outcome of that submission.

The good which it concerns us to remember is the good which it lies in
our power to create--the good in our own lives and in our attitude
towards the world. Insistence on belief in an external realisation of
the good is a form of self-assertion, which, while it cannot secure
the external good which it desires, can seriously impair the inward
good which lies within our power, and destroy that reverence towards
fact which constitutes both what is valuable in humility and what is
fruitful in the scientific temper.

Human beings cannot, of course, wholly transcend human nature;
something subjective, if only the interest that determines the
direction of our attention, must remain in all our thought. But
scientific philosophy comes nearer to objectivity than any other human
pursuit, and gives us, therefore, the closest constant and the most
intimate relation with the outer world that it is possible to achieve.
To the primitive mind, everything is either friendly or hostile; but
experience has shown that friendliness and hostility are not the
conceptions by which the world is to be understood. Scientific
philosophy thus represents, though as yet only in a nascent condition,
a higher form of thought than any pre-scientific belief or
imagination, and, like every approach to self-transcendence, it brings
with it a rich reward in increase of scope and breadth and
comprehension. Evolutionism, in spite of its appeals to particular
scientific facts, fails to be a truly scientific philosophy because of
its slavery to time, its ethical preoccupations, and its predominant
interest in our mundane concerns and destiny. A truly scientific
philosophy will be more humble, more piecemeal, more arduous, offering
less glitter of outward mirage to flatter fallacious hopes, but more
indifferent to fate, and more capable of accepting the world without
the tyrannous imposition of our human and temporary demands.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] All the above quotations are from Burnet's _Early Greek
Philosophy_, (2nd ed., 1908), pp. 146-156.

[2] _Republic_, 514, translated by Davies and Vaughan.

[3] This section, and also one or two pages in later sections, have
been printed in a course of Lowell lectures _On our knowledge of the
external world_, published by the Open Court Publishing Company. But I
have left them here, as this is the context for which they were
originally written.

[4] _Introduction to Metaphysics_, p. 1.

[5] Whinfield's translation of the _Masnavi_ (Trbner, 1887), p. 34.

[6] _Ethics_, Bk. IV, Prop. LXII.

[7] Ib., Pt. IV, Df. I.

[8] _Ethics_. Pt. II. Df. VI.




II

THE PLACE OF SCIENCE IN A LIBERAL EDUCATION


I

Science, to the ordinary reader of newspapers, is represented by a
varying selection of sensational triumphs, such as wireless telegraphy
and aeroplanes, radio-activity and the marvels of modern alchemy. It is
not of this aspect of science that I wish to speak. Science, in this
aspect, consists of detached up-to-date fragments, interesting only
until they are replaced by something newer and more up-to-date,
displaying nothing of the systems of patiently constructed knowledge
out of which, almost as a casual incident, have come the practically
useful results which interest the man in the street. The increased
command over the forces of nature which is derived from science is
undoubtedly an amply sufficient reason for encouraging scientific
research, but this reason has been so often urged and is so easily
appreciated that other reasons, to my mind quite as important, are apt
to be overlooked. It is with these other reasons, especially with the
intrinsic value of a scientific habit of mind in forming our outlook
on the world, that I shall be concerned in what follows.

The instance of wireless telegraphy will serve to illustrate the
difference between the two points of view. Almost all the serious
intellectual labour required for the possibility of this invention is
due to three men--Faraday, Maxwell, and Hertz. In alternating layers
of experiment and theory these three men built up the modern theory of
electromagnetism, and demonstrated the identity of light with
electromagnetic waves. The system which they discovered is one of
profound intellectual interest, bringing together and unifying an
endless variety of apparently detached phenomena, and displaying a
cumulative mental power which cannot but afford delight to every
generous spirit. The mechanical details which remained to be adjusted
in order to utilise their discoveries for a practical system of
telegraphy demanded, no doubt, very considerable ingenuity, but had
not that broad sweep and that universality which could give them
intrinsic interest as an object of disinterested contemplation.

From the point of view of training the mind, of giving that
well-informed, impersonal outlook which constitutes culture in the
good sense of this much-misused word, it seems to be generally held
indisputable that a literary education is superior to one based on
science. Even the warmest advocates of science are apt to rest their
claims on the contention that culture ought to be sacrificed to
utility. Those men of science who respect culture, when they associate
with men learned in the classics, are apt to admit, not merely
politely, but sincerely, a certain inferiority on their side,
compensated doubtless by the services which science renders to
humanity, but none the less real. And so long as this attitude exists
among men of science, it tends to verify itself: the intrinsically
valuable aspects of science tend to be sacrificed to the merely
useful, and little attempt is made to preserve that leisurely,
systematic survey by which the finer quality of mind is formed and
nourished.

But even if there be, in present fact, any such inferiority as is
supposed in the educational value of science, this is, I believe, not
the fault of science itself, but the fault of the spirit in which
science is taught. If its full possibilities were realised by those
who teach it, I believe that its capacity of producing those habits of
mind which constitute the highest mental excellence would be at least
as great as that of literature, and more particularly of Greek and
Latin literature. In saying this I have no wish whatever to disparage
a classical education. I have not myself enjoyed its benefits, and my
knowledge of Greek and Latin authors is derived almost wholly from
translations. But I am firmly persuaded that the Greeks fully deserve
all the admiration that is bestowed upon them, and that it is a very
great and serious loss to be unacquainted with their writings. It is
not by attacking them, but by drawing attention to neglected
excellences in science, that I wish to conduct my argument.

One defect, however, does seem inherent in a purely classical
education--namely, a too exclusive emphasis on the past. By the study
of what is absolutely ended and can never be renewed, a habit of
criticism towards the present and the future is engendered. The
qualities in which the present excels are qualities to which the study
of the past does not direct attention, and to which, therefore, the
student of Greek civilisation may easily become blind. In what is new
and growing there is apt to be something crude, insolent, even a
little vulgar, which is shocking to the man of sensitive taste;
quivering from the rough contact, he retires to the trim gardens of a
polished past, forgetting that they were reclaimed from the wilderness
by men as rough and earth-soiled as those from whom he shrinks in his
own day. The habit of being unable to recognise merit until it is
dead is too apt to be the result of a purely bookish life, and a
culture based wholly on the past will seldom be able to pierce through
everyday surroundings to the essential splendour of contemporary
things, or to the hope of still greater splendour in the future.

    "My eyes saw not the men of old;
    And now their age away has rolled.
    I weep--to think I shall not see
    The heroes of posterity."

So says the Chinese poet; but such impartiality is rare in the more
pugnacious atmosphere of the West, where the champions of past and
future fight a never-ending battle, instead of combining to seek out
the merits of both.

This consideration, which militates not only against the exclusive
study of the classics, but against every form of culture which has
become static, traditional, and academic, leads inevitably to the
fundamental question: What is the true end of education? But before
attempting to answer this question it will be well to define the sense
in which we are to use the word "education." For this purpose I shall
distinguish the sense in which I mean to use it from two others, both
perfectly legitimate, the one broader and the other narrower than the
sense in which I mean to use the word.

In the broader sense, education will include not only what we learn
through instruction, but all that we learn through personal
experience--the formation of character through the education of life.
Of this aspect of education, vitally important as it is, I will say
nothing, since its consideration would introduce topics quite foreign
to the question with which we are concerned.

In the narrower sense, education may be confined to instruction, the
imparting of definite information on various subjects, because such
information, in and for itself, is useful in daily life. Elementary
education--reading, writing, and arithmetic--is almost wholly of this
kind. But instruction, necessary as it is, does not _per se_
constitute education in the sense in which I wish to consider it.

Education, in the sense in which I mean it, may be defined as _the
formation, by means of instruction, of certain mental habits and a
certain outlook on life and the world_. It remains to ask ourselves,
what mental habits, and what sort of outlook, can be hoped for as the
result of instruction? When we have answered this question we can
attempt to decide what science has to contribute to the formation of
the habits and outlook which we desire.

Our whole life is built about a certain number--not a very small
number--of primary instincts and impulses. Only what is in some way
connected with these instincts and impulses appears to us desirable or
important; there is no faculty, whether "reason" or "virtue" or
whatever it may be called, that can take our active life and our hopes
and fears outside the region controlled by these first movers of all
desire. Each of them is like a queen-bee, aided by a hive of workers
gathering honey; but when the queen is gone the workers languish and
die, and the cells remain empty of their expected sweetness. So with
each primary impulse in civilised man: it is surrounded and protected
by a busy swarm of attendant derivative desires, which store up in its
service whatever honey the surrounding world affords. But if the
queen-impulse dies, the death-dealing influence, though retarded a
little by habit, spreads slowly through all the subsidiary impulses,
and a whole tract of life becomes inexplicably colourless. What was
formerly full of zest, and so obviously worth doing that it raised no
questions, has now grown dreary and purposeless: with a sense of
disillusion we inquire the meaning of life, and decide, perhaps, that
all is vanity. The search for an outside meaning that can _compel_ an
inner response must always be disappointed: all "meaning" must be at
bottom related to our primary desires, and when they are extinct no
miracle can restore to the world the value which they reflected upon
it.

The purpose of education, therefore, cannot be to create any primary
impulse which is lacking in the uneducated; the purpose can only be to
enlarge the scope of those that human nature provides, by increasing
the number and variety of attendant thoughts, and by showing where the
most permanent satisfaction is to be found. Under the impulse of a
Calvinistic horror of the "natural man," this obvious truth has been
too often misconceived in the training of the young; "nature" has been
falsely regarded as excluding all that is best in what is natural, and
the endeavour to teach virtue has led to the production of stunted and
contorted hypocrites instead of full-grown human beings. From such
mistakes in education a better psychology or a kinder heart is
beginning to preserve the present generation; we need, therefore,
waste no more words on the theory that the purpose of education is to
thwart or eradicate nature.

But although nature must supply the initial force of desire, nature is
not, in the civilised man, the spasmodic, fragmentary, and yet violent
set of impulses that it is in the savage. Each impulse has its
constitutional ministry of thought and knowledge and reflection,
through which possible conflicts of impulses are foreseen, and
temporary impulses are controlled by the unifying impulse which may be
called wisdom. In this way education destroys the crudity of
instinct, and increases through knowledge the wealth and variety of
the individual's contacts with the outside world, making him no longer
an isolated fighting unit, but a citizen of the universe, embracing
distant countries, remote regions of space, and vast stretches of past
and future within the circle of his interests. It is this simultaneous
softening in the insistence of desire and enlargement of its scope
that is the chief moral end of education.

Closely connected with this moral end is the more purely intellectual
aim of education, the endeavour to make us see and imagine the world
in an objective manner, as far as possible as it is in itself, and not
merely through the distorting medium of personal desire. The complete
attainment of such an objective view is no doubt an ideal,
indefinitely approachable, but not actually and fully realisable.
Education, considered as a process of forming our mental habits and
our outlook on the world, is to be judged successful in proportion as
its outcome approximates to this ideal; in proportion, that is to say,
as it gives us a true view of our place in society, of the relation of
the whole human society to its non-human environment, and of the
nature of the non-human world as it is in itself apart from our
desires and interests. If this standard is admitted, we can return to
the consideration of science, inquiring how far science contributes to
such an aim, and whether it is in any respect superior to its rivals
in educational practice.


II

Two opposite and at first sight conflicting merits belong to science
as against literature and art. The one, which is not inherently
necessary, but is certainly true at the present day, is hopefulness
as to the future of human achievement, and in particular as to the
useful work that may be accomplished by any intelligent student. This
merit and the cheerful outlook which it engenders prevent what might
otherwise be the depressing effect of another aspect of science, to my
mind also a merit, and perhaps its greatest merit--I mean the
irrelevance of human passions and of the whole subjective apparatus
where scientific truth is concerned. Each of these reasons for
preferring the study of science requires some amplification. Let us
begin with the first.

In the study of literature or art our attention is perpetually riveted
upon the past: the men of Greece or of the Renaissance did better than
any men do now; the triumphs of former ages, so far from facilitating
fresh triumphs in our own age, actually increase the difficulty of
fresh triumphs by rendering originality harder of attainment; not only
is artistic achievement not cumulative, but it seems even to depend
upon a certain freshness and _navet_ of impulse and vision which
civilisation tends to destroy. Hence comes, to those who have been
nourished on the literary and artistic productions of former ages, a
certain peevishness and undue fastidiousness towards the present, from
which there seems no escape except into the deliberate vandalism which
ignores tradition and in the search after originality achieves only
the eccentric. But in such vandalism there is none of the simplicity
and spontaneity out of which great art springs: theory is still the
canker in its core, and insincerity destroys the advantages of a
merely pretended ignorance.

The despair thus arising from an education which suggests no
pre-eminent mental activity except that of artistic creation is wholly
absent from an education which gives the knowledge of scientific
method. The discovery of scientific method, except in pure
mathematics, is a thing of yesterday; speaking broadly, we may say
that it dates from Galileo. Yet already it has transformed the world,
and its success proceeds with ever-accelerating velocity. In science
men have discovered an activity of the very highest value in which
they are no longer, as in art, dependent for progress upon the
appearance of continually greater genius, for in science the
successors stand upon the shoulders of their predecessors; where one
man of supreme genius has invented a method, a thousand lesser men can
apply it. No transcendent ability is required in order to make useful
discoveries in science; the edifice of science needs its masons,
bricklayers, and common labourers as well as its foremen,
master-builders, and architects. In art nothing worth doing can be
done without genius; in science even a very moderate capacity can
contribute to a supreme achievement.

In science the man of real genius is the man who invents a new method.
The notable discoveries are often made by his successors, who can
apply the method with fresh vigour, unimpaired by the previous labour
of perfecting it; but the mental calibre of the thought required for
their work, however brilliant, is not so great as that required by the
first inventor of the method. There are in science immense numbers of
different methods, appropriate to different classes of problems; but
over and above them all, there is something not easily definable,
which may be called _the_ method of science. It was formerly customary
to identify this with the inductive method, and to associate it with
the name of Bacon. But the true inductive method was not discovered by
Bacon, and the true method of science is something which includes
deduction as much as induction, logic and mathematics as much as
botany and geology. I shall not attempt the difficult task of stating
what the scientific method is, but I will try to indicate the temper
of mind out of which the scientific method grows, which is the second
of the two merits that were mentioned above as belonging to a
scientific education.

The kernel of the scientific outlook is a thing so simple, so obvious,
so seemingly trivial, that the mention of it may almost excite
derision. The kernel of the scientific outlook is the refusal to
regard our own desires, tastes, and interests as affording a key to
the understanding of the world. Stated thus baldly, this may seem no
more than a trite truism. But to remember it consistently in matters
arousing our passionate partisanship is by no means easy, especially
where the available evidence is uncertain and inconclusive. A few
illustrations will make this clear.

Aristotle, I understand, considered that the stars must move in
circles because the circle is the most perfect curve. In the absence
of evidence to the contrary, he allowed himself to decide a question
of fact by an appeal to sthetico-moral considerations. In such a case
it is at once obvious to us that this appeal was unjustifiable. We
know now how to ascertain as a fact the way in which the heavenly
bodies move, and we know that they do not move in circles, or even in
accurate ellipses, or in any other kind of simply describable curve.
This may be painful to a certain hankering after simplicity of pattern
in the universe, but we know that in astronomy such feelings are
irrelevant. Easy as this knowledge seems now, we owe it to the courage
and insight of the first inventors of scientific method, and more
especially of Galileo.

We may take as another illustration Malthus's doctrine of population.
This illustration is all the better for the fact that his actual
doctrine is now known to be largely erroneous. It is not his
conclusions that are valuable, but the temper and method of his
inquiry. As everyone knows, it was to him that Darwin owed an
essential part of his theory of natural selection, and this was only
possible because Malthus's outlook was truly scientific. His great
merit lies in considering man not as the object of praise or blame,
but as a part of nature, a thing with a certain characteristic
behaviour from which certain consequences must follow. If the
behaviour is not quite what Malthus supposed, if the consequences are
not quite what he inferred, that may falsify his conclusions, but does
not impair the value of his method. The objections which were made
when his doctrine was new--that it was horrible and depressing, that
people ought not to act as he said they did, and so on--were all such
as implied an unscientific attitude of mind; as against all of them,
his calm determination to treat man as a natural phenomenon marks an
important advance over the reformers of the eighteenth century and the
Revolution.

Under the influence of Darwinism the scientific attitude towards man
has now become fairly common, and is to some people quite natural,
though to most it is still a difficult and artificial intellectual
contortion. There is however, one study which is as yet almost wholly
untouched by the scientific spirit--I mean the study of philosophy.
Philosophers and the public imagine that the scientific spirit must
pervade pages that bristle with allusions to ions, germ-plasms, and
the eyes of shell-fish. But as the devil can quote Scripture, so the
philosopher can quote science. The scientific spirit is not an affair
of quotation, of externally acquired information, any more than
manners are an affair of the etiquette-book. The scientific attitude
of mind involves a sweeping away of all other desires in the interests
of the desire to know--it involves suppression of hopes and fears,
loves and hates, and the whole subjective emotional life, until we
become subdued to the material, able to see it frankly, without
preconceptions, without bias, without any wish except to see it as it
is, and without any belief that what it is must be determined by some
relation, positive or negative, to what we should like it to be, or to
what we can easily imagine it to be.

Now in philosophy this attitude of mind has not as yet been achieved.
A certain self-absorption, not personal, but human, has marked almost
all attempts to conceive the universe as a whole. Mind, or some aspect
of it--thought or will or sentience--has been regarded as the pattern
after which the universe is to be conceived, for no better reason, at
bottom, than that such a universe would not seem strange, and would
give us the cosy feeling that every place is like home. To conceive
the universe as essentially progressive or essentially deteriorating,
for example, is to give to our hopes and fears a cosmic importance
which _may_, of course, be justified, but which we have as yet no
reason to suppose justified. Until we have learnt to think of it in
ethically neutral terms, we have not arrived at a scientific attitude
in philosophy; and until we have arrived at such an attitude, it is
hardly to be hoped that philosophy will achieve any solid results.

I have spoken so far largely of the negative aspect of the scientific
spirit, but it is from the positive aspect that its value is derived.
The instinct of constructiveness, which is one of the chief incentives
to artistic creation, can find in scientific systems a satisfaction
more massive than any epic poem. Disinterested curiosity, which is the
source of almost all intellectual effort, finds with astonished
delight that science can unveil secrets which might well have seemed
for ever undiscoverable. The desire for a larger life and wider
interests, for an escape from private circumstances, and even from the
whole recurring human cycle of birth and death, is fulfilled by the
impersonal cosmic outlook of science as by nothing else. To all these
must be added, as contributing to the happiness of the man of science,
the admiration of splendid achievement, and the consciousness of
inestimable utility to the human race. A life devoted to science is
therefore a happy life, and its happiness is derived from the very
best sources that are open to dwellers on this troubled and passionate
planet.




III

A FREE MAN'S WORSHIP[9]


To Dr. Faustus in his study Mephistopheles told the history of the
Creation, saying:

"The endless praises of the choirs of angels had begun to grow
wearisome; for, after all, did he not deserve their praise? Had he not
given them endless joy? Would it not be more amusing to obtain
undeserved praise, to be worshipped by beings whom he tortured? He
smiled inwardly, and resolved that the great drama should be
performed.

"For countless ages the hot nebula whirled aimlessly through space. At
length it began to take shape, the central mass threw off planets, the
planets cooled, boiling seas and burning mountains heaved and tossed,
from black masses of cloud hot sheets of rain deluged the barely solid
crust. And now the first germ of life grew in the depths of the ocean,
and developed rapidly in the fructifying warmth into vast forest
trees, huge ferns springing from the damp mould, sea monsters
breeding, fighting, devouring, and passing away. And from the
monsters, as the play unfolded itself, Man was born, with the power of
thought, the knowledge of good and evil, and the cruel thirst for
worship. And Man saw that all is passing in this mad, monstrous world,
that all is struggling to snatch, at any cost, a few brief moments of
life before Death's inexorable decree. And Man said: 'There is a
hidden purpose, could we but fathom it, and the purpose is good; for
we must reverence something, and in the visible world there is nothing
worthy of reverence.' And Man stood aside from the struggle, resolving
that God intended harmony to come out of chaos by human efforts. And
when he followed the instincts which God had transmitted to him from
his ancestry of beasts of prey, he called it Sin, and asked God to
forgive him. But he doubted whether he could be justly forgiven, until
he invented a divine Plan by which God's wrath was to have been
appeased. And seeing the present was bad, he made it yet worse, that
thereby the future might be better. And he gave God thanks for the
strength that enabled him to forgo even the joys that were possible.
And God smiled; and when he saw that Man had become perfect in
renunciation and worship, he sent another sun through the sky, which
crashed into Man's sun; and all returned again to nebula.

"'Yes,' he murmured, 'it was a good play; I will have it performed
again.'"

Such, in outline, but even more purposeless, more void of meaning, is
the world which Science presents for our belief. Amid such a world, if
anywhere, our ideals henceforward must find a home. That Man is the
product of causes which had no prevision of the end they were
achieving; that his origin, his growth, his hopes and fears, his loves
and his beliefs, are but the outcome of accidental collocations of
atoms; that no fire, no heroism, no intensity of thought and feeling,
can preserve an individual life beyond the grave; that all the labours
of the ages, all the devotion, all the inspiration, all the noonday
brightness of human genius, are destined to extinction in the vast
death of the solar system, and that the whole temple of Man's
achievement must inevitably be buried beneath the dbris of a universe
in ruins--all these things, if not quite beyond dispute, are yet so
nearly certain, that no philosophy which rejects them can hope to
stand. Only within the scaffolding of these truths, only on the firm
foundation of unyielding despair, can the soul's habitation henceforth
be safely built.

How, in such an alien and inhuman world, can so powerless a creature
as Man preserve his aspirations untarnished? A strange mystery it is
that Nature, omnipotent but blind, in the revolutions of her secular
hurryings through the abysses of space, has brought forth at last a
child, subject still to her power, but gifted with sight, with
knowledge of good and evil, with the capacity of judging all the works
of his unthinking Mother. In spite of Death, the mark and seal of the
parental control, Man is yet free, during his brief years, to examine,
to criticise, to know, and in imagination to create. To him alone, in
the world with which he is acquainted, this freedom belongs; and in
this lies his superiority to the resistless forces that control his
outward life.

The savage, like ourselves, feels the oppression of his impotence
before the powers of Nature; but having in himself nothing that he
respects more than Power, he is willing to prostrate himself before
his gods, without inquiring whether they are worthy of his worship.
Pathetic and very terrible is the long history of cruelty and torture,
of degradation and human sacrifice, endured in the hope of placating
the jealous gods: surely, the trembling believer thinks, when what is
most precious has been freely given, their lust for blood must be
appeased, and more will not be required. The religion of Moloch--as
such creeds may be generically called--is in essence the cringing
submission of the slave, who dare not, even in his heart, allow the
thought that his master deserves no adulation. Since the independence
of ideals is not yet acknowledged, Power may be freely worshipped, and
receive an unlimited respect, despite its wanton infliction of pain.

But gradually, as morality grows bolder, the claim of the ideal world
begins to be felt; and worship, if it is not to cease, must be given
to gods of another kind than those created by the savage. Some, though
they feel the demands of the ideal, will still consciously reject
them, still urging that naked Power is worthy of worship. Such is the
attitude inculcated in God's answer to Job out of the whirlwind: the
divine power and knowledge are paraded, but of the divine goodness
there is no hint. Such also is the attitude of those who, in our own
day, base their morality upon the struggle for survival, maintaining
that the survivors are necessarily the fittest. But others, not
content with an answer so repugnant to the moral sense, will adopt the
position which we have become accustomed to regard as specially
religious, maintaining that, in some hidden manner, the world of fact
is really harmonious with the world of ideals. Thus Man creates God,
all-powerful and all-good, the mystic unity of what is and what should
be.

But the world of fact, after all, is not good; and, in submitting our
judgment to it, there is an element of slavishness from which our
thoughts must be purged. For in all things it is well to exalt the
dignity of Man, by freeing him as far as possible from the tyranny of
non-human Power. When we have realised that Power is largely bad, that
man, with his knowledge of good and evil, is but a helpless atom in a
world which has no such knowledge, the choice is again presented to
us: Shall we worship Force, or shall we worship Goodness? Shall our
God exist and be evil, or shall he be recognised as the creation of
our own conscience?

The answer to this question is very momentous, and affects profoundly
our whole morality. The worship of Force, to which Carlyle and
Nietzsche and the creed of Militarism have accustomed us, is the
result of failure to maintain our own ideals against a hostile
universe: it is itself a prostrate submission to evil, a sacrifice of
our best to Moloch. If strength indeed is to be respected, let us
respect rather the strength of those who refuse that false
"recognition of facts" which fails to recognise that facts are often
bad. Let us admit that, in the world we know, there are many things
that would be better otherwise, and that the ideals to which we do and
must adhere are not realised in the realm of matter. Let us preserve
our respect for truth, for beauty, for the ideal of perfection which
life does not permit us to attain, though none of these things meet
with the approval of the unconscious universe. If Power is bad, as it
seems to be, let us reject it from our hearts. In this lies Man's true
freedom: in determination to worship only the God created by our own
love of the good, to respect only the heaven which inspires the
insight of our best moments. In action, in desire, we must submit
perpetually to the tyranny of outside forces; but in thought, in
aspiration, we are free, free from our fellow-men, free from the petty
planet on which our bodies impotently crawl, free even, while we live,
from the tyranny of death. Let us learn, then, that energy of faith
which enables us to live constantly in the vision of the good; and let
us descend, in action, into the world of fact, with that vision always
before us.

When first the opposition of fact and ideal grows fully visible, a
spirit of fiery revolt, of fierce hatred of the gods, seems necessary
to the assertion of freedom. To defy with Promethean constancy a
hostile universe, to keep its evil always in view, always actively
hated, to refuse no pain that the malice of Power can invent, appears
to be the duty of all who will not bow before the inevitable. But
indignation is still a bondage, for it compels our thoughts to be
occupied with an evil world; and in the fierceness of desire from
which rebellion springs there is a kind of self-assertion which it is
necessary for the wise to overcome. Indignation is a submission of our
thoughts, but not of our desires; the Stoic freedom in which wisdom
consists is found in the submission of our desires, but not of our
thoughts. From the submission of our desires springs the virtue of
resignation; from the freedom of our thoughts springs the whole world
of art and philosophy, and the vision of beauty by which, at last, we
half reconquer the reluctant world. But the vision of beauty is
possible only to unfettered contemplation, to thoughts not weighted by
the load of eager wishes; and thus Freedom comes only to those who no
longer ask of life that it shall yield them any of those personal
goods that are subject to the mutations of Time.

Although the necessity of renunciation is evidence of the existence of
evil, yet Christianity, in preaching it, has shown a wisdom exceeding
that of the Promethean philosophy of rebellion. It must be admitted
that, of the things we desire, some, though they prove impossible, are
yet real goods; others, however, as ardently longed for, do not form
part of a fully purified ideal. The belief that what must be renounced
is bad, though sometimes false, is far less often false than untamed
passion supposes; and the creed of religion, by providing a reason
for proving that it is never false, has been the means of purifying
our hopes by the discovery of many austere truths.

But there is in resignation a further good element: even real goods,
when they are unattainable, ought not to be fretfully desired. To
every man comes, sooner or later, the great renunciation. For the
young, there is nothing unattainable; a good thing desired with the
whole force of a passionate will, and yet impossible, is to them not
credible. Yet, by death, by illness, by poverty, or by the voice of
duty, we must learn, each one of us, that the world was not made for
us, and that, however beautiful may be the things we crave, Fate may
nevertheless forbid them. It is the part of courage, when misfortune
comes, to bear without repining the ruin of our hopes, to turn away
our thoughts from vain regrets. This degree of submission to Power is
not only just and right: it is the very gate of wisdom.

But passive renunciation is not the whole of wisdom; for not by
renunciation alone can we build a temple for the worship of our own
ideals. Haunting foreshadowings of the temple appear in the realm of
imagination, in music, in architecture, in the untroubled kingdom of
reason, and in the golden sunset magic of lyrics, where beauty shines
and glows, remote from the touch of sorrow, remote from the fear of
change, remote from the failures and disenchantments of the world of
fact. In the contemplation of these things the vision of heaven will
shape itself in our hearts, giving at once a touchstone to judge the
world about us, and an inspiration by which to fashion to our needs
whatever is not incapable of serving as a stone in the sacred temple.

Except for those rare spirits that are born without sin, there is a
cavern of darkness to be traversed before that temple can be entered.
The gate of the cavern is despair, and its floor is paved with the
gravestones of abandoned hopes. There Self must die; there the
eagerness, the greed of untamed desire must be slain, for only so can
the soul be freed from the empire of Fate. But out of the cavern the
Gate of Renunciation leads again to the daylight of wisdom, by whose
radiance a new insight, a new joy, a new tenderness, shine forth to
gladden the pilgrim's heart.

When, without the bitterness of impotent rebellion, we have learnt
both to resign ourselves to the outward rule of Fate and to recognise
that the non-human world is unworthy of our worship, it becomes
possible at last so to transform and refashion the unconscious
universe, so to transmute it in the crucible of imagination, that a
new image of shining gold replaces the old idol of clay. In all the
multiform facts of the world--in the visual shapes of trees and
mountains and clouds, in the events of the life of man, even in the
very omnipotence of Death--the insight of creative idealism can find
the reflection of a beauty which its own thoughts first made. In this
way mind asserts its subtle mastery over the thoughtless forces of
Nature. The more evil the material with which it deals, the more
thwarting to untrained desire, the greater is its achievement in
inducing the reluctant rock to yield up its hidden treasures, the
prouder its victory in compelling the opposing forces to swell the
pageant of its triumph. Of all the arts, Tragedy is the proudest, the
most triumphant; for it builds its shining citadel in the very centre
of the enemy's country, on the very summit of his highest mountain;
from its impregnable watchtowers, his camps and arsenals, his columns
and forts, are all revealed; within its walls the free life continues,
while the legions of Death and Pain and Despair, and all the servile
captains of tyrant Fate, afford the burghers of that dauntless city
new spectacles of beauty. Happy those sacred ramparts, thrice happy
the dwellers on that all-seeing eminence. Honour to those brave
warriors who, through countless ages of warfare, have preserved for us
the priceless heritage of liberty, and have kept undefiled by
sacrilegious invaders the home of the unsubdued.

But the beauty of Tragedy does but make visible a quality which, in
more or less obvious shapes, is present always and everywhere in life.
In the spectacle of Death, in the endurance of intolerable pain, and
in the irrevocableness of a vanished past, there is a sacredness, an
overpowering awe, a feeling of the vastness, the depth, the
inexhaustible mystery of existence, in which, as by some strange
marriage of pain, the sufferer is bound to the world by bonds of
sorrow. In these moments of insight, we lose all eagerness of
temporary desire, all struggling and striving for petty ends, all care
for the little trivial things that, to a superficial view, make up the
common life of day by day; we see, surrounding the narrow raft
illumined by the flickering light of human comradeship, the dark ocean
on whose rolling waves we toss for a brief hour; from the great night
without, a chill blast breaks in upon our refuge; all the loneliness
of humanity amid hostile forces is concentrated upon the individual
soul, which must struggle alone, with what of courage it can command,
against the whole weight of a universe that cares nothing for its
hopes and fears. Victory, in this struggle with the powers of
darkness, is the true baptism into the glorious company of heroes, the
true initiation into the overmastering beauty of human existence. From
that awful encounter of the soul with the outer world, renunciation,
wisdom, and charity are born; and with their birth a new life begins.
To take into the inmost shrine of the soul the irresistible forces
whose puppets we seem to be--Death and change, the irrevocableness of
the past, and the powerlessness of man before the blind hurry of the
universe from vanity to vanity--to feel these things and know them is
to conquer them.

This is the reason why the Past has such magical power. The beauty of
its motionless and silent pictures is like the enchanted purity of
late autumn, when the leaves, though one breath would make them fall,
still glow against the sky in golden glory. The Past does not change
or strive; like Duncan, after life's fitful fever it sleeps well; what
was eager and grasping, what was petty and transitory, has faded away,
the things that were beautiful and eternal shine out of it like stars
in the night. Its beauty, to a soul not worthy of it, is unendurable;
but to a soul which has conquered Fate it is the key of religion.

The life of Man, viewed outwardly, is but a small thing in comparison
with the forces of Nature. The slave is doomed to worship Time and
Fate and Death, because they are greater than anything he finds in
himself, and because all his thoughts are of things which they devour.
But, great as they are, to think of them greatly, to feel their
passionless splendour, is greater still. And such thought makes us
free men; we no longer bow before the inevitable in Oriental
subjection, but we absorb it, and make it a part of ourselves. To
abandon the struggle for private happiness, to expel all eagerness of
temporary desire, to burn with passion for eternal things--this is
emancipation, and this is the free man's worship. And this liberation
is effected by a contemplation of Fate; for Fate itself is subdued by
the mind which leaves nothing to be purged by the purifying fire of
Time.

United with his fellow-men by the strongest of all ties, the tie of a
common doom, the free man finds that a new vision is with him always,
shedding over every daily task the light of love. The life of Man is a
long march through the night, surrounded by invisible foes, tortured
by weariness and pain, towards a goal that few can hope to reach, and
where none may tarry long. One by one, as they march, our comrades
vanish from our sight, seized by the silent orders of omnipotent
Death. Very brief is the time in which we can help them, in which
their happiness or misery is decided. Be it ours to shed sunshine on
their path, to lighten their sorrows by the balm of sympathy, to give
them the pure joy of a never-tiring affection, to strengthen failing
courage, to instil faith in hours of despair. Let us not weigh in
grudging scales their merits and demerits, but let us think only of
their need--of the sorrows, the difficulties, perhaps the blindnesses,
that make the misery of their lives; let us remember that they are
fellow-sufferers in the same darkness, actors in the same tragedy with
ourselves. And so, when their day is over, when their good and their
evil have become eternal by the immortality of the past, be it ours to
feel that, where they suffered, where they failed, no deed of ours was
the cause; but wherever a spark of the divine fire kindled in their
hearts, we were ready with encouragement, with sympathy, with brave
words in which high courage glowed.

Brief and powerless is Man's life; on him and all his race the slow,
sure doom falls pitiless and dark. Blind to good and evil, reckless of
destruction, omnipotent matter rolls on its relentless way; for Man,
condemned to-day to lose his dearest, to-morrow himself to pass
through the gate of darkness, it remains only to cherish, ere yet the
blow falls, the lofty thoughts that ennoble his little day; disdaining
the coward terrors of the slave of Fate, to worship at the shrine that
his own hands have built; undismayed by the empire of chance, to
preserve a mind free from the wanton tyranny that rules his outward
life; proudly defiant of the irresistible forces that tolerate, for a
moment, his knowledge and his condemnation, to sustain alone, a weary
but unyielding Atlas, the world that his own ideals have fashioned
despite the trampling march of unconscious power.

FOOTNOTES:

[9] Reprinted from the _Independent Review_, December, 1903.




IV

THE STUDY OF MATHEMATICS


In regard to every form of human activity it is necessary that the
question should be asked from time to time, What is its purpose and
ideal? In what way does it contribute to the beauty of human
existence? As respects those pursuits which contribute only remotely,
by providing the mechanism of life, it is well to be reminded that not
the mere fact of living is to be desired, but the art of living in the
contemplation of great things. Still more in regard to those
avocations which have no end outside themselves, which are to be
justified, if at all, as actually adding to the sum of the world's
permanent possessions, it is necessary to keep alive a knowledge of
their aims, a clear prefiguring vision of the temple in which creative
imagination is to be embodied.

The fulfilment of this need, in what concerns the studies forming the
material upon which custom has decided to train the youthful mind, is
indeed sadly remote--so remote as to make the mere statement of such a
claim appear preposterous. Great men, fully alive to the beauty of the
contemplations to whose service their lives are devoted, desiring that
others may share in their joys, persuade mankind to impart to the
successive generations the mechanical knowledge without which it is
impossible to cross the threshold. Dry pedants possess themselves of
the privilege of instilling this knowledge: they forget that it is to
serve but as a key to open the doors of the temple; though they spend
their lives on the steps leading up to those sacred doors, they turn
their backs upon the temple so resolutely that its very existence is
forgotten, and the eager youth, who would press forward to be
initiated to its domes and arches, is bidden to turn back and count
the steps.

Mathematics, perhaps more even than the study of Greece and Rome, has
suffered from this oblivion of its due place in civilisation. Although
tradition has decreed that the great bulk of educated men shall know
at least the elements of the subject, the reasons for which the
tradition arose are forgotten, buried beneath a great rubbish-heap of
pedantries and trivialities. To those who inquire as to the purpose of
mathematics, the usual answer will be that it facilitates the making
of machines, the travelling from place to place, and the victory over
foreign nations, whether in war or commerce. If it be objected that
these ends--all of which are of doubtful value--are not furthered by
the merely elementary study imposed upon those who do not become
expert mathematicians, the reply, it is true, will probably be that
mathematics trains the reasoning faculties. Yet the very men who make
this reply are, for the most part, unwilling to abandon the teaching
of definite fallacies, known to be such, and instinctively rejected by
the unsophisticated mind of every intelligent learner. And the
reasoning faculty itself is generally conceived, by those who urge its
cultivation, as merely a means for the avoidance of pitfalls and a
help in the discovery of rules for the guidance of practical life. All
these are undeniably important achievements to the credit of
mathematics; yet it is none of these that entitles mathematics to a
place in every liberal education. Plato, we know, regarded the
contemplation of mathematical truths as worthy of the Deity; and
Plato realised, more perhaps than any other single man, what those
elements are in human life which merit a place in heaven. There is in
mathematics, he says, "something which is _necessary_ and cannot be
set aside ... and, if I mistake not, of divine necessity; for as to
the human necessities of which the Many talk in this connection,
nothing can be more ridiculous than such an application of the words.
_Cleinias._ And what are these necessities of knowledge, Stranger,
which are divine and not human? _Athenian._ Those things without some
use or knowledge of which a man cannot become a God to the world, nor
a spirit, nor yet a hero, nor able earnestly to think and care for
man" (_Laws_, p. 818).[10] Such was Plato's judgment of mathematics;
but the mathematicians do not read Plato, while those who read him
know no mathematics, and regard his opinion upon this question as
merely a curious aberration.

Mathematics, rightly viewed, possesses not only truth, but supreme
beauty--a beauty cold and austere, like that of sculpture, without
appeal to any part of our weaker nature, without the gorgeous
trappings of painting or music, yet sublimely pure, and capable of a
stern perfection such as only the greatest art can show. The true
spirit of delight, the exaltation, the sense of being more than man,
which is the touchstone of the highest excellence, is to be found in
mathematics as surely as in poetry. What is best in mathematics
deserves not merely to be learnt as a task, but to be assimilated as a
part of daily thought, and brought again and again before the mind
with ever-renewed encouragement. Real life is, to most men, a long
second-best, a perpetual compromise between the ideal and the
possible; but the world of pure reason knows no compromise, no
practical limitations, no barrier to the creative activity embodying
in splendid edifices the passionate aspiration after the perfect from
which all great work springs. Remote from human passions, remote even
from the pitiful facts of nature, the generations have gradually
created an ordered cosmos, where pure thought can dwell as in its
natural home, and where one, at least, of our nobler impulses can
escape from the dreary exile of the actual world.

So little, however, have mathematicians aimed at beauty, that hardly
anything in their work has had this conscious purpose. Much, owing to
irrepressible instincts, which were better than avowed beliefs, has
been moulded by an unconscious taste; but much also has been spoilt by
false notions of what was fitting. The characteristic excellence of
mathematics is only to be found where the reasoning is rigidly
logical: the rules of logic are to mathematics what those of structure
are to architecture. In the most beautiful work, a chain of argument
is presented in which every link is important on its own account, in
which there is an air of ease and lucidity throughout, and the
premises achieve more than would have been thought possible, by means
which appear natural and inevitable. Literature embodies what is
general in particular circumstances whose universal significance
shines through their individual dress; but mathematics endeavours to
present whatever is most general in its purity, without any irrelevant
trappings.

How should the teaching of mathematics be conducted so as to
communicate to the learner as much as possible of this high ideal?
Here experience must, in a great measure, be our guide; but some
maxims may result from our consideration of the ultimate purpose to be
achieved.

One of the chief ends served by mathematics, when rightly taught, is
to awaken the learner's belief in reason, his confidence in the truth
of what has been demonstrated, and in the value of demonstration. This
purpose is not served by existing instruction; but it is easy to see
ways in which it might be served. At present, in what concerns
arithmetic, the boy or girl is given a set of rules, which present
themselves as neither true nor false, but as merely the will of the
teacher, the way in which, for some unfathomable reason, the teacher
prefers to have the game played. To some degree, in a study of such
definite practical utility, this is no doubt unavoidable; but as soon
as possible, the reasons of rules should be set forth by whatever
means most readily appeal to the childish mind. In geometry, instead
of the tedious apparatus of fallacious proofs for obvious truisms
which constitutes the beginning of Euclid, the learner should be
allowed at first to assume the truth of everything obvious, and should
be instructed in the demonstrations of theorems which are at once
startling and easily verifiable by actual drawing, such as those in
which it is shown that three or more lines meet in a point. In this
way belief is generated; it is seen that reasoning may lead to
startling conclusions, which nevertheless the facts will verify; and
thus the instinctive distrust of whatever is abstract or rational is
gradually overcome. Where theorems are difficult, they should be first
taught as exercises in geometrical drawing, until the figure has
become thoroughly familiar; it will then be an agreeable advance to be
taught the logical connections of the various lines or circles that
occur. It is desirable also that the figure illustrating a theorem
should be drawn in all possible cases and shapes, that so the abstract
relations with which geometry is concerned may of themselves emerge
as the residue of similarity amid such great apparent diversity. In
this way the abstract demonstrations should form but a small part of
the instruction, and should be given when, by familiarity with
concrete illustrations, they have come to be felt as the natural
embodiment of visible fact. In this early stage proofs should not be
given with pedantic fullness; definitely fallacious methods, such as
that of superposition, should be rigidly excluded from the first, but
where, without such methods, the proof would be very difficult, the
result should be rendered acceptable by arguments and illustrations
which are explicitly contrasted with demonstrations.

In the beginning of algebra, even the most intelligent child finds, as
a rule, very great difficulty. The use of letters is a mystery, which
seems to have no purpose except mystification. It is almost
impossible, at first, not to think that every letter stands for some
particular number, if only the teacher would reveal _what_ number it
stands for. The fact is, that in algebra the mind is first taught to
consider general truths, truths which are not asserted to hold only of
this or that particular thing, but of any one of a whole group of
things. It is in the power of understanding and discovering such
truths that the mastery of the intellect over the whole world of
things actual and possible resides; and ability to deal with the
general as such is one of the gifts that a mathematical education
should bestow. But how little, as a rule, is the teacher of algebra
able to explain the chasm which divides it from arithmetic, and how
little is the learner assisted in his groping efforts at
comprehension! Usually the method that has been adopted in arithmetic
is continued: rules are set forth, with no adequate explanation of
their grounds; the pupil learns to use the rules blindly, and
presently, when he is able to obtain the answer that the teacher
desires, he feels that he has mastered the difficulties of the
subject. But of inner comprehension of the processes employed he has
probably acquired almost nothing.

When algebra has been learnt, all goes smoothly until we reach those
studies in which the notion of infinity is employed--the infinitesimal
calculus and the whole of higher mathematics. The solution of the
difficulties which formerly surrounded the mathematical infinite is
probably the greatest achievement of which our own age has to boast.
Since the beginnings of Greek thought these difficulties have been
known; in every age the finest intellects have vainly endeavoured to
answer the apparently unanswerable questions that had been asked by
Zeno the Eleatic. At last Georg Cantor has found the answer, and has
conquered for the intellect a new and vast province which had been
given over to Chaos and old Night. It was assumed as self-evident,
until Cantor and Dedekind established the opposite, that if, from any
collection of things, some were taken away, the number of things left
must always be less than the original number of things. This
assumption, as a matter of fact, holds only of finite collections; and
the rejection of it, where the infinite is concerned, has been shown
to remove all the difficulties that had hitherto baffled human reason
in this matter, and to render possible the creation of an exact
science of the infinite. This stupendous fact ought to produce a
revolution in the higher teaching of mathematics; it has itself added
immeasurably to the educational value of the subject, and it has at
last given the means of treating with logical precision many studies
which, until lately, were wrapped in fallacy and obscurity. By those
who were educated on the old lines, the new work is considered to be
appallingly difficult, abstruse, and obscure; and it must be confessed
that the discoverer, as is so often the case, has hardly himself
emerged from the mists which the light of his intellect is dispelling.
But inherently, the new doctrine of the infinite, to all candid and
inquiring minds, has facilitated the mastery of higher mathematics;
for hitherto, it has been necessary to learn, by a long process of
sophistication, to give assent to arguments which, on first
acquaintance, were rightly judged to be confused and erroneous. So far
from producing a fearless belief in reason, a bold rejection of
whatever failed to fulfil the strictest requirements of logic, a
mathematical training, during the past two centuries, encouraged the
belief that many things, which a rigid inquiry would reject as
fallacious, must yet be accepted because they work in what the
mathematician calls "practice." By this means, a timid, compromising
spirit, or else a sacerdotal belief in mysteries not intelligible to
the profane, has been bred where reason alone should have ruled. All
this it is now time to sweep away; let those who wish to penetrate
into the arcana of mathematics be taught at once the true theory in
all its logical purity, and in the concatenation established by the
very essence of the entities concerned.

If we are considering mathematics as an end in itself, and not as a
technical training for engineers, it is very desirable to preserve the
purity and strictness of its reasoning. Accordingly those who have
attained a sufficient familiarity with its easier portions should be
led backward from propositions to which they have assented as
self-evident to more and more fundamental principles from which what
had previously appeared as premises can be deduced. They should be
taught--what the theory of infinity very aptly illustrates--that many
propositions seem self-evident to the untrained mind which,
nevertheless, a nearer scrutiny shows to be false. By this means they
will be led to a sceptical inquiry into first principles, an
examination of the foundations upon which the whole edifice of
reasoning is built, or, to take perhaps a more fitting metaphor, the
great trunk from which the spreading branches spring. At this stage,
it is well to study afresh the elementary portions of mathematics,
asking no longer merely whether a given proposition is true, but also
how it grows out of the central principles of logic. Questions of this
nature can now be answered with a precision and certainty which were
formerly quite impossible; and in the chains of reasoning that the
answer requires the unity of all mathematical studies at last unfolds
itself.

In the great majority of mathematical text-books there is a total lack
of unity in method and of systematic development of a central theme.
Propositions of very diverse kinds are proved by whatever means are
thought most easily intelligible, and much space is devoted to mere
curiosities which in no way contribute to the main argument. But in
the greatest works, unity and inevitability are felt as in the
unfolding of a drama; in the premisses a subject is proposed for
consideration, and in every subsequent step some definite advance is
made towards mastery of its nature. The love of system, of
interconnection, which is perhaps the inmost essence of the
intellectual impulse, can find free play in mathematics as nowhere
else. The learner who feels this impulse must not be repelled by an
array of meaningless examples or distracted by amusing oddities, but
must be encouraged to dwell upon central principles, to become
familiar with the structure of the various subjects which are put
before him, to travel easily over the steps of the more important
deductions. In this way a good tone of mind is cultivated, and
selective attention is taught to dwell by preference upon what is
weighty and essential.

When the separate studies into which mathematics is divided have each
been viewed as a logical whole, as a natural growth from the
propositions which constitute their principles, the learner will be
able to understand the fundamental science which unifies and
systematises the whole of deductive reasoning. This is symbolic
logic--a study which, though it owes its inception to Aristotle, is
yet, in its wider developments, a product, almost wholly, of the
nineteenth century, and is indeed, in the present day, still growing
with great rapidity. The true method of discovery in symbolic logic,
and probably also the best method for introducing the study to a
learner acquainted with other parts of mathematics, is the analysis of
actual examples of deductive reasoning, with a view to the discovery
of the principles employed. These principles, for the most part, are
so embedded in our ratiocinative instincts, that they are employed
quite unconsciously, and can be dragged to light only by much patient
effort. But when at last they have been found, they are seen to be few
in number, and to be the sole source of everything in pure
mathematics. The discovery that all mathematics follows inevitably
from a small collection of fundamental laws is one which immeasurably
enhances the intellectual beauty of the whole; to those who have been
oppressed by the fragmentary and incomplete nature of most existing
chains of deduction this discovery comes with all the overwhelming
force of a revelation; like a palace emerging from the autumn mist as
the traveller ascends an Italian hill-side, the stately storeys of the
mathematical edifice appear in their due order and proportion, with a
new perfection in every part.

Until symbolic logic had acquired its present development, the
principles upon which mathematics depends were always supposed to be
philosophical, and discoverable only by the uncertain, unprogressive
methods hitherto employed by philosophers. So long as this was
thought, mathematics seemed to be not autonomous, but dependent upon a
study which had quite other methods than its own. Moreover, since the
nature of the postulates from which arithmetic, analysis, and geometry
are to be deduced was wrapped in all the traditional obscurities of
metaphysical discussion, the edifice built upon such dubious
foundations began to be viewed as no better than a castle in the air.
In this respect, the discovery that the true principles are as much a
part of mathematics as any of their consequences has very greatly
increased the intellectual satisfaction to be obtained. This
satisfaction ought not to be refused to learners capable of enjoying
it, for it is of a kind to increase our respect for human powers and
our knowledge of the beauties belonging to the abstract world.

Philosophers have commonly held that the laws of logic, which underlie
mathematics, are laws of thought, laws regulating the operations of
our minds. By this opinion the true dignity of reason is very greatly
lowered: it ceases to be an investigation into the very heart and
immutable essence of all things actual and possible, becoming,
instead, an inquiry into something more or less human and subject to
our limitations. The contemplation of what is non-human, the discovery
that our minds are capable of dealing with material not created by
them, above all, the realisation that beauty belongs to the outer
world as to the inner, are the chief means of overcoming the terrible
sense of impotence, of weakness, of exile amid hostile powers, which
is too apt to result from acknowledging the all-but omnipotence of
alien forces. To reconcile us, by the exhibition of its awful beauty,
to the reign of Fate--which is merely the literary personification of
these forces--is the task of tragedy. But mathematics takes us still
further from what is human, into the region of absolute necessity, to
which not only the actual world, but every possible world, must
conform; and even here it builds a habitation, or rather finds a
habitation eternally standing, where our ideals are fully satisfied
and our best hopes are not thwarted. It is only when we thoroughly
understand the entire independence of ourselves, which belongs to this
world that reason finds, that we can adequately realise the profound
importance of its beauty.

Not only is mathematics independent of us and our thoughts, but in
another sense we and the whole universe of existing things are
independent of mathematics. The apprehension of this purely ideal
character is indispensable, if we are to understand rightly the place
of mathematics as one among the arts. It was formerly supposed that
pure reason could decide, in some respects, as to the nature of the
actual world: geometry, at least, was thought to deal with the space
in which we live. But we now know that pure mathematics can never
pronounce upon questions of actual existence: the world of reason, in
a sense, controls the world of fact, but it is not at any point
creative of fact, and in the application of its results to the world
in time and space, its certainty and precision are lost among
approximations and working hypotheses. The objects considered by
mathematicians have, in the past, been mainly of a kind suggested by
phenomena; but from such restrictions the abstract imagination should
be wholly free. A reciprocal liberty must thus be accorded: reason
cannot dictate to the world of facts, but the facts cannot restrict
reason's privilege of dealing with whatever objects its love of beauty
may cause to seem worthy of consideration. Here, as elsewhere, we
build up our own ideals out of the fragments to be found in the world;
and in the end it is hard to say whether the result is a creation or a
discovery.

It is very desirable, in instruction, not merely to persuade the
student of the accuracy of important theorems, but to persuade him in
the way which itself has, of all possible ways, the most beauty. The
true interest of a demonstration is not, as traditional modes of
exposition suggest, concentrated wholly in the result; where this does
occur, it must be viewed as a defect, to be remedied, if possible, by
so generalising the steps of the proof that each becomes important in
and for itself. An argument which serves only to prove a conclusion is
like a story subordinated to some moral which it is meant to teach:
for sthetic perfection no part of the whole should be merely a means.
A certain practical spirit, a desire for rapid progress, for conquest
of new realms, is responsible for the undue emphasis upon results
which prevails in mathematical instruction. The better way is to
propose some theme for consideration--in geometry, a figure having
important properties; in analysis, a function of which the study is
illuminating, and so on. Whenever proofs depend upon some only of the
marks by which we define the object to be studied, these marks should
be isolated and investigated on their own account. For it is a defect,
in an argument, to employ more premisses than the conclusion demands:
what mathematicians call elegance results from employing only the
essential principles in virtue of which the thesis is true. It is a
merit in Euclid that he advances as far as he is able to go without
employing the axiom of parallels--not, as is often said, because this
axiom is inherently objectionable, but because, in mathematics, every
new axiom diminishes the generality of the resulting theorems, and the
greatest possible generality is before all things to be sought.

Of the effects of mathematics outside its own sphere more has been
written than on the subject of its own proper ideal. The effect upon
philosophy has, in the past, been most notable, but most varied; in
the seventeenth century, idealism and rationalism, in the eighteenth,
materialism and sensationalism, seemed equally its offspring. Of the
effect which it is likely to have in the future it would be very rash
to say much; but in one respect a good result appears probable.
Against that kind of scepticism which abandons the pursuit of ideals
because the road is arduous and the goal not certainly attainable,
mathematics, within its own sphere, is a complete answer. Too often it
is said that there is no absolute truth, but only opinion and private
judgment; that each of us is conditioned, in his view of the world, by
his own peculiarities, his own taste and bias; that there is no
external kingdom of truth to which, by patience and discipline, we may
at last obtain admittance, but only truth for me, for you, for every
separate person. By this habit of mind one of the chief ends of human
effort is denied, and the supreme virtue of candour, of fearless
acknowledgment of what is, disappears from our moral vision. Of such
scepticism mathematics is a perpetual reproof; for its edifice of
truths stands unshakable and inexpungable to all the weapons of
doubting cynicism.

The effects of mathematics upon practical life, though they should not
be regarded as the motive of our studies, may be used to answer a
doubt to which the solitary student must always be liable. In a world
so full of evil and suffering, retirement into the cloister of
contemplation, to the enjoyment of delights which, however noble, must
always be for the few only, cannot but appear as a somewhat selfish
refusal to share the burden imposed upon others by accidents in which
justice plays no part. Have any of us the right, we ask, to withdraw
from present evils, to leave our fellow-men unaided, while we live a
life which, though arduous and austere, is yet plainly good in its own
nature? When these questions arise, the true answer is, no doubt, that
some must keep alive the sacred fire, some must preserve, in every
generation, the haunting vision which shadows forth the goal of so
much striving. But when, as must sometimes occur, this answer seems
too cold, when we are almost maddened by the spectacle of sorrows to
which we bring no help, then we may reflect that indirectly the
mathematician often does more for human happiness than any of his more
practically active contemporaries. The history of science abundantly
proves that a body of abstract propositions--even if, as in the case
of conic sections, it remains two thousand years without effect upon
daily life--may yet, at any moment, be used to cause a revolution in
the habitual thoughts and occupations of every citizen. The use of
steam and electricity--to take striking instances--is rendered
possible only by mathematics. In the results of abstract thought the
world possesses a capital of which the employment in enriching the
common round has no hitherto discoverable limits. Nor does experience
give any means of deciding what parts of mathematics will be found
useful. Utility, therefore, can be only a consolation in moments of
discouragement, not a guide in directing our studies.

For the health of the moral life, for ennobling the tone of an age or
a nation, the austerer virtues have a strange power, exceeding the
power of those not informed and purified by thought. Of these austerer
virtues the love of truth is the chief, and in mathematics, more than
elsewhere, the love of truth may find encouragement for waning faith.
Every great study is not only an end in itself, but also a means of
creating and sustaining a lofty habit of mind; and this purpose should
be kept always in view throughout the teaching and learning of
mathematics.

FOOTNOTES:

[10] This passage was pointed out to me by Professor Gilbert Murray.




V

MATHEMATICS AND THE METAPHYSICIANS


The nineteenth century, which prided itself upon the invention of
steam and evolution, might have derived a more legitimate title to
fame from the discovery of pure mathematics. This science, like most
others, was baptised long before it was born; and thus we find writers
before the nineteenth century alluding to what they called pure
mathematics. But if they had been asked what this subject was, they
would only have been able to say that it consisted of Arithmetic,
Algebra, Geometry, and so on. As to what these studies had in common,
and as to what distinguished them from applied mathematics, our
ancestors were completely in the dark.

Pure mathematics was discovered by Boole, in a work which he called
the _Laws of Thought_ (1854). This work abounds in asseverations that
it is not mathematical, the fact being that Boole was too modest to
suppose his book the first ever written on mathematics. He was also
mistaken in supposing that he was dealing with the laws of thought:
the question how people actually think was quite irrelevant to him,
and if his book had really contained the laws of thought, it was
curious that no one should ever have thought in such a way before. His
book was in fact concerned with formal logic, and this is the same
thing as mathematics.

Pure mathematics consists entirely of assertions to the effect that,
if such and such a proposition is true of _anything_, then such and
such another proposition is true of that thing. It is essential not to
discuss whether the first proposition is really true, and not to
mention what the anything is, of which it is supposed to be true. Both
these points would belong to applied mathematics. We start, in pure
mathematics, from certain rules of inference, by which we can infer
that _if_ one proposition is true, then so is some other proposition.
These rules of inference constitute the major part of the principles
of formal logic. We then take any hypothesis that seems amusing, and
deduce its consequences. _If_ our hypothesis is about _anything_, and
not about some one or more particular things, then our deductions
constitute mathematics. Thus mathematics may be defined as the subject
in which we never know what we are talking about, nor whether what we
are saying is true. People who have been puzzled by the beginnings of
mathematics will, I hope, find comfort in this definition, and will
probably agree that it is accurate.

As one of the chief triumphs of modern mathematics consists in having
discovered what mathematics really is, a few more words on this
subject may not be amiss. It is common to start any branch of
mathematics--for instance, Geometry--with a certain number of
primitive ideas, supposed incapable of definition, and a certain
number of primitive propositions or axioms, supposed incapable of
proof. Now the fact is that, though there are indefinables and
indemonstrables in every branch of applied mathematics, there are none
in pure mathematics except such as belong to general logic. Logic,
broadly speaking, is distinguished by the fact that its propositions
can be put into a form in which they apply to anything whatever. All
pure mathematics--Arithmetic, Analysis, and Geometry--is built up by
combinations of the primitive ideas of logic, and its propositions are
deduced from the general axioms of logic, such as the syllogism and
the other rules of inference. And this is no longer a dream or an
aspiration. On the contrary, over the greater and more difficult part
of the domain of mathematics, it has been already accomplished; in the
few remaining cases, there is no special difficulty, and it is now
being rapidly achieved. Philosophers have disputed for ages whether
such deduction was possible; mathematicians have sat down and made the
deduction. For the philosophers there is now nothing left but graceful
acknowledgments.

The subject of formal logic, which has thus at last shown itself to be
identical with mathematics, was, as every one knows, invented by
Aristotle, and formed the chief study (other than theology) of the
Middle Ages. But Aristotle never got beyond the syllogism, which is a
very small part of the subject, and the schoolmen never got beyond
Aristotle. If any proof were required of our superiority to the
medival doctors, it might be found in this. Throughout the Middle
Ages, almost all the best intellects devoted themselves to formal
logic, whereas in the nineteenth century only an infinitesimal
proportion of the world's thought went into this subject.
Nevertheless, in each decade since 1850 more has been done to advance
the subject than in the whole period from Aristotle to Leibniz. People
have discovered how to make reasoning symbolic, as it is in Algebra,
so that deductions are effected by mathematical rules. They have
discovered many rules besides the syllogism, and a new branch of
logic, called the Logic of Relatives,[11] has been invented to deal
with topics that wholly surpassed the powers of the old logic, though
they form the chief contents of mathematics.

It is not easy for the lay mind to realise the importance of symbolism
in discussing the foundations of mathematics, and the explanation may
perhaps seem strangely paradoxical. The fact is that symbolism is
useful because it makes things difficult. (This is not true of the
advanced parts of mathematics, but only of the beginnings.) What we
wish to know is, what can be deduced from what. Now, in the
beginnings, everything is self-evident; and it is very hard to see
whether one self-evident proposition follows from another or not.
Obviousness is always the enemy to correctness. Hence we invent some
new and difficult symbolism, in which nothing seems obvious. Then we
set up certain rules for operating on the symbols, and the whole thing
becomes mechanical. In this way we find out what must be taken as
premiss and what can be demonstrated or defined. For instance, the
whole of Arithmetic and Algebra has been shown to require three
indefinable notions and five indemonstrable propositions. But without
a symbolism it would have been very hard to find this out. It is so
obvious that two and two are four, that we can hardly make ourselves
sufficiently sceptical to doubt whether it can be proved. And the same
holds in other cases where self-evident things are to be proved.

But the proof of self-evident propositions may seem, to the
uninitiated, a somewhat frivolous occupation. To this we might reply
that it is often by no means self-evident that one obvious proposition
follows from another obvious proposition; so that we are really
discovering new truths when we prove what is evident by a method which
is not evident. But a more interesting retort is, that since people
have tried to prove obvious propositions, they have found that many of
them are false. Self-evidence is often a mere will-o'-the-wisp, which
is sure to lead us astray if we take it as our guide. For instance,
nothing is plainer than that a whole always has more terms than a
part, or that a number is increased by adding one to it. But these
propositions are now known to be usually false. Most numbers are
infinite, and if a number is infinite you may add ones to it as long
as you like without disturbing it in the least. One of the merits of a
proof is that it instils a certain doubt as to the result proved; and
when what is obvious can be proved in some cases, but not in others,
it becomes possible to suppose that in these other cases it is false.

The great master of the art of formal reasoning, among the men of our
own day, is an Italian, Professor Peano, of the University of
Turin.[12] He has reduced the greater part of mathematics (and he or
his followers will, in time, have reduced the whole) to strict
symbolic form, in which there are no words at all. In the ordinary
mathematical books, there are no doubt fewer words than most readers
would wish. Still, little phrases occur, such as _therefore, let us
assume, consider_, or _hence it follows_. All these, however, are a
concession, and are swept away by Professor Peano. For instance, if we
wish to learn the whole of Arithmetic, Algebra, the Calculus, and
indeed all that is usually called pure mathematics (except Geometry),
we must start with a dictionary of three words. One symbol stands for
_zero_, another for _number_, and a third for _next after_. What these
ideas mean, it is necessary to know if you wish to become an
arithmetician. But after symbols have been invented for these three
ideas, not another word is required in the whole development. All
future symbols are symbolically explained by means of these three.
Even these three can be explained by means of the notions of
_relation_ and _class_; but this requires the Logic of Relations,
which Professor Peano has never taken up. It must be admitted that
what a mathematician has to know to begin with is not much. There are
at most a dozen notions out of which all the notions in all pure
mathematics (including Geometry) are compounded. Professor Peano, who
is assisted by a very able school of young Italian disciples, has
shown how this may be done; and although the method which he has
invented is capable of being carried a good deal further than he has
carried it, the honour of the pioneer must belong to him.

Two hundred years ago, Leibniz foresaw the science which Peano has
perfected, and endeavoured to create it. He was prevented from
succeeding by respect for the authority of Aristotle, whom he could
not believe guilty of definite, formal fallacies; but the subject
which he desired to create now exists, in spite of the patronising
contempt with which his schemes have been treated by all superior
persons. From this "Universal Characteristic," as he called it, he
hoped for a solution of all problems, and an end to all disputes. "If
controversies were to arise," he says, "there would be no more need of
disputation between two philosophers than between two accountants. For
it would suffice to take their pens in their hands, to sit down to
their desks, and to say to each other (with a friend as witness, if
they liked), 'Let us calculate.'" This optimism has now appeared to be
somewhat excessive; there still are problems whose solution is
doubtful, and disputes which calculation cannot decide. But over an
enormous field of what was formerly controversial, Leibniz's dream has
become sober fact. In the whole philosophy of mathematics, which used
to be at least as full of doubt as any other part of philosophy, order
and certainty have replaced the confusion and hesitation which
formerly reigned. Philosophers, of course, have not yet discovered
this fact, and continue to write on such subjects in the old way. But
mathematicians, at least in Italy, have now the power of treating the
principles of mathematics in an exact and masterly manner, by means of
which the certainty of mathematics extends also to mathematical
philosophy. Hence many of the topics which used to be placed among the
great mysteries--for example, the natures of infinity, of continuity,
of space, time and motion--are now no longer in any degree open to
doubt or discussion. Those who wish to know the nature of these things
need only read the works of such men as Peano or Georg Cantor; they
will there find exact and indubitable expositions of all these quondam
mysteries.

In this capricious world, nothing is more capricious than posthumous
fame. One of the most notable examples of posterity's lack of judgment
is the Eleatic Zeno. This man, who may be regarded as the founder of
the philosophy of infinity, appears in Plato's Parmenides in the
privileged position of instructor to Socrates. He invented four
arguments, all immeasurably subtle and profound, to prove that motion
is impossible, that Achilles can never overtake the tortoise, and that
an arrow in flight is really at rest. After being refuted by
Aristotle, and by every subsequent philosopher from that day to our
own, these arguments were reinstated, and made the basis of a
mathematical renaissance, by a German professor, who probably never
dreamed of any connection between himself and Zeno. Weierstrass,[13]
by strictly banishing from mathematics the use of infinitesimals, has
at last shown that we live in an unchanging world, and that the arrow
in its flight is truly at rest. Zeno's only error lay in inferring (if
he did infer) that, because there is no such thing as a state of
change, therefore the world is in the same state at any one time as at
any other. This is a consequence which by no means follows; and in
this respect, the German mathematician is more constructive than the
ingenious Greek. Weierstrass has been able, by embodying his views in
mathematics, where familiarity with truth eliminates the vulgar
prejudices of common sense, to invest Zeno's paradoxes with the
respectable air of platitudes; and if the result is less delightful to
the lover of reason than Zeno's bold defiance, it is at any rate more
calculated to appease the mass of academic mankind.

Zeno was concerned, as a matter of fact, with three problems, each
presented by motion, but each more abstract than motion, and capable
of a purely arithmetical treatment. These are the problems of the
infinitesimal, the infinite, and continuity. To state clearly the
difficulties involved, was to accomplish perhaps the hardest part of
the philosopher's task. This was done by Zeno. From him to our own
day, the finest intellects of each generation in turn attacked the
problems, but achieved, broadly speaking, nothing. In our own time,
however, three men--Weierstrass, Dedekind, and Cantor--have not merely
advanced the three problems, but have completely solved them. The
solutions, for those acquainted with mathematics, are so clear as to
leave no longer the slightest doubt or difficulty. This achievement is
probably the greatest of which our age has to boast; and I know of no
age (except perhaps the golden age of Greece) which has a more
convincing proof to offer of the transcendent genius of its great men.
Of the three problems, that of the infinitesimal was solved by
Weierstrass; the solution of the other two was begun by Dedekind, and
definitively accomplished by Cantor.

The infinitesimal played formerly a great part in mathematics. It was
introduced by the Greeks, who regarded a circle as differing
infinitesimally from a polygon with a very large number of very small
equal sides. It gradually grew in importance, until, when Leibniz
invented the Infinitesimal Calculus, it seemed to become the
fundamental notion of all higher mathematics. Carlyle tells, in his
_Frederick the Great_, how Leibniz used to discourse to Queen Sophia
Charlotte of Prussia concerning the infinitely little, and how she
would reply that on that subject she needed no instruction--the
behaviour of courtiers had made her thoroughly familiar with it. But
philosophers and mathematicians--who for the most part had less
acquaintance with courts--continued to discuss this topic, though
without making any advance. The Calculus required continuity, and
continuity was supposed to require the infinitely little; but nobody
could discover what the infinitely little might be. It was plainly not
quite zero, because a sufficiently large number of infinitesimals,
added together, were seen to make up a finite whole. But nobody could
point out any fraction which was not zero, and yet not finite. Thus
there was a deadlock. But at last Weierstrass discovered that the
infinitesimal was not needed at all, and that everything could be
accomplished without it. Thus there was no longer any need to suppose
that there was such a thing. Nowadays, therefore, mathematicians are
more dignified than Leibniz: instead of talking about the infinitely
small, they talk about the infinitely great--a subject which, however
appropriate to monarchs, seems, unfortunately, to interest them even
less than the infinitely little interested the monarchs to whom
Leibniz discoursed.

The banishment of the infinitesimal has all sorts of odd consequences,
to which one has to become gradually accustomed. For example, there is
no such thing as the next moment. The interval between one moment and
the next would have to be infinitesimal, since, if we take two moments
with a finite interval between them, there are always other moments in
the interval. Thus if there are to be no infinitesimals, no two
moments are quite consecutive, but there are always other moments
between any two. Hence there must be an infinite number of moments
between any two; because if there were a finite number one would be
nearest the first of the two moments, and therefore next to it. This
might be thought to be a difficulty; but, as a matter of fact, it is
here that the philosophy of the infinite comes in, and makes all
straight.

The same sort of thing happens in space. If any piece of matter be cut
in two, and then each part be halved, and so on, the bits will become
smaller and smaller, and can theoretically be made as small as we
please. However small they may be, they can still be cut up and made
smaller still. But they will always have _some_ finite size, however
small they may be. We never reach the infinitesimal in this way, and
no finite number of divisions will bring us to points. Nevertheless
there _are_ points, only these are not to be reached by successive
divisions. Here again, the philosophy of the infinite shows us how
this is possible, and why points are not infinitesimal lengths.

As regards motion and change, we get similarly curious results. People
used to think that when a thing changes, it must be in a state of
change, and that when a thing moves, it is in a state of motion. This
is now known to be a mistake. When a body moves, all that can be said
is that it is in one place at one time and in another at another. We
must not say that it will be in a neighbouring place at the next
instant, since there is no next instant. Philosophers often tell us
that when a body is in motion, it changes its position within the
instant. To this view Zeno long ago made the fatal retort that every
body always is where it is; but a retort so simple and brief was not
of the kind to which philosophers are accustomed to give weight, and
they have continued down to our own day to repeat the same phrases
which roused the Eleatic's destructive ardour. It was only recently
that it became possible to explain motion in detail in accordance with
Zeno's platitude, and in opposition to the philosopher's paradox. We
may now at last indulge the comfortable belief that a body in motion
is just as truly where it is as a body at rest. Motion consists merely
in the fact that bodies are sometimes in one place and sometimes in
another, and that they are at intermediate places at intermediate
times. Only those who have waded through the quagmire of philosophic
speculation on this subject can realise what a liberation from antique
prejudices is involved in this simple and straightforward commonplace.

The philosophy of the infinitesimal, as we have just seen, is mainly
negative. People used to believe in it, and now they have found out
their mistake. The philosophy of the infinite, on the other hand, is
wholly positive. It was formerly supposed that infinite numbers, and
the mathematical infinite generally, were self-contradictory. But as
it was obvious that there were infinities--for example, the number of
numbers--the contradictions of infinity seemed unavoidable, and
philosophy seemed to have wandered into a "cul-de-sac." This
difficulty led to Kant's antinomies, and hence, more or less
indirectly, to much of Hegel's dialectic method. Almost all current
philosophy is upset by the fact (of which very few philosophers are as
yet aware) that all the ancient and respectable contradictions in the
notion of the infinite have been once for all disposed of. The method
by which this has been done is most interesting and instructive. In
the first place, though people had talked glibly about infinity ever
since the beginnings of Greek thought, nobody had ever thought of
asking, What is infinity? If any philosopher had been asked for a
definition of infinity, he might have produced some unintelligible
rigmarole, but he would certainly not have been able to give a
definition that had any meaning at all. Twenty years ago, roughly
speaking, Dedekind and Cantor asked this question, and, what is more
remarkable, they answered it. They found, that is to say, a perfectly
precise definition of an infinite number or an infinite collection of
things. This was the first and perhaps the greatest step. It then
remained to examine the supposed contradictions in this notion. Here
Cantor proceeded in the only proper way. He took pairs of
contradictory propositions, in which both sides of the contradiction
would be usually regarded as demonstrable, and he strictly examined
the supposed proofs. He found that all proofs adverse to infinity
involved a certain principle, at first sight obviously true, but
destructive, in its consequences, of almost all mathematics. The
proofs favourable to infinity, on the other hand, involved no
principle that had evil consequences. It thus appeared that common
sense had allowed itself to be taken in by a specious maxim, and that,
when once this maxim was rejected, all went well.

The maxim in question is, that if one collection is part of another,
the one which is a part has fewer terms than the one of which it is a
part. This maxim is true of finite numbers. For example, Englishmen
are only some among Europeans, and there are fewer Englishmen than
Europeans. But when we come to infinite numbers, this is no longer
true. This breakdown of the maxim gives us the precise definition of
infinity. A collection of terms is infinite when it contains as parts
other collections which have just as many terms as it has. If you can
take away some of the terms of a collection, without diminishing the
number of terms, then there are an infinite number of terms in the
collection. For example, there are just as many even numbers as there
are numbers altogether, since every number can be doubled. This may be
seen by putting odd and even numbers together in one row, and even
numbers alone in a row below:--

          1, 2, 3, 4, 5, _ad infinitum_.
          2, 4, 6, 8, 10, _ad infinitum_.

There are obviously just as many numbers in the row below as in the
row above, because there is one below for each one above. This
property, which was formerly thought to be a contradiction, is now
transformed into a harmless definition of infinity, and shows, in the
above case, that the number of finite numbers is infinite.

But the uninitiated may wonder how it is possible to deal with a
number which cannot be counted. It is impossible to count up _all_ the
numbers, one by one, because, however many we may count, there are
always more to follow. The fact is that counting is a very vulgar and
elementary way of finding out how many terms there are in a
collection. And in any case, counting gives us what mathematicians
call the _ordinal_ number of our terms; that is to say, it arranges
our terms in an order or series, and its result tells us what type of
series results from this arrangement. In other words, it is impossible
to count things without counting some first and others afterwards, so
that counting always has to do with order. Now when there are only a
finite number of terms, we can count them in any order we like; but
when there are an infinite number, what corresponds to counting will
give us quite different results according to the way in which we carry
out the operation. Thus the ordinal number, which results from what,
in a general sense may be called counting, depends not only upon how
many terms we have, but also (where the number of terms is infinite)
upon the way in which the terms are arranged.

The fundamental infinite numbers are not ordinal, but are what is
called _cardinal_. They are not obtained by putting our terms in order
and counting them, but by a different method, which tells us, to begin
with, whether two collections have the same number of terms, or, if
not, which is the greater.[14] It does not tell us, in the way in
which counting does, _what_ number of terms a collection has; but if
we define a number as the number of terms in such and such a
collection, then this method enables us to discover whether some other
collection that may be mentioned has more or fewer terms. An
illustration will show how this is done. If there existed some country
in which, for one reason or another, it was impossible to take a
census, but in which it was known that every man had a wife and every
woman a husband, then (provided polygamy was not a national
institution) we should know, without counting, that there were exactly
as many men as there were women in that country, neither more nor
less. This method can be applied generally. If there is some relation
which, like marriage, connects the things in one collection each with
one of the things in another collection, and vice versa, then the two
collections have the same number of terms. This was the way in which
we found that there are as many even numbers as there are numbers.
Every number can be doubled, and every even number can be halved, and
each process gives just one number corresponding to the one that is
doubled or halved. And in this way we can find any number of
collections each of which has just as many terms as there are finite
numbers. If every term of a collection can be hooked on to a number,
and all the finite numbers are used once, and only once, in the
process, then our collection must have just as many terms as there are
finite numbers. This is the general method by which the numbers of
infinite collections are defined.

But it must not be supposed that all infinite numbers are equal. On
the contrary, there are infinitely more infinite numbers than finite
ones. There are more ways of arranging the finite numbers in different
types of series than there are finite numbers. There are probably more
points in space and more moments in time than there are finite
numbers. There are exactly as many fractions as whole numbers,
although there are an infinite number of fractions between any two
whole numbers. But there are more irrational numbers than there are
whole numbers or fractions. There are probably exactly as many points
in space as there are irrational numbers, and exactly as many points
on a line a millionth of an inch long as in the whole of infinite
space. There is a greatest of all infinite numbers, which is the
number of things altogether, of every sort and kind. It is obvious
that there cannot be a greater number than this, because, if
everything has been taken, there is nothing left to add. Cantor has a
proof that there is no greatest number, and if this proof were valid,
the contradictions of infinity would reappear in a sublimated form.
But in this one point, the master has been guilty of a very subtle
fallacy, which I hope to explain in some future work.[15]

We can now understand why Zeno believed that Achilles cannot overtake
the tortoise and why as a matter of fact he can overtake it. We shall
see that all the people who disagreed with Zeno had no right to do so,
because they all accepted premises from which his conclusion followed.
The argument is this: Let Achilles and the tortoise start along a road
at the same time, the tortoise (as is only fair) being allowed a
handicap. Let Achilles go twice as fast as the tortoise, or ten times
or a hundred times as fast. Then he will never reach the tortoise. For
at every moment the tortoise is somewhere and Achilles is somewhere;
and neither is ever twice in the same place while the race is going
on. Thus the tortoise goes to just as many places as Achilles does,
because each is in one place at one moment, and in another at any
other moment. But if Achilles were to catch up with the tortoise, the
places where the tortoise would have been would be only part of the
places where Achilles would have been. Here, we must suppose, Zeno
appealed to the maxim that the whole has more terms than the part.[16]
Thus if Achilles were to overtake the tortoise, he would have been in
more places than the tortoise; but we saw that he must, in any period,
be in exactly as many places as the tortoise. Hence we infer that he
can never catch the tortoise. This argument is strictly correct, if we
allow the axiom that the whole has more terms than the part. As the
conclusion is absurd, the axiom must be rejected, and then all goes
well. But there is no good word to be said for the philosophers of the
past two thousand years and more, who have all allowed the axiom and
denied the conclusion.

The retention of this axiom leads to absolute contradictions, while
its rejection leads only to oddities. Some of these oddities, it must
be confessed, are very odd. One of them, which I call the paradox of
Tristram Shandy, is the converse of the Achilles, and shows that the
tortoise, if you give him time, will go just as far as Achilles.
Tristram Shandy, as we know, employed two years in chronicling the
first two days of his life, and lamented that, at this rate, material
would accumulate faster than he could deal with it, so that, as years
went by, he would be farther and farther from the end of his history.
Now I maintain that, if he had lived for ever, and had not wearied of
his task, then, even if his life had continued as event fully as it
began, no part of his biography would have remained unwritten. For
consider: the hundredth day will be described in the hundredth year,
the thousandth in the thousandth year, and so on. Whatever day we may
choose as so far on that he cannot hope to reach it, that day will be
described in the corresponding year. Thus any day that may be
mentioned will be written up sooner or later, and therefore no part of
the biography will remain permanently unwritten. This paradoxical but
perfectly true proposition depends upon the fact that the number of
days in all time is no greater than the number of years.

Thus on the subject of infinity it is impossible to avoid conclusions
which at first sight appear paradoxical, and this is the reason why so
many philosophers have supposed that there were inherent
contradictions in the infinite. But a little practice enables one to
grasp the true principles of Cantor's doctrine, and to acquire new and
better instincts as to the true and the false. The oddities then
become no odder than the people at the antipodes, who used to be
thought impossible because they would find it so inconvenient to stand
on their heads.

The solution of the problems concerning infinity has enabled Cantor to
solve also the problems of continuity. Of this, as of infinity, he has
given a perfectly precise definition, and has shown that there are no
contradictions in the notion so defined. But this subject is so
technical that it is impossible to give any account of it here.

The notion of continuity depends upon that of _order_, since
continuity is merely a particular type of order. Mathematics has, in
modern times, brought order into greater and greater prominence. In
former days, it was supposed (and philosophers are still apt to
suppose) that quantity was the fundamental notion of mathematics. But
nowadays, quantity is banished altogether, except from one little
corner of Geometry, while order more and more reigns supreme. The
investigation of different kinds of series and their relations is now
a very large part of mathematics, and it has been found that this
investigation can be conducted without any reference to quantity, and,
for the most part, without any reference to number. All types of
series are capable of formal definition, and their properties can be
deduced from the principles of symbolic logic by means of the Algebra
of Relatives. The notion of a limit, which is fundamental in the
greater part of higher mathematics, used to be defined by means of
quantity, as a term to which the terms of some series approximate as
nearly as we please. But nowadays the limit is defined quite
differently, and the series which it limits may not approximate to it
at all. This improvement also is due to Cantor, and it is one which
has revolutionised mathematics. Only order is now relevant to limits.
Thus, for instance, the smallest of the infinite integers is the limit
of the finite integers, though all finite integers are at an infinite
distance from it. The study of different types of series is a general
subject of which the study of ordinal numbers (mentioned above) is a
special and very interesting branch. But the unavoidable
technicalities of this subject render it impossible to explain to any
but professed mathematicians.

Geometry, like Arithmetic, has been subsumed, in recent times, under
the general study of order. It was formerly supposed that Geometry was
the study of the nature of the space in which we live, and accordingly
it was urged, by those who held that what exists can only be known
empirically, that Geometry should really be regarded as belonging to
applied mathematics. But it has gradually appeared, by the increase of
non-Euclidean systems, that Geometry throws no more light upon the
nature of space than Arithmetic throws upon the population of the
United States. Geometry is a whole collection of deductive sciences
based on a corresponding collection of sets of axioms. One set of
axioms is Euclid's; other equally good sets of axioms lead to other
results. Whether Euclid's axioms are true, is a question as to which
the pure mathematician is indifferent; and, what is more, it is a
question which it is theoretically impossible to answer with certainty
in the affirmative. It might possibly be shown, by very careful
measurements, that Euclid's axioms are false; but no measurements
could ever assure us (owing to the errors of observation) that they
are exactly true. Thus the geometer leaves to the man of science to
decide, as best he may, what axioms are most nearly true in the actual
world. The geometer takes any set of axioms that seem interesting, and
deduces their consequences. What defines Geometry, in this sense, is
that the axioms must give rise to a series of more than one dimension.
And it is thus that Geometry becomes a department in the study of
order.

In Geometry, as in other parts of mathematics, Peano and his disciples
have done work of the very greatest merit as regards principles.
Formerly, it was held by philosophers and mathematicians alike that
the proofs in Geometry depended on the figure; nowadays, this is known
to be false. In the best books there are no figures at all. The
reasoning proceeds by the strict rules of formal logic from a set of
axioms laid down to begin with. If a figure is used, all sorts of
things seem obviously to follow, which no formal reasoning can prove
from the explicit axioms, and which, as a matter of fact, are only
accepted because they are obvious. By banishing the figure, it becomes
possible to discover _all_ the axioms that are needed; and in this way
all sorts of possibilities, which would have otherwise remained
undetected, are brought to light.

One great advance, from the point of view of correctness, has been
made by introducing points as they are required, and not starting, as
was formerly done, by assuming the whole of space. This method is due
partly to Peano, partly to another Italian named Fano. To those
unaccustomed to it, it has an air of somewhat wilful pedantry. In this
way, we begin with the following axioms: (1) There is a class of
entities called _points_. (2) There is at least one point. (3) If _a_
be a point, there is at least one other point besides _a_. Then we
bring in the straight line joining two points, and begin again with
(4), namely, on the straight line joining _a_ and _b_, there is at
least one other point besides _a_ and _b_. (5) There is at least one
point not on the line _ab_. And so we go on, till we have the means of
obtaining as many points as we require. But the word _space_, as Peano
humorously remarks, is one for which Geometry has no use at all.

The rigid methods employed by modern geometers have deposed Euclid
from his pinnacle of correctness. It was thought, until recent times,
that, as Sir Henry Savile remarked in 1621, there were only two
blemishes in Euclid, the theory of parallels and the theory of
proportion. It is now known that these are almost the only points in
which Euclid is free from blemish. Countless errors are involved in
his first eight propositions. That is to say, not only is it doubtful
whether his axioms are true, which is a comparatively trivial matter,
but it is certain that his propositions do not follow from the axioms
which he enunciates. A vastly greater number of axioms, which Euclid
unconsciously employs, are required for the proof of his propositions.
Even in the first proposition of all, where he constructs an
equilateral triangle on a given base, he uses two circles which are
assumed to intersect. But no explicit axiom assures us that they do
so, and in some kinds of spaces they do not always intersect. It is
quite doubtful whether our space belongs to one of these kinds or not.
Thus Euclid fails entirely to prove his point in the very first
proposition. As he is certainly not an easy author, and is terribly
long-winded, he has no longer any but an historical interest. Under
these circumstances, it is nothing less than a scandal that he should
still be taught to boys in England.[17] A book should have either
intelligibility or correctness; to combine the two is impossible, but
to lack both is to be unworthy of such a place as Euclid has occupied
in education.

The most remarkable result of modern methods in mathematics is the
importance of symbolic logic and of rigid formalism. Mathematicians,
under the influence of Weierstrass, have shown in modern times a care
for accuracy, and an aversion to slipshod reasoning, such as had not
been known among them previously since the time of the Greeks. The
great inventions of the seventeenth century--Analytical Geometry and
the Infinitesimal Calculus--were so fruitful in new results that
mathematicians had neither time nor inclination to examine their
foundations. Philosophers, who should have taken up the task, had too
little mathematical ability to invent the new branches of mathematics
which have now been found necessary for any adequate discussion. Thus
mathematicians were only awakened from their "dogmatic slumbers" when
Weierstrass and his followers showed that many of their most cherished
propositions are in general false. Macaulay, contrasting the certainty
of mathematics with the uncertainty of philosophy, asks who ever heard
of a reaction against Taylor's theorem? If he had lived now, he
himself might have heard of such a reaction, for this is precisely one
of the theorems which modern investigations have overthrown. Such rude
shocks to mathematical faith have produced that love of formalism
which appears, to those who are ignorant of its motive, to be mere
outrageous pedantry.

The proof that all pure mathematics, including Geometry, is nothing
but formal logic, is a fatal blow to the Kantian philosophy. Kant,
rightly perceiving that Euclid's propositions could not be deduced
from Euclid's axioms without the help of the figures, invented a
theory of knowledge to account for this fact; and it accounted so
successfully that, when the fact is shown to be a mere defect in
Euclid, and not a result of the nature of geometrical reasoning,
Kant's theory also has to be abandoned. The whole doctrine of _a
priori_ intuitions, by which Kant explained the possibility of pure
mathematics, is wholly inapplicable to mathematics in its present
form. The Aristotelian doctrines of the schoolmen come nearer in
spirit to the doctrines which modern mathematics inspire; but the
schoolmen were hampered by the fact that their formal logic was very
defective, and that the philosophical logic based upon the syllogism
showed a corresponding narrowness. What is now required is to give the
greatest possible development to mathematical logic, to allow to the
full the importance of relations, and then to found upon this secure
basis a new philosophical logic, which may hope to borrow some of the
exactitude and certainty of its mathematical foundation. If this can
be successfully accomplished, there is every reason to hope that the
near future will be as great an epoch in pure philosophy as the
immediate past has been in the principles of mathematics. Great
triumphs inspire great hopes; and pure thought may achieve, within our
generation, such results as will place our time, in this respect, on a
level with the greatest age of Greece.[18]

FOOTNOTES:

[11] This subject is due in the main to Mr. C.S. Peirce.

[12] I ought to have added Frege, but his writings were unknown to me
when this article was written. [Note added in 1917.]

[13] Professor of Mathematics in the University of Berlin. He died in
1897.

[14] [Note added in 1917.] Although some infinite numbers are greater
than some others, it cannot be proved that of any two infinite numbers
one must be the greater.

[15] Cantor was not guilty of a fallacy on this point. His proof that
there is no greatest number is valid. The solution of the puzzle is
complicated and depends upon the theory of types, which is explained
in _Principia Mathematica_, Vol. I (Camb. Univ. Press, 1910). [Note
added in 1917.]

[16] This must not be regarded as a historically correct account of
what Zeno actually had in mind. It is a new argument for his
conclusion, not the argument which influenced him. On this point, see
e.g. C.D. Broad, "Note on Achilles and the Tortoise," _Mind_, N.S.,
Vol. XXII, pp. 318-19. Much valuable work on the interpretation of
Zeno has been done since this article was written. [Note added in
1917.]

[17] Since the above was written, he has ceased to be used as a
textbook. But I fear many of the books now used are so bad that the
change is no great improvement. [Note added in 1917.]

[18] The greatest age of Greece was brought to an end by the
Peloponnesian War. [Note added in 1917.]




VI

ON SCIENTIFIC METHOD IN PHILOSOPHY


When we try to ascertain the motives which have led men to the
investigation of philosophical questions, we find that, broadly
speaking, they can be divided into two groups, often antagonistic, and
leading to very divergent systems. These two groups of motives are, on
the one hand, those derived from religion and ethics, and, on the
other hand, those derived from science. Plato, Spinoza, and Hegel may
be taken as typical of the philosophers whose interests are mainly
religious and ethical, while Leibniz, Locke, and Hume may be taken as
representatives of the scientific wing. In Aristotle, Descartes,
Berkeley, and Kant we find both groups of motives strongly present.

Herbert Spencer, in whose honour we are assembled to-day, would
naturally be classed among scientific philosophers: it was mainly from
science that he drew his data, his formulation of problems, and his
conception of method. But his strong religious sense is obvious in
much of his writing, and his ethical pre-occupations are what make him
value the conception of evolution--that conception in which, as a
whole generation has believed, science and morals are to be united in
fruitful and indissoluble marriage.

It is my belief that the ethical and religious motives in spite of
the splendidly imaginative systems to which they have given rise, have
been on the whole a hindrance to the progress of philosophy, and ought
now to be consciously thrust aside by those who wish to discover
philosophical truth. Science, originally, was entangled in similar
motives, and was thereby hindered in its advances. It is, I maintain,
from science, rather than from ethics and religion, that philosophy
should draw its inspiration.

But there are two different ways in which a philosophy may seek to
base itself upon science. It may emphasise the most general _results_
of science, and seek to give even greater generality and unity to
these results. Or it may study the _methods_ of science, and seek to
apply these methods, with the necessary adaptations, to its own
peculiar province. Much philosophy inspired by science has gone astray
through preoccupation with the _results_ momentarily supposed to have
been achieved. It is not results, but _methods_ that can be
transferred with profit from the sphere of the special sciences to the
sphere of philosophy. What I wish to bring to your notice is the
possibility and importance of applying to philosophical problems
certain broad principles of method which have been found successful in
the study of scientific questions.

The opposition between a philosophy guided by scientific method and a
philosophy dominated by religious and ethical ideas may be illustrated
by two notions which are very prevalent in the works of philosophers,
namely the notion of _the universe_, and the notion of _good and
evil_. A philosopher is expected to tell us something about the nature
of the universe as a whole, and to give grounds for either optimism or
pessimism. Both these expectations seem to me mistaken. I believe the
conception of "the universe" to be, as its etymology indicates, a
mere relic of pre-Copernican astronomy: and I believe the question of
optimism and pessimism to be one which the philosopher will regard as
outside his scope, except, possibly, to the extent of maintaining that
it is insoluble.

In the days before Copernicus, the conception of the "universe" was
defensible on scientific grounds: the diurnal revolution of the
heavenly bodies bound them together as all parts of one system, of
which the earth was the centre. Round this apparent scientific fact,
many human desires rallied: the wish to believe Man important in the
scheme of things, the theoretical desire for a comprehensive
understanding of the Whole, the hope that the course of nature might
be guided by some sympathy with our wishes. In this way, an ethically
inspired system of metaphysics grew up, whose anthropocentrism was
apparently warranted by the geocentrism of astronomy. When Copernicus
swept away the astronomical basis of this system of thought, it had
grown so familiar, and had associated itself so intimately with men's
aspirations, that it survived with scarcely diminished force--survived
even Kant's "Copernican revolution," and is still now the unconscious
premiss of most metaphysical systems.

The oneness of the world is an almost undiscussed postulate of most
metaphysics. "Reality is not merely one and self-consistent, but is a
system of reciprocally determinate parts"[19]--such a statement would
pass almost unnoticed as a mere truism. Yet I believe that it embodies
a failure to effect thoroughly the "Copernican revolution," and that
the apparent oneness of the world is merely the oneness of what is
seen by a single spectator or apprehended by a single mind. The
Critical Philosophy, although it intended to emphasise the subjective
element in many apparent characteristics of the world, yet, by
regarding the world in itself as unknowable, so concentrated attention
upon the subjective representation that its subjectivity was soon
forgotten. Having recognised the categories as the work of the mind,
it was paralysed by its own recognition, and abandoned in despair the
attempt to undo the work of subjective falsification. In part, no
doubt, its despair was well founded, but not, I think, in any absolute
or ultimate sense. Still less was it a ground for rejoicing, or for
supposing that the nescience to which it ought to have given rise
could be legitimately exchanged for a metaphysical dogmatism.


I

As regards our present question, namely, the question of the unity of
the world, the right method, as I think, has been indicated by William
James.[20] "Let us now turn our backs upon ineffable or unintelligible
ways of accounting for the world's oneness, and inquire whether,
instead of being a principle, the 'oneness' affirmed may not merely be
a name like 'substance' descriptive of the fact that certain _specific
and verifiable connections_ are found among the parts of the
experiential flux.... We can easily conceive of things that shall have
no connection whatever with each other. We may assume them to inhabit
different times and spaces, as the dreams of different persons do even
now. They may be so unlike and incommensurable, and so inert towards
one another, as never to jostle or interfere. Even now there may
actually be whole universes so disparate from ours that we who know
ours have no means of perceiving that they exist. We conceive their
diversity, however; and by that fact the whole lot of them form what
is known in logic as 'a universe of discourse.' To form a universe of
discourse argues, as this example shows, no further kind of connexion.
The importance attached by certain monistic writers to the fact that
any chaos may become a universe by merely being named, is to me
incomprehensible." We are thus left with two kinds of unity in the
experienced world; the one what we may call the epistemological unity,
due merely to the fact that my experienced world is what _one_
experience selects from the sum total of existence: the other that
tentative and partial unity exhibited in the prevalence of scientific
laws in those portions of the world which science has hitherto
mastered. Now a generalisation based upon either of these kinds of
unity would be fallacious. That the things which we experience have
the common property of being experienced by us is a truism from which
obviously nothing of importance can be deducible: it is clearly
fallacious to draw from the fact that whatever we experience is
experienced the conclusion that therefore everything must be
experienced. The generalisation of the second kind of unity, namely,
that derived from scientific laws, would be equally fallacious, though
the fallacy is a trifle less elementary. In order to explain it let us
consider for a moment what is called the reign of law. People often
speak as though it were a remarkable fact that the physical world is
subject to invariable laws. In fact, however, it is not easy to see
how such a world could fail to obey general laws. Taking any arbitrary
set of points in space, there is a function of the time corresponding
to these points, i.e. expressing the motion of a particle which
traverses these points: this function may be regarded as a general law
to which the behaviour of such a particle is subject. Taking all such
functions for all the particles in the universe, there will be
theoretically some one formula embracing them all, and this formula
may be regarded as the single and supreme law of the spatio-temporal
world. Thus what is surprising in physics is not the existence of
general laws, but their extreme simplicity. It is not the uniformity
of nature that should surprise us, for, by sufficient analytic
ingenuity, any conceivable course of nature might be shown to exhibit
uniformity. What should surprise us is the fact that the uniformity is
simple enough for us to be able to discover it. But it is just this
characteristic of simplicity in the laws of nature hitherto discovered
which it would be fallacious to generalise, for it is obvious that
simplicity has been a part cause of their discovery, and can,
therefore, give no ground for the supposition that other undiscovered
laws are equally simple.

The fallacies to which these two kinds of unity have given rise
suggest a caution as regards all use in philosophy of general
_results_ that science is supposed to have achieved. In the first
place, in generalising these results beyond past experience, it is
necessary to examine very carefully whether there is not some reason
making it more probable that these results should hold of all that has
been experienced than that they should hold of things universally. The
sum total of what is experienced by mankind is a selection from the
sum total of what exists, and any general character exhibited by this
selection may be due to the manner of selecting rather than to the
general character of that from which experience selects. In the second
place, the most general results of science are the least certain and
the most liable to be upset by subsequent research. In utilizing these
results as the basis of a philosophy, we sacrifice the most valuable
and remarkable characteristic of scientific method, namely, that,
although almost everything in science is found sooner or later to
require some correction, yet this correction is almost always such as
to leave untouched, or only slightly modified, the greater part of the
results which have been deduced from the premiss subsequently
discovered to be faulty. The prudent man of science acquires a certain
instinct as to the kind of uses which may be made of present
scientific beliefs without incurring the danger of complete and utter
refutation from the modifications likely to be introduced by
subsequent discoveries. Unfortunately the use of scientific
generalisations of a sweeping kind as the basis of philosophy is just
that kind of use which an instinct of scientific caution would avoid,
since, as a rule, it would only lead to true results if the
generalisation upon which it is based stood in _no_ need of
correction.

We may illustrate these general considerations by means of two
examples, namely, the conservation of energy and the principle of
evolution.

(1) Let us begin with the conservation of energy, or, as Herbert
Spencer used to call it, the persistence of force. He says:[21]

  "Before taking a first step in the rational interpretation of
  Evolution, it is needful to recognise, not only the facts that
  Matter is indestructible and Motion continuous, but also the fact
  that Force persists. An attempt to assign the _causes_ of
  Evolution would manifestly be absurd if that agency to which the
  metamorphosis in general and in detail is due, could either come
  into existence or cease to exist. The succession of phenomena
  would in such case be altogether arbitrary, and deductive Science
  impossible."

This paragraph illustrates the kind of way in which the philosopher is
tempted to give an air of absoluteness and necessity to empirical
generalisations, of which only the approximate truth in the regions
hitherto investigated can be guaranteed by the unaided methods of
science. It is very often said that the persistence of something or
other is a necessary presupposition of all scientific investigation,
and this presupposition is then thought to be exemplified in some
quantity which physics declares to be constant. There are here, as it
seems to me, three distinct errors. First, the detailed scientific
investigation of nature does not _presuppose_ any such general laws as
its results are found to verify. Apart from particular observations,
science need presuppose nothing except the general principles of
logic, and these principles are not laws of nature, for they are
merely hypothetical, and apply not only to the actual world but to
whatever is _possible_. The second error consists in the
identification of a constant quantity with a persistent entity. Energy
is a certain function of a physical system, but is not a thing or
substance persisting throughout the changes of the system. The same is
true of mass, in spite of the fact that mass has often been defined as
_quantity of matter_. The whole conception of quantity, involving, as
it does, numerical measurement based largely upon conventions, is far
more artificial, far more an embodiment of mathematical convenience,
than is commonly believed by those who philosophise on physics. Thus
even if (which I cannot for a moment admit) the persistence of some
entity were among the necessary postulates of science, it would be a
sheer error to infer from this the constancy of any physical quantity,
or the _a priori_ necessity of any such constancy which may be
empirically discovered. In the third place, it has become more and
more evident with the progress of physics that large generalisations,
such as the conservation of energy or mass, are far from certain and
are very likely only approximate. Mass, which used to be regarded as
the most indubitable of physical quantities, is now generally believed
to vary according to velocity, and to be, in fact, a vector quantity
which at a given moment is different in different directions. The
detailed conclusions deduced from the supposed constancy of mass for
such motions as used to be studied in physics will remain very nearly
exact, and therefore over the field of the older investigations very
little modification of the older results is required. But as soon as
such a principle as the conservation of mass or of energy is erected
into a universal _a priori_ law, the slightest failure in absolute
exactness is fatal, and the whole philosophic structure raised upon
this foundation is necessarily ruined. The prudent philosopher,
therefore, though he may with advantage study the methods of physics,
will be very chary of basing anything upon what happen at the moment
to be the most general results apparently obtained by those methods.

(2) The philosophy of evolution, which was to be our second example,
illustrates the same tendency to hasty generalisation, and also
another sort, namely, the undue preoccupation with ethical notions.
There are two kinds of evolutionist philosophy, of which both Hegel
and Spencer represent the older and less radical kind, while
Pragmatism and Bergson represent the more modern and revolutionary
variety. But both these sorts of evolutionism have in common the
emphasis on _progress_, that is, upon a continual change from the
worse to the better, or from the simpler to the more complex. It
would be unfair to attribute to Hegel any scientific motive or
foundation, but all the other evolutionists, including Hegel's modern
disciples, have derived their impetus very largely from the history of
biological development. To a philosophy which derives a law of
universal progress from this history there are two objections. First,
that this history itself is concerned with a very small selection of
facts confined to an infinitesimal fragment of space and time, and
even on scientific grounds probably not an average sample of events in
the world at large. For we know that decay as well as growth is a
normal occurrence in the world. An extra-terrestrial philosopher, who
had watched a single youth up to the age of twenty-one and had never
come across any other human being, might conclude that it is the
nature of human beings to grow continually taller and wiser in an
indefinite progress towards perfection; and this generalisation would
be just as well founded as the generalisation which evolutionists base
upon the previous history of this planet. Apart, however, from this
scientific objection to evolutionism, there is another, derived from
the undue admixture of ethical notions in the very idea of progress
from which evolutionism derives its charm. Organic life, we are told,
has developed gradually from the protozoon to the philosopher, and
this development, we are assured, is indubitably an advance.
Unfortunately it is the philosopher, not the protozoon, who gives us
this assurance, and we can have no security that the impartial
outsider would agree with the philosopher's self-complacent
assumption. This point has been illustrated by the philosopher Chuang
Tz[)u] in the following instructive anecdote:

  "The Grand Augur, in his ceremonial robes, approached the shambles
  and thus addressed the pigs: 'How can you object to die? I shall
  fatten you for three months. I shall discipline myself for ten
  days and fast for three. I shall strew fine grass, and place you
  bodily upon a carved sacrificial dish. Does not this satisfy you?'

  Then, speaking from the pigs' point of view, he continued: 'It is
  better, perhaps, after all, to live on bran and escape the
  shambles....'

  'But then,' added he, speaking from his own point of view, 'to
  enjoy honour when alive one would readily die on a war-shield or
  in the headsman's basket.'

  So he rejected the pigs' point of view and adopted his own point
  of view. In what sense, then, was he different from the pigs?"

I much fear that the evolutionists too often resemble the Grand Augur
and the pigs.

The ethical element which has been prominent in many of the most
famous systems of philosophy is, in my opinion, one of the most
serious obstacles to the victory of scientific method in the
investigation of philosophical questions. Human ethical notions, as
Chuang Tz[)u] perceived, are essentially anthropocentric, and involve,
when used in metaphysics, an attempt, however veiled, to legislate for
the universe on the basis of the present desires of men. In this way
they interfere with that receptivity to fact which is the essence of
the scientific attitude towards the world. To regard ethical notions
as a key to the understanding of the world is essentially
pre-Copernican. It is to make man, with the hopes and ideals which he
happens to have at the present moment, the centre of the universe and
the interpreter of its supposed aims and purposes. Ethical metaphysics
is fundamentally an attempt, however disguised, to give legislative
force to our own wishes. This may, of course, be questioned, but I
think that it is confirmed by a consideration of the way in which
ethical notions arise. Ethics is essentially a product of the
gregarious instinct, that is to say, of the instinct to co-operate
with those who are to form our own group against those who belong to
other groups. Those who belong to our own group are good; those who
belong to hostile groups are wicked. The ends which are pursued by our
own group are desirable ends, the ends pursued by hostile groups are
nefarious. The subjectivity of this situation is not apparent to the
gregarious animal, which feels that the general principles of justice
are on the side of its own herd. When the animal has arrived at the
dignity of the metaphysician, it invents ethics as the embodiment of
its belief in the justice of its own herd. So the Grand Augur invokes
ethics as the justification of Augurs in their conflicts with pigs.
But, it may be said, this view of ethics takes no account of such
truly ethical notions as that of self-sacrifice. This, however, would
be a mistake. The success of gregarious animals in the struggle for
existence depends upon co-operation within the herd, and co-operation
requires sacrifice, to some extent, of what would otherwise be the
interest of the individual. Hence arises a conflict of desires and
instincts, since both self-preservation and the preservation of the
herd are biological ends to the individual. Ethics is in origin the
art of recommending to others the sacrifices required for co-operation
with oneself. Hence, by reflexion, it comes, through the operation of
social justice, to recommend sacrifices by oneself, but all ethics,
however refined, remains more or less subjective. Even vegetarians do
not hesitate, for example, to save the life of a man in a fever,
although in doing so they destroy the lives of many millions of
microbes. The view of the world taken by the philosophy derived from
ethical notions is thus never impartial and therefore never fully
scientific. As compared with science, it fails to achieve the
imaginative liberation from self which is necessary to such
understanding of the world as man can hope to achieve, and the
philosophy which it inspires is always more or less parochial, more or
less infected with the prejudices of a time and a place.

I do not deny the importance or value, within its own sphere, of the
kind of philosophy which is inspired by ethical notions. The ethical
work of Spinoza, for example, appears to me of the very highest
significance, but what is valuable in such work is not any
metaphysical theory as to the nature of the world to which it may give
rise, nor indeed anything which can be proved or disproved by
argument. What is valuable is the indication of some new way of
feeling towards life and the world, some way of feeling by which our
own existence can acquire more of the characteristics which we must
deeply desire. The value of such work, however immeasurable it is,
belongs with practice and not with theory. Such theoretic importance
as it may possess is only in relation to human nature, not in relation
to the world at large. The scientific philosophy, therefore, which
aims only at understanding the world and not directly at any other
improvement of human life, cannot take account of ethical notions
without being turned aside from that submission to fact which is the
essence of the scientific temper.


II

If the notion of the universe and the notion of good and evil are
extruded from scientific philosophy, it may be asked what specific
problems remain for the philosopher as opposed to the man of science?
It would be difficult to give a precise answer to this question, but
certain characteristics may be noted as distinguishing the province of
philosophy from that of the special sciences.

In the first place a philosophical proposition must be general. It
must not deal specially with things on the surface of the earth, or
with the solar system, or with any other portion of space and time. It
is this need of generality which has led to the belief that philosophy
deals with the universe as a whole. I do not believe that this belief
is justified, but I do believe that a philosophical proposition must
be applicable to everything that exists or may exist. It might be
supposed that this admission would be scarcely distinguishable from
the view which I wish to reject. This, however, would be an error, and
an important one. The traditional view would make the universe itself
the subject of various predicates which could not be applied to any
particular thing in the universe, and the ascription of such peculiar
predicates to the universe would be the special business of
philosophy. I maintain, on the contrary, that there are no
propositions of which the "universe" is the subject; in other words,
that there is no such thing as the "universe." What I do maintain is
that there are general propositions which may be asserted of each
individual thing, such as the propositions of logic. This does not
involve that all the things there are form a whole which could be
regarded as another thing and be made the subject of predicates. It
involves only the assertion that there are properties which belong to
each separate thing, not that there are properties belonging to the
whole of things collectively. The philosophy which I wish to advocate
may be called logical atomism or absolute pluralism, because, while
maintaining that there are many things, it denies that there is a
whole composed of those things. We shall see, therefore, that
philosophical propositions, instead of being concerned with the whole
of things collectively, are concerned with all things distributively;
and not only must they be concerned with all things, but they must be
concerned with such properties of all things as do not depend upon the
accidental nature of the things that there happen to be, but are true
of any possible world, independently of such facts as can only be
discovered by our senses.

This brings us to a second characteristic of philosophical
propositions, namely, that they must be _a priori_. A philosophical
proposition must be such as can be neither proved nor disproved by
empirical evidence. Too often we find in philosophical books arguments
based upon the course of history, or the convolutions of the brain, or
the eyes of shell-fish. Special and accidental facts of this kind are
irrelevant to philosophy, which must make only such assertions as
would be equally true however the actual world were constituted.

We may sum up these two characteristics of philosophical propositions
by saying that _philosophy is the science of the possible_. But this
statement unexplained is liable to be misleading, since it may be
thought that the possible is something other than the general, whereas
in fact the two are indistinguishable.

Philosophy, if what has been said is correct, becomes
indistinguishable from logic as that word has now come to be used.
The study of logic consists, broadly speaking, of two not very sharply
distinguished portions. On the one hand it is concerned with those
general statements which can be made concerning everything without
mentioning any one thing or predicate or relation, such for example as
"if _x_ is a member of the class [alpha] and every member of [alpha]
is a member of [beta], then _x_ is a member of the class [beta],
whatever _x_, [alpha], and [beta] may be." On the other hand, it is
concerned with the analysis and enumeration of logical _forms_, i.e.
with the kinds of propositions that may occur, with the various types
of facts, and with the classification of the constituents of facts. In
this way logic provides an inventory of possibilities, a repertory of
abstractly tenable hypotheses.

It might be thought that such a study would be too vague and too
general to be of any very great importance, and that, if its problems
became at any point sufficiently definite, they would be merged in the
problems of some special science. It appears, however, that this is
not the case. In some problems, for example, the analysis of space and
time, the nature of perception, or the theory of judgment, the
discovery of the logical form of the facts involved is the hardest
part of the work and the part whose performance has been most lacking
hitherto. It is chiefly for want of the right logical hypothesis that
such problems have hitherto been treated in such an unsatisfactory
manner, and have given rise to those contradictions or antinomies in
which the enemies of reason among philosophers have at all times
delighted.

By concentrating attention upon the investigation of logical forms, it
becomes possible at last for philosophy to deal with its problems
piecemeal, and to obtain, as the sciences do, such partial and
probably not wholly correct results as subsequent investigation can
utilise even while it supplements and improves them. Most
philosophies hitherto have been constructed all in one block, in such
a way that, if they were not wholly correct, they were wholly
incorrect, and could not be used as a basis for further
investigations. It is chiefly owing to this fact that philosophy,
unlike science, has hitherto been unprogressive, because each original
philosopher has had to begin the work again from the beginning,
without being able to accept anything definite from the work of his
predecessors. A scientific philosophy such as I wish to recommend will
be piecemeal and tentative like other sciences; above all, it will be
able to invent hypotheses which, even if they are not wholly true,
will yet remain fruitful after the necessary corrections have been
made. This possibility of successive approximations to the truth is,
more than anything else, the source of the triumphs of science, and to
transfer this possibility to philosophy is to ensure a progress in
method whose importance it would be almost impossible to exaggerate.

The essence of philosophy as thus conceived is analysis, not
synthesis. To build up systems of the world, like Heine's German
professor who knit together fragments of life and made an intelligible
system out of them, is not, I believe, any more feasible than the
discovery of the philosopher's stone. What is feasible is the
understanding of general forms, and the division of traditional
problems into a number of separate and less baffling questions.
"Divide and conquer" is the maxim of success here as elsewhere.

Let us illustrate these somewhat general maxims by examining their
application to the philosophy of space, for it is only in application
that the meaning or importance of a method can be understood. Suppose
we are confronted with the problem of space as presented in Kant's
Transcendental sthetic, and suppose we wish to discover what are the
elements of the problem and what hope there is of obtaining a solution
of them. It will soon appear that three entirely distinct problems,
belonging to different studies, and requiring different methods for
their solution, have been confusedly combined in the supposed single
problem with which Kant is concerned. There is a problem of logic, a
problem of physics, and a problem of theory of knowledge. Of these
three, the problem of logic can be solved exactly and perfectly; the
problem of physics can probably be solved with as great a degree of
certainty and as great an approach to exactness as can be hoped in an
empirical region; the problem of theory of knowledge, however, remains
very obscure and very difficult to deal with. Let us see how these
three problems arise.

(1) The logical problem has arisen through the suggestions of
non-Euclidean geometry. Given a body of geometrical propositions, it
is not difficult to find a minimum statement of the axioms from which
this body of propositions can be deduced. It is also not difficult, by
dropping or altering some of these axioms, to obtain a more general or
a different geometry, having, from the point of view of pure
mathematics, the same logical coherence and the same title to respect
as the more familiar Euclidean geometry. The Euclidean geometry itself
is true perhaps of actual space (though this is doubtful), but
certainly of an infinite number of purely arithmetical systems, each
of which, from the point of view of abstract logic, has an equal and
indefeasible right to be called a Euclidean space. Thus space as an
object of logical or mathematical study loses its uniqueness; not only
are there many kinds of spaces, but there are an infinity of examples
of each kind, though it is difficult to find any kind of which the
space of physics may be an example, and it is impossible to find any
kind of which the space of physics is certainly an example. As an
illustration of one possible logical system of geometry we may
consider all relations of three terms which are analogous in certain
formal respects to the relation "between" as it appears to be in
actual space. A space is then defined by means of one such three-term
relation. The points of the space are all the terms which have this
relation to something or other, and their order in the space in
question is determined by this relation. The points of one space are
necessarily also points of other spaces, since there are necessarily
other three-term relations having those same points for their field.
The space in fact is not determined by the class of its points, but by
the ordering three-term relation. When enough abstract logical
properties of such relations have been enumerated to determine the
resulting kind of geometry, say, for example, Euclidean geometry, it
becomes unnecessary for the pure geometer in his abstract capacity to
distinguish between the various relations which have all these
properties. He considers the whole class of such relations, not any
single one among them. Thus in studying a given kind of geometry the
pure mathematician is studying a certain class of relations defined by
means of certain abstract logical properties which take the place of
what used to be called axioms. The nature of geometrical _reasoning_
therefore is purely deductive and purely logical; if any special
epistemological peculiarities are to be found in geometry, it must not
be in the reasoning, but in our knowledge concerning the axioms in
some given space.

(2) The physical problem of space is both more interesting and more
difficult than the logical problem. The physical problem may be
stated as follows: to find in the physical world, or to construct from
physical materials, a space of one of the kinds enumerated by the
logical treatment of geometry. This problem derives its difficulty
from the attempt to accommodate to the roughness and vagueness of the
real world some system possessing the logical clearness and exactitude
of pure mathematics. That this can be done with a certain degree of
approximation is fairly evident If I see three people _A_, _B_, and
_C_ sitting in a row, I become aware of the fact which may be
expressed by saying that _B_ is between _A_ and _C_ rather than that
_A_ is between _B_ and _C_, or _C_ is between _A_ and _B_. This
relation of "between" which is thus perceived to hold has some of the
abstract logical properties of those three-term relations which, we
saw, give rise to a geometry, but its properties fail to be exact, and
are not, as empirically given, amenable to the kind of treatment at
which geometry aims. In abstract geometry we deal with points,
straight lines, and planes; but the three people _A_, _B_, and _C_
whom I see sitting in a row are not exactly points, nor is the row
exactly a straight line. Nevertheless physics, which formally assumes
a space containing points, straight lines, and planes, is found
empirically to give results applicable to the sensible world. It must
therefore be possible to find an interpretation of the points,
straight lines, and planes of physics in terms of physical data, or at
any rate in terms of data together with such hypothetical additions as
seem least open to question. Since all data suffer from a lack of
mathematical precision through being of a certain size and somewhat
vague in outline, it is plain that if such a notion as that of a point
is to find any application to empirical material, the point must be
neither a datum nor a hypothetical addition to data, but a
_construction_ by means of data with their hypothetical additions. It
is obvious that any hypothetical filling out of data is less dubious
and unsatisfactory when the additions are closely analogous to data
than when they are of a radically different sort. To assume, for
example, that objects which we see continue, after we have turned away
our eyes, to be more or less analogous to what they were while we were
looking, is a less violent assumption than to assume that such objects
are composed of an infinite number of mathematical points. Hence in
the physical study of the geometry of physical space, points must not
be assumed _ab initio_ as they are in the logical treatment of
geometry, but must be constructed as systems composed of data and
hypothetical analogues of data. We are thus led naturally to define a
physical point as a certain class of those objects which are the
ultimate constituents of the physical world. It will be the class of
all those objects which, as one would naturally say, _contain_ the
point. To secure a definition giving this result, without previously
assuming that physical objects are composed of points, is an agreeable
problem in mathematical logic. The solution of this problem and the
perception of its importance are due to my friend Dr. Whitehead. The
oddity of regarding a point as a class of physical entities wears off
with familiarity, and ought in any case not to be felt by those who
maintain, as practically every one does, that points are mathematical
fictions. The word "fiction" is used glibly in such connexions by many
men who seem not to feel the necessity of explaining how it can come
about that a fiction can be so useful in the study of the actual world
as the points of mathematical physics have been found to be. By our
definition, which regards a point as a class of physical objects, it
is explained both how the use of points can lead to important
physical results, and how we can nevertheless avoid the assumption
that points are themselves entities in the physical world.

Many of the mathematically convenient properties of abstract logical
spaces cannot be either known to belong or known not to belong to the
space of physics. Such are all the properties connected with continuity.
For to know that actual space has these properties would require an
infinite exactness of sense-perception. If actual space is continuous,
there are nevertheless many possible non-continuous spaces which will be
empirically indistinguishable from it; and, conversely, actual space may
be non-continuous and yet empirically indistinguishable from a possible
continuous space. Continuity, therefore, though obtainable in the _a
priori_ region of arithmetic, is not with certainty obtainable in the
space or time of the physical world: whether these are continuous or not
would seem to be a question not only unanswered but for ever
unanswerable. From the point of view of philosophy, however, the
discovery that a question is unanswerable is as complete an answer as
any that could possibly be obtained. And from the point of view of
physics, where no empirical means of distinction can be found, there can
be no empirical objection to the mathematically simplest assumption,
which is that of continuity.

The subject of the physical theory of space is a very large one,
hitherto little explored. It is associated with a similar theory of
time, and both have been forced upon the attention of philosophically
minded physicists by the discussions which have raged concerning the
theory of relativity.

(3) The problem with which Kant is concerned in the Transcendental
sthetic is primarily the epistemological problem: "How do we come to
have knowledge of geometry _a priori_?" By the distinction between the
logical and physical problems of geometry, the bearing and scope of
this question are greatly altered. Our knowledge of pure geometry is
_a priori_ but is wholly logical. Our knowledge of physical geometry
is synthetic, but is not _a priori_. Our knowledge of pure geometry is
hypothetical, and does not enable us to assert, for example, that the
axiom of parallels is true in the physical world. Our knowledge of
physical geometry, while it does enable us to assert that this axiom
is approximately verified, does not, owing to the inevitable
inexactitude of observation, enable us to assert that it is verified
_exactly_. Thus, with the separation which we have made between pure
geometry and the geometry of physics, the Kantian problem collapses.
To the question, "How is synthetic _a priori_ knowledge possible?" we
can now reply, at any rate so far as geometry is concerned, "It is not
possible," if "synthetic" means "not deducible from logic alone." Our
knowledge of geometry, like the rest of our knowledge, is derived
partly from logic, partly from sense, and the peculiar position which
in Kant's day geometry appeared to occupy is seen now to be a
delusion. There are still some philosophers, it is true, who maintain
that our knowledge that the axiom of parallels, for example, is true
of actual space, is not to be accounted for empirically, but is as
Kant maintained derived from an _a priori_ intuition. This position is
not logically refutable, but I think it loses all plausibility as soon
as we realise how complicated and derivative is the notion of physical
space. As we have seen, the application of geometry to the physical
world in no way demands that there should really be points and
straight lines among physical entities. The principle of economy,
therefore, demands that we should abstain from assuming the existence
of points and straight lines. As soon, however, as we accept the view
that points and straight lines are complicated constructions by means
of classes of physical entities, the hypothesis that we have an _a
priori_ intuition enabling us to know what happens to straight lines
when they are produced indefinitely becomes extremely strained and
harsh; nor do I think that such an hypothesis would ever have arisen
in the mind of a philosopher who had grasped the nature of physical
space. Kant, under the influence of Newton, adopted, though with some
vacillation, the hypothesis of absolute space, and this hypothesis,
though logically unobjectionable, is removed by Occam's razor, since
absolute space is an unnecessary entity in the explanation of the
physical world. Although, therefore, we cannot refute the Kantian
theory of an _a priori_ intuition, we can remove its grounds one by
one through an analysis of the problem. Thus, here as in many other
philosophical questions, the analytic method, while not capable of
arriving at a demonstrative result, is nevertheless capable of showing
that all the positive grounds in favour of a certain theory are
fallacious and that a less unnatural theory is capable of accounting
for the facts.

Another question by which the capacity of the analytic method can be
shown is the question of realism. Both those who advocate and those
who combat realism seem to me to be far from clear as to the nature of
the problem which they are discussing. If we ask: "Are our objects of
perception _real_ and are they _independent_ of the percipient?" it
must be supposed that we attach some meaning to the words "real" and
"independent," and yet, if either side in the controversy of realism
is asked to define these two words, their answer is pretty sure to
embody confusions such as logical analysis will reveal.

Let us begin with the word "real." There certainly are objects of
perception, and therefore, if the question whether these objects are
real is to be a substantial question, there must be in the world two
sorts of objects, namely, the real and the unreal, and yet the unreal
is supposed to be essentially what there is not. The question what
properties must belong to an object in order to make it real is one to
which an adequate answer is seldom if ever forthcoming. There is of
course the Hegelian answer, that the real is the self-consistent and
that nothing is self-consistent except the Whole; but this answer,
true or false, is not relevant in our present discussion, which moves
on a lower plane and is concerned with the status of objects of
perception among other objects of equal fragmentariness. Objects of
perception are contrasted, in the discussions concerning realism,
rather with psychical states on the one hand and matter on the other
hand than with the all-inclusive whole of things. The question we have
therefore to consider is the question as to what can be meant by
assigning "reality" to some but not all of the entities that make up
the world. Two elements, I think, make up what is felt rather than
thought when the word "reality" is used in this sense. A thing is real
if it persists at times when it is not perceived; or again, a thing is
real when it is correlated with other things in a way which experience
has led us to expect. It will be seen that reality in either of these
senses is by no means necessary to a thing, and that in fact there
might be a whole world in which nothing was real in either of these
senses. It might turn out that the objects of perception failed of
reality in one or both of these respects, without its being in any way
deducible that they are not parts of the external world with which
physics deals. Similar remarks will apply to the word "independent."
Most of the associations of this word are bound up with ideas as to
causation which it is not now possible to maintain. _A_ is independent
of _B_ when _B_ is not an indispensable part of the _cause_ of _A_.
But when it is recognised that causation is nothing more than
correlation, and that there are correlations of simultaneity as well
as of succession, it becomes evident that there is no uniqueness in a
series of casual antecedents of a given event, but that, at any point
where there is a correlation of simultaneity, we can pass from one
line of antecedents to another in order to obtain a new series of
causal antecedents. It will be necessary to specify the causal law
according to which the antecedents are to be considered. I received a
letter the other day from a correspondent who had been puzzled by
various philosophical questions. After enumerating them he says:
"These questions led me from Bonn to Strassburg, where I found
Professor Simmel." Now, it would be absurd to deny that these
questions caused his body to move from Bonn to Strassburg, and yet it
must be supposed that a set of purely mechanical antecedents could
also be found which would account for this transfer of matter from one
place to another. Owing to this plurality of causal series antecedent
to a given event, the notion of _the_ cause becomes indefinite, and
the question of independence becomes correspondingly ambiguous. Thus,
instead of asking simply whether _A_ is independent of _B_, we ought
to ask whether there is a series determined by such and such causal
laws leading from _B_ to _A_. This point is important in connexion
with the particular question of objects of perception. It may be that
no objects quite like those which we perceive ever exist unperceived;
in this case there will be a causal law according to which objects of
perception are not independent of being perceived. But even if this be
the case, it may nevertheless also happen that there are purely
physical causal laws determining the occurrence of objects which are
perceived by means of other objects which perhaps are not perceived.
In that case, in regard to such causal laws objects of perception will
be independent of being perceived. Thus the question whether objects
of perception are independent of being perceived is, as it stands,
indeterminate, and the answer will be yes or no according to the
method adopted of making it determinate. I believe that this confusion
has borne a very large part in prolonging the controversies on this
subject, which might well have seemed capable of remaining for ever
undecided. The view which I should wish to advocate is that objects of
perception do not persist unchanged at times when they are not
perceived, although probably objects more or less resembling them do
exist at such times; that objects of perception are part, and the only
empirically knowable part, of the actual subject-matter of physics,
and are themselves properly to be called physical; that purely
physical laws exist determining the character and duration of objects
of perception without any reference to the fact that they are
perceived; and that in the establishment of such laws the propositions
of physics do not presuppose any propositions of psychology or even
the existence of mind. I do not know whether realists would recognise
such a view as realism. All that I should claim for it is, that it
avoids difficulties which seem to me to beset both realism and
idealism as hitherto advocated, and that it avoids the appeal which
they have made to ideas which logical analysis shows to be ambiguous.
A further defence and elaboration of the positions which I advocate,
but for which time is lacking now, will be found indicated in my book
on _Our Knowledge of the External World_.[22]

The adoption of scientific method in philosophy, if I am not mistaken,
compels us to abandon the hope of solving many of the more ambitious
and humanly interesting problems of traditional philosophy. Some of
these it relegates, though with little expectation of a successful
solution, to special sciences, others it shows to be such as our
capacities are essentially incapable of solving. But there remain a
large number of the recognised problems of philosophy in regard to
which the method advocated gives all those advantages of division into
distinct questions, of tentative, partial, and progressive advance,
and of appeal to principles with which, independently of temperament,
all competent students must agree. The failure of philosophy hitherto
has been due in the main to haste and ambition: patience and modesty,
here as in other sciences, will open the road to solid and durable
progress.

FOOTNOTES:

[19] Bosanquet, _Logic_, ii, p. 211.

[20] _Some Problems of Philosophy_, p 124.

[21] _First Principles_ (1862), Part II, beginning of chap. viii.

[22] Open Court Company, 1914.




VII

THE ULTIMATE CONSTITUENTS OF MATTER[23]


I wish to discuss in this article no less a question than the ancient
metaphysical query, "What is matter?" The question, "What is matter?"
in so far as it concerns philosophy, is, I think, already capable of
an answer which in principle will be as complete as an answer can hope
to be; that is to say, we can separate the problem into an essentially
soluble and an essentially insoluble portion, and we can now see how
to solve the essentially soluble portion, at least as regards its main
outlines. It is these outlines which I wish to suggest in the present
article. My main position, which is realistic, is, I hope and believe,
not remote from that of Professor Alexander, by whose writings on this
subject I have profited greatly.[24] It is also in close accord with
that of Dr. Nunn.[25]

Common sense is accustomed to the division of the world into mind and
matter. It is supposed by all who have never studied philosophy that
the distinction between mind and matter is perfectly clear and easy,
that the two do not at any point overlap, and that only a fool or a
philosopher could be in doubt as to whether any given entity is mental
or material. This simple faith survives in Descartes and in a
somewhat modified form in Spinoza, but with Leibniz it begins to
disappear, and from his day to our own almost every philosopher of
note has criticised and rejected the dualism of common sense. It is my
intention in this article to defend this dualism; but before defending
it we must spend a few moments on the reasons which have prompted its
rejection.

Our knowledge of the material world is obtained by means of the
senses, of sight and touch and so on. At first it is supposed that
things are just as they seem, but two opposite sophistications soon
destroy this nave belief. On the one hand the physicists cut up
matter into molecules, atoms, corpuscles, and as many more such
subdivisions as their future needs may make them postulate, and the
units at which they arrive are uncommonly different from the visible,
tangible objects of daily life. A unit of matter tends more and more
to be something like an electromagnetic field filling all space,
though having its greatest intensity in a small region. Matter
consisting of such elements is as remote from daily life as any
metaphysical theory. It differs from the theories of metaphysicians
only in the fact that its practical efficacy proves that it contains
some measure of truth and induces business men to invest money on the
strength of it; but, in spite of its connection with the money market,
it remains a metaphysical theory none the less.

The second kind of sophistication to which the world of common sense
has been subjected is derived from the psychologists and
physiologists. The physiologists point out that what we see depends
upon the eye, that what we hear depends upon the ear, and that all our
senses are liable to be affected by anything which affects the brain,
like alcohol or hasheesh. Psychologists point out how much of what we
think we see is supplied by association or unconscious inference, how
much is mental interpretation, and how doubtful is the residuum which
can be regarded as crude datum. From these facts it is argued by the
psychologists that the notion of a datum passively received by the
mind is a delusion, and it is argued by the physiologists that even if
a pure datum of sense could be obtained by the analysis of experience,
still this datum could not belong, as common sense supposes, to the
outer world, since its whole nature is conditioned by our nerves and
sense organs, changing as they change in ways which it is thought
impossible to connect with any change in the matter supposed to be
perceived. This physiologist's argument is exposed to the rejoinder,
more specious than solid, that our knowledge of the existence of the
sense organs and nerves is obtained by that very process which the
physiologist has been engaged in discrediting, since the existence of
the nerves and sense organs is only known through the evidence of the
senses themselves. This argument may prove that some reinterpretation
of the results of physiology is necessary before they can acquire
metaphysical validity. But it does not upset the physiological
argument in so far as this constitutes merely a _reductio ad absurdum_
of nave realism.

These various lines of argument prove, I think, that some part of the
beliefs of common sense must be abandoned. They prove that, if we take
these beliefs as a whole, we are forced into conclusions which are in
part self-contradictory; but such arguments cannot of themselves
decide what portion of our common-sense beliefs is in need of
correction. Common sense believes that what we see is physical,
outside the mind, and continuing to exist if we shut our eyes or turn
them in another direction. I believe that common sense is right in
regarding what we see as physical and (in one of several possible
senses) outside the mind, but is probably wrong in supposing that it
continues to exist when we are no longer looking at it. It seems to me
that the whole discussion of matter has been obscured by two errors
which support each other. The first of these is the error that what we
see, or perceive through any of our other senses, is subjective: the
second is the belief that what is physical must be persistent.
Whatever physics may regard as the ultimate constituents of matter, it
always supposes these constituents to be indestructible. Since the
immediate data of sense are not indestructible but in a state of
perpetual flux, it is argued that these data themselves cannot be
among the ultimate constituents of matter. I believe this to be a
sheer mistake. The persistent particles of mathematical physics I
regard as logical constructions, symbolic fictions enabling us to
express compendiously very complicated assemblages of facts; and, on
the other hand, I believe that the actual data in sensation, the
immediate objects of sight or touch or hearing, are extra-mental,
purely physical, and among the ultimate constituents of matter.

My meaning in regard to the impermanence of physical entities may
perhaps be made clearer by the use of Bergson's favourite illustration
of the cinematograph. When I first read Bergson's statement that the
mathematician conceives the world after the analogy of a
cinematograph, I had never seen a cinematograph, and my first visit to
one was determined by the desire to verify Bergson's statement, which
I found to be completely true, at least so far as I am concerned.
When, in a picture palace, we see a man rolling down hill, or running
away from the police, or falling into a river, or doing any of those
other things to which men in such places are addicted, we know that
there is not really only one man moving, but a succession of films,
each with a different momentary man. The illusion of persistence
arises only through the approach to continuity in the series of
momentary men. Now what I wish to suggest is that in this respect the
cinema is a better metaphysician than common sense, physics, or
philosophy. The real man too, I believe, however the police may swear
to his identity, is really a series of momentary men, each different
one from the other, and bound together, not by a numerical identity,
but by continuity and certain intrinsic causal laws. And what applies
to men applies equally to tables and chairs, the sun, moon and stars.
Each of these is to be regarded, not as one single persistent entity,
but as a series of entities succeeding each other in time, each
lasting for a very brief period, though probably not for a mere
mathematical instant. In saying this I am only urging the same kind of
division in time as we are accustomed to acknowledge in the case of
space. A body which fills a cubic foot will be admitted to consist of
many smaller bodies, each occupying only a very tiny volume; similarly
a thing which persists for an hour is to be regarded as composed of
many things of less duration. A true theory of matter requires a
division of things into time-corpuscles as well as into
space-corpuscles.

The world may be conceived as consisting of a multitude of entities
arranged in a certain pattern. The entities which are arranged I shall
call "particulars." The arrangement or pattern results from relations
among particulars. Classes or series of particulars, collected
together on account of some property which makes it convenient to be
able to speak of them as wholes, are what I call logical constructions
or symbolic fictions. The particulars are to be conceived, not on the
analogy of bricks in a building, but rather on the analogy of notes
in a symphony. The ultimate constituents of a symphony (apart from
relations) are the notes, each of which lasts only for a very short
time. We may collect together all the notes played by one instrument:
these may be regarded as the analogues of the successive particulars
which common sense would regard as successive states of one "thing."
But the "thing" ought to be regarded as no more "real" or
"substantial" than, for example, the rle of the trombone. As soon as
"things" are conceived in this manner it will be found that the
difficulties in the way of regarding immediate objects of sense as
physical have largely disappeared.

When people ask, "Is the object of sense mental or physical?" they
seldom have any clear idea either what is meant by "mental" or
"physical," or what criteria are to be applied for deciding whether a
given entity belongs to one class or the other. I do not know how to
give a sharp definition of the word "mental," but something may be
done by enumerating occurrences which are indubitably mental:
believing, doubting, wishing, willing, being pleased or pained, are
certainly mental occurrences; so are what we may call experiences,
seeing, hearing, smelling, perceiving generally. But it does not
follow from this that what is seen, what is heard, what is smelt, what
is perceived, must be mental. When I see a flash of lightning, my
seeing of it is mental, but what I see, although it is not quite the
same as what anybody else sees at the same moment, and although it
seems very unlike what the physicist would describe as a flash of
lightning, is not mental. I maintain, in fact, that if the physicist
could describe truly and fully all that occurs in the physical world
when there is a flash of lightning, it would contain as a constituent
what I see, and also what is seen by anybody else who would commonly
be said to see the same flash. What I mean may perhaps be made plainer
by saying that if my body could remain in exactly the same state in
which it is, although my mind had ceased to exist, precisely that
object which I now see when I see the flash would exist, although of
course I should not see it, since my seeing is mental. The principal
reasons which have led people to reject this view have, I think, been
two: first, that they did not adequately distinguish between my seeing
and what I see; secondly, that the causal dependence of what I see
upon my body has made people suppose that what I see cannot be
"outside" me. The first of these reasons need not detain us, since the
confusion only needs to be pointed out in order to be obviated; but
the second requires some discussion, since it can only be answered by
removing current misconceptions, on the one hand as to the nature of
space, and on the other, as to the meaning of causal dependence.

When people ask whether colours, for example, or other secondary
qualities are inside or outside the mind, they seem to suppose that
their meaning must be clear, and that it ought to be possible to say
yes or no without any further discussion of the terms involved. In
fact, however, such terms as "inside" or "outside" are very ambiguous.
What is meant by asking whether this or that is "in" the mind? The
mind is not like a bag or a pie; it does not occupy a certain region
in space, or, if (in a sense) it does, what is in that region is
presumably part of the brain, which would not be said to be in the
mind. When people say that sensible qualities are in the mind, they do
not mean "spatially contained in" in the sense in which the blackbirds
were in the pie. We might regard the mind as an assemblage of
particulars, namely, what would be called "states of mind," which
would belong together in virtue of some specific common quality. The
common quality of all states of mind would be the quality designated
by the word "mental"; and besides this we should have to suppose that
each separate person's states of mind have some common characteristic
distinguishing them from the states of mind of other people. Ignoring
this latter point, let us ask ourselves whether the quality designated
by the word "mental" does, as a matter of observation, actually belong
to objects of sense, such as colours or noises. I think any candid
person must reply that, however difficult it may be to know what we
mean by "mental," it is not difficult to see that colours and noises
are not mental in the sense of having that intrinsic peculiarity which
belongs to beliefs and wishes and volitions, but not to the physical
world. Berkeley advances on this subject a plausible argument[26]
which seems to me to rest upon an ambiguity in the word "pain." He
argues that the realist supposes the heat which he feels in
approaching a fire to be something outside his mind, but that as he
approaches nearer and nearer to the fire the sensation of heat passes
imperceptibly into pain, and that no one could regard pain as
something outside the mind. In reply to this argument, it should be
observed in the first place that the heat of which we are immediately
aware is not in the fire but in our own body. It is only by inference
that the fire is judged to be the cause of the heat which we feel in
our body. In the second place (and this is the more important point),
when we speak of pain we may mean one of two things: we may mean the
object of the sensation or other experience which has the quality of
being painful, or we may mean the quality of painfulness itself. When
a man says he has a pain in his great toe, what he means is that he
has a sensation associated with his great toe and having the quality
of painfulness. The sensation itself, like every sensation, consists
in experiencing a sensible object, and the experiencing has that
quality of painfulness which only mental occurrences can have, but
which may belong to thoughts or desires, as well as to sensations. But
in common language we speak of the sensible object experienced in a
painful sensation as a pain, and it is this way of speaking which
causes the confusion upon which the plausibility of Berkeley's
argument depends. It would be absurd to attribute the quality of
painfulness to anything non-mental, and hence it comes to be thought
that what we call a pain in the toe must be mental. In fact, however,
it is not the sensible object in such a case which is painful, but the
sensation, that is to say, the experience of the sensible object. As
the heat which we experience from the fire grows greater, the
experience passes gradually from being pleasant to being painful, but
neither the pleasure nor the pain is a quality of the object
experienced as opposed to the experience, and it is therefore a
fallacy to argue that this object must be mental on the ground that
painfulness can only be attributed to what is mental.

If, then, when we say that something is in the mind we mean that it
has a certain recognisable intrinsic characteristic such as belongs to
thoughts and desires, it must be maintained on grounds of immediate
inspection that objects of sense are not in any mind.

A different meaning of "in the mind" is, however, to be inferred from
the arguments advanced by those who regard sensible objects as being
in the mind. The arguments used are, in the main, such as would prove
the causal dependence of objects of sense upon the percipient. Now
the notion of causal dependence is very obscure and difficult, much
more so in fact than is generally realised by philosophers. I shall
return to this point in a moment. For the present, however, accepting
the notion of causal dependence without criticism, I wish to urge that
the dependence in question is rather upon our bodies than upon our
minds. The visual appearance of an object is altered if we shut one
eye, or squint, or look previously at something dazzling; but all
these are bodily acts, and the alterations which they effect are to be
explained by physiology and optics, not by psychology.[27] They are in
fact of exactly the same kind as the alterations effected by
spectacles or a microscope. They belong therefore to the theory of the
physical world, and can have no bearing upon the question whether what
we see is causally dependent upon the mind. What they do tend to
prove, and what I for my part have no wish to deny, is that what we
see is causally dependent upon our body and is not, as crude common
sense would suppose, something which would exist equally if our eyes
and nerves and brain were absent, any more than the visual appearance
presented by an object seen through a microscope would remain if the
microscope were removed. So long as it is supposed that the physical
world is composed of stable and more or less permanent constituents,
the fact that what we see is changed by changes in our body appears to
afford reason for regarding what we see as not an ultimate constituent
of matter. But if it is recognised that the ultimate constituents of
matter are as circumscribed in duration as in spatial extent, the
whole of this difficulty vanishes.

There remains, however, another difficulty, connected with space. When
we look at the sun we wish to know something about the sun itself,
which is ninety-three million miles away; but what we see is dependent
upon our eyes, and it is difficult to suppose that our eyes can affect
what happens at a distance of ninety-three million miles. Physics
tells us that certain electromagnetic waves start from the sun, and
reach our eyes after about eight minutes. They there produce
disturbances in the rods and cones, thence in the optic nerve, thence
in the brain. At the end of this purely physical series, by some odd
miracle, comes the experience which we call "seeing the sun," and it
is such experiences which form the whole and sole reason for our
belief in the optic nerve, the rods and cones, the ninety-three
million miles, the electromagnetic waves, and the sun itself. It is
this curious oppositeness of direction between the order of causation
as affirmed by physics, and the order of evidence as revealed by
theory of knowledge, that causes the most serious perplexities in
regard to the nature of physical reality. Anything that invalidates
our seeing, as a source of knowledge concerning physical reality,
invalidates also the whole of physics and physiology. And yet,
starting from a common-sense acceptance of our seeing, physics has
been led step by step to the construction of the causal chain in which
our seeing is the last link, and the immediate object which we see
cannot be regarded as that initial cause which we believe to be
ninety-three million miles away, and which we are inclined to regard
as the "real" sun.

I have stated this difficulty as forcibly as I can, because I believe
that it can only be answered by a radical analysis and reconstruction
of all the conceptions upon whose employment it depends.

Space, time, matter and cause, are the chief of these conceptions. Let
us begin with the conception of cause.

Causal dependence, as I observed a moment ago, is a conception which
it is very dangerous to accept at its face value. There exists a
notion that in regard to any event there is something which may be
called _the_ cause of that event--some one definite occurrence,
without which the event would have been impossible and with which it
becomes necessary. An event is supposed to be dependent upon its cause
in some way which in it is not dependent upon other things. Thus men
will urge that the mind is dependent upon the brain, or, with equal
plausibility, that the brain is dependent upon the mind. It seems not
improbable that if we had sufficient knowledge we could infer the
state of a man's mind from the state of his brain, or the state of his
brain from the state of his mind. So long as the usual conception of
causal dependence is retained, this state of affairs can be used by
the materialist to urge that the state of our brain causes our
thoughts, and by the idealist to urge that our thoughts cause the
state of our brain. Either contention is equally valid or equally
invalid. The fact seems to be that there are many correlations of the
sort which may be called causal, and that, for example, either a
physical or a mental event can be predicted, theoretically, either
from a sufficient number of physical antecedents or from a sufficient
number of mental antecedents. To speak of _the_ cause of an event is
therefore misleading. Any set of antecedents from which the event can
theoretically be inferred by means of correlations might be called a
cause of the event. But to speak of _the_ cause is to imply a
uniqueness which does not exist.

The relevance of this to the experience which we call "seeing the sun"
is obvious. The fact that there exists a chain of antecedents which
makes our seeing dependent upon the eyes and nerves and brain does not
even tend to show that there is not another chain of antecedents in
which the eyes and nerves and brain as physical things are ignored. If
we are to escape from the dilemma which seemed to arise out of the
physiological causation of what we see when we say we see the sun, we
must find, at least in theory, a way of stating causal laws for the
physical world, in which the units are not material things, such as
the eyes and nerves and brain, but momentary particulars of the same
sort as our momentary visual object when we look at the sun. The sun
itself and the eyes and nerves and brain must be regarded as
assemblages of momentary particulars. Instead of supposing, as we
naturally do when we start from an uncritical acceptance of the
apparent dicta of physics, that _matter_ is what is "really real" in
the physical world, and that the immediate objects of sense are mere
phantasms, we must regard matter as a logical construction, of which
the constituents will be just such evanescent particulars as may, when
an observer happens to be present, become data of sense to that
observer. What physics regards as the sun of eight minutes ago will be
a whole assemblage of particulars, existing at different times,
spreading out from a centre with the velocity of light, and containing
among their number all those visual data which are seen by people who
are now looking at the sun. Thus the sun of eight minutes ago is a
class of particulars, and what I see when I now look at the sun is one
member of this class. The various particulars constituting this class
will be correlated with each other by a certain continuity and certain
intrinsic laws of variation as we pass outwards from the centre,
together with certain modifications correlated extrinsically with
other particulars which are not members of this class. It is these
extrinsic modifications which represent the sort of facts that, in our
former account, appeared as the influence of the eyes and nerves in
modifying the appearance of the sun.[28]

The _prima facie_ difficulties in the way of this view are chiefly
derived from an unduly conventional theory of space. It might seem at
first sight as if we had packed the world much fuller than it could
possibly hold. At every place between us and the sun, we said, there
is to be a particular which is to be a member of the sun as it was a
few minutes ago. There will also, of course, have to be a particular
which is a member of any planet or fixed star that may happen to be
visible from that place. At the place where I am, there will be
particulars which will be members severally of all the "things" I am
now said to be perceiving. Thus throughout the world, everywhere,
there will be an enormous number of particulars coexisting in the same
place. But these troubles result from contenting ourselves too readily
with the merely three-dimensional space to which schoolmasters have
accustomed us. The space of the real world is a space of six
dimensions, and as soon as we realise this we see that there is plenty
of room for all the particulars for which we want to find positions.
In order to realise this we have only to return for a moment from the
polished space of physics to the rough and untidy space of our
immediate sensible experience. The space of one man's sensible objects
is a three-dimensional space. It does not appear probable that two men
ever both perceive at the same time any one sensible object; when they
are said to see the same thing or hear the same noise, there will
always be some difference, however slight, between the actual shapes
seen or the actual sounds heard. If this is so, and if, as is
generally assumed, position in space is purely relative, it follows
that the space of one man's objects and the space of another man's
objects have no place in common, that they are in fact different
spaces, and not merely different parts of one space. I mean by this
that such immediate spatial relations as are perceived to hold
between the different parts of the sensible space perceived by one
man, do not hold between parts of sensible spaces perceived by
different men. There are therefore a multitude of three-dimensional
spaces in the world: there are all those perceived by observers, and
presumably also those which are not perceived, merely because no
observer is suitably situated for perceiving them.

But although these spaces do not have to one another the same kind of
spatial relations as obtain between the parts of one of them, it is
nevertheless possible to arrange these spaces themselves in a
three-dimensional order. This is done by means of the correlated
particulars which we regard as members (or aspects) of one physical
thing. When a number of people are said to see the same object, those
who would be said to be near to the object see a particular occupying
a larger part of their field of vision than is occupied by the
corresponding particular seen by people who would be said to be
farther from the thing. By means of such considerations it is
possible, in ways which need not now be further specified, to arrange
all the different spaces in a three-dimensional series. Since each of
the spaces is itself three-dimensional, the whole world of particulars
is thus arranged in a six-dimensional space, that is to say, six
co-ordinates will be required to assign completely the position of any
given particular, namely, three to assign its position in its own
space and three more to assign the position of its space among the
other spaces.

There are two ways of classifying particulars: we may take together
all those that belong to a given "perspective," or all those that are,
as common sense would say, different "aspects" of the same "thing."
For example, if I am (as is said) seeing the sun, what I see belongs
to two assemblages: (1) the assemblage of all my present objects of
sense, which is what I call a "perspective"; (2) the assemblage of
all the different particulars which would be called aspects of the sun
of eight minutes ago--this assemblage is what I define as _being_ the
sun of eight minutes ago. Thus "perspectives" and "things" are merely
two different ways of classifying particulars. It is to be observed
that there is no _a priori_ necessity for particulars to be
susceptible of this double classification. There may be what might be
called "wild" particulars, not having the usual relations by which the
classification is effected; perhaps dreams and hallucinations are
composed of particulars which are "wild" in this sense.

The exact definition of what is meant by a perspective is not quite
easy. So long as we confine ourselves to visible objects or to objects
of touch we might define the perspective of a given particular as "all
particulars which have a simple (direct) spatial relation to the given
particular." Between two patches of colour which I see now, there is a
direct spatial relation which I equally see. But between patches of
colour seen by different men there is only an indirect constructed
spatial relation by means of the placing of "things" in physical space
(which is the same as the space composed of perspectives). Those
particulars which have direct spatial relations to a given particular
will belong to the same perspective. But if, for example, the sounds
which I hear are to belong to the same perspective with the patches of
colour which I see, there must be particulars which have no direct
spatial relation and yet belong to the same perspective. We cannot
define a perspective as all the data of one percipient at one time,
because we wish to allow the possibility of perspectives which are not
perceived by any one. There will be need, therefore, in defining a
perspective, of some principle derived neither from psychology nor
from space.

Such a principle may be obtained from the consideration of _time_.
The one all-embracing time, like the one all-embracing space, is a
construction; there is no _direct_ time-relation between particulars
belonging to my perspective and particulars belonging to another
man's. On the other hand, any two particulars of which I am aware are
either simultaneous or successive, and their simultaneity or
successiveness is sometimes itself a datum to me. We may therefore
define the perspective to which a given particular belongs as "all
particulars simultaneous with the given particular," where
"simultaneous" is to be understood as a direct simple relation, not
the derivative constructed relation of physics. It may be observed
that the introduction of "local time" suggested by the principle of
relativity has effected, for purely scientific reasons, much the same
multiplication of times as we have just been advocating.

The sum-total of all the particulars that are (directly) either
simultaneous with or before or after a given particular may be defined
as the "biography" to which that particular belongs. It will be
observed that, just as a perspective need not be actually perceived by
any one, so a biography need not be actually lived by any one. Those
biographies that are lived by no one are called "official."

The definition of a "thing" is effected by means of continuity and of
correlations which have a certain differential independence of other
"things." That is to say, given a particular in one perspective, there
will usually in a neighbouring perspective be a very similar
particular, differing from the given particular, to the first order of
small quantities, according to a law involving only the difference of
position of the two perspectives in perspective space, and not any of
the other "things" in the universe. It is this continuity and
differential independence in the law of change as we pass from one
perspective to another that defines the class of particulars which is
to be called "one thing."

Broadly speaking, we may say that the physicist finds it convenient to
classify particulars into "things," while the psychologist finds it
convenient to classify them into "perspectives" and "biographies,"
since one perspective _may_ constitute the momentary data of one
percipient, and one biography _may_ constitute the whole of the data
of one percipient throughout his life.

We may now sum up our discussion. Our object has been to discover as
far as possible the nature of the ultimate constituents of the
physical world. When I speak of the "physical world," I mean, to begin
with, the world dealt with by physics. It is obvious that physics is
an empirical science, giving us a certain amount of knowledge and
based upon evidence obtained through the senses. But partly through
the development of physics itself, partly through arguments derived
from physiology, psychology or metaphysics, it has come to be thought
that the immediate data of sense could not themselves form part of the
ultimate constituents of the physical world, but were in some sense
"mental," "in the mind," or "subjective." The grounds for this view,
in so far as they depend upon physics, can only be adequately dealt
with by rather elaborate constructions depending upon symbolic logic,
showing that out of such materials as are provided by the senses it is
possible to construct classes and series having the properties which
physics assigns to matter. Since this argument is difficult and
technical, I have not embarked upon it in this article. But in so far
as the view that sense-data are "mental" rests upon physiology,
psychology, or metaphysics, I have tried to show that it rests upon
confusions and prejudices--prejudices in favour of permanence in the
ultimate constituents of matter, and confusions derived from unduly
simple notions as to space, from the causal correlation of sense-data
with sense-organs, and from failure to distinguish between sense-data
and sensations. If what we have said on these subjects is valid, the
existence of sense-data is logically independent of the existence of
mind, and is causally dependent upon the _body_ of the percipient
rather than upon his mind. The causal dependence upon the body of the
percipient, we found, is a more complicated matter than it appears to
be, and, like all causal dependence, is apt to give rise to erroneous
beliefs through misconceptions as to the nature of causal correlation.
If we have been right in our contentions, sense-data are merely those
among the ultimate constituents of the physical world, of which we
happen to be immediately aware; they themselves are purely physical,
and all that is mental in connection with them is our awareness of
them, which is irrelevant to their nature and to their place in
physics.

Unduly simple notions as to space have been a great stumbling-block to
realists. When two men look at the same table, it is supposed that
what the one sees and what the other sees are in the same place. Since
the shape and colour are not quite the same for the two men, this
raises a difficulty, hastily solved, or rather covered up, by
declaring what each sees to be purely "subjective"--though it would
puzzle those who use this glib word to say what they mean by it. The
truth seems to be that space--and time also--is much more complicated
than it would appear to be from the finished structure of physics, and
that the one all-embracing three-dimensional space is a logical
construction, obtained by means of correlations from a crude space of
six dimensions. The particulars occupying this six-dimensional space,
classified in one way, form "things," from which with certain further
manipulations we can obtain what physics can regard as matter;
classified in another way, they form "perspectives" and "biographies,"
which may, if a suitable percipient happens to exist, form
respectively the sense-data of a momentary or of a total experience.
It is only when physical "things" have been dissected into series of
classes of particulars, as we have done, that the conflict between the
point of view of physics and the point of view of psychology can be
overcome. This conflict, if what has been said is not mistaken, flows
from different methods of classification, and vanishes as soon as its
source is discovered.

In favour of the theory which I have briefly outlined, I do not claim
that it is _certainly_ true. Apart from the likelihood of mistakes,
much of it is avowedly hypothetical. What I do claim for the theory is
that it _may_ be true, and that this is more than can be said for any
other theory except the closely analogous theory of Leibniz. The
difficulties besetting realism, the confusions obstructing any
philosophical account of physics, the dilemma resulting from
discrediting sense-data, which yet remain the sole source of our
knowledge of the outer world--all these are avoided by the theory
which I advocate. This does not prove the theory to be true, since
probably many other theories might be invented which would have the
same merits. But it does prove that the theory has a better chance of
being true than any of its present competitors, and it suggests that
what can be known with certainty is likely to be discoverable by
taking our theory as a starting-point, and gradually freeing it from
all such assumptions as seem irrelevant, unnecessary, or unfounded. On
these grounds, I recommend it to attention as a hypothesis and a basis
for further work, though not as itself a finished or adequate solution
of the problem with which it deals.

FOOTNOTES:

[23] An address delivered to the Philosophical Society of Manchester
in February, 1915. Reprinted from _The Monist_, July, 1915.

[24] Cf. especially Samuel Alexander, "The Basis of Realism," _British
Academy_, Vol. VI.

[25] "Are Secondary Qualities Independent of Perception?" _Proc.
Arist. Soc._, 1909-10, pp. 191-218.

[26] First dialogue between Hylas and Philonous, _Works_ (Fraser's
edition 1901). I. p. 384.

[27] This point has been well urged by the American realists.

[28] Cf. T.P. Nunn, "Are Secondary Qualities Independent of
Perception?" _Proc. Arist. Soc._, 1909-1910.




VIII

THE RELATION OF SENSE-DATA TO PHYSICS


I. THE PROBLEM STATED

Physics is said to be an empirical science, based upon observation and
experiment.

It is supposed to be verifiable, i.e. capable of calculating
beforehand results subsequently confirmed by observation and
experiment.

What can we learn by observation and experiment?

Nothing, so far as physics is concerned, except immediate data of
sense: certain patches of colour, sounds, tastes, smells, etc., with
certain spatio-temporal relations.

The supposed contents of the physical world are _prima facie_ very
different from these: molecules have no colour, atoms make no noise,
electrons have no taste, and corpuscles do not even smell.

If such objects are to be verified, it must be solely through their
relation to sense-data: they must have some kind of correlation with
sense-data, and must be verifiable through their correlation _alone_.

But how is the correlation itself ascertained? A correlation can only
be ascertained empirically by the correlated objects being constantly
_found_ together. But in our case, only one term of the correlation,
namely, the sensible term, is ever _found_: the other term seems
essentially incapable of being found. Therefore, it would seem, the
correlation with objects of sense, by which physics was to be
verified, is itself utterly and for ever unverifiable.

There are two ways of avoiding this result.

(1) We may say that we know some principle _a priori_, without the
need of empirical verification, e.g. that our sense-data have _causes_
other than themselves, and that something can be known about these
causes by inference from their effects. This way has been often
adopted by philosophers. It may be necessary to adopt this way to some
extent, but in so far as it is adopted physics ceases to be empirical
or based upon experiment and observation alone. Therefore this way is
to be avoided as much as possible.

(2) We may succeed in actually defining the objects of physics as
functions of sense-data. Just in so far as physics leads to
expectations, this _must_ be possible, since we can only _expect_ what
can be experienced. And in so far as the physical state of affairs is
inferred from sense-data, it must be capable of expression as a
function of sense-data. The problem of accomplishing this expression
leads to much interesting logico-mathematical work.

In physics as commonly set forth, sense-data appear as functions of
physical objects: when such-and-such waves impinge upon the eye, we
see such-and-such colours, and so on. But the waves are in fact
inferred from the colours, not vice versa. Physics cannot be regarded
as validly based upon empirical data until the waves have been
expressed as functions of the colours and other sense-data.

Thus if physics is to be verifiable we are faced with the following
problem: Physics exhibits sense-data as functions of physical objects,
but verification is only possible if physical objects can be exhibited
as functions of sense-data. We have therefore to solve the equations
giving sense-data in terms of physical objects, so as to make them
instead give physical objects in terms of sense-data.


II. CHARACTERISTICS OF SENSE-DATA

When I speak of a "sense-datum," I do not mean the whole of what is
given in sense at one time. I mean rather such a part of the whole as
might be singled out by attention: particular patches of colour,
particular noises, and so on. There is some difficulty in deciding
what is to be considered _one_ sense-datum: often attention causes
divisions to appear where, so far as can be discovered, there were no
divisions before. An observed complex fact, such as that this patch of
red is to the left of that patch of blue, is also to be regarded as a
datum from our present point of view: epistemologically, it does not
differ greatly from a simple sense-datum as regards its function in
giving knowledge. Its _logical_ structure is very different, however,
from that of sense: _sense_ gives acquaintance with particulars, and
is thus a two-term relation in which the object can be _named_ but not
_asserted_, and is inherently incapable of truth or falsehood, whereas
the observation of a complex fact, which may be suitably called
perception, is not a two-term relation, but involves the propositional
form on the object-side, and gives knowledge of a truth, not mere
acquaintance with a particular. This logical difference, important as
it is, is not very relevant to our present problem; and it will be
convenient to regard data of perception as included among sense-data
for the purposes of this paper. It is to be observed that the
particulars which are constituents of a datum of perception are always
sense-data in the strict sense.

Concerning sense-data, we know that they are there while they are
data, and this is the epistemological basis of all our knowledge of
external particulars. (The meaning of the word "external" of course
raises problems which will concern us later.) We do not know, except
by means of more or less precarious inferences, whether the objects
which are at one time sense-data continue to exist at times when they
are not data. Sense-data at the times when they are data are all that
we directly and primitively know of the external world; hence in
epistemology the fact that they are _data_ is all-important. But the
fact that they are all that we directly know gives, of course, no
presumption that they are all that there is. If we could construct an
impersonal metaphysic, independent of the accidents of our knowledge
and ignorance, the privileged position of the actual data would
probably disappear, and they would probably appear as a rather
haphazard selection from a mass of objects more or less like them. In
saying this, I assume only that it is probable that there are
particulars with which we are not acquainted. Thus the special
importance of sense-data is in relation to epistemology, not to
metaphysics. In this respect, physics is to be reckoned as
metaphysics: it is impersonal, and nominally pays no special attention
to sense-data. It is only when we ask how physics can be _known_ that
the importance of sense-data re-emerges.


III. SENSIBILIA

I shall give the name _sensibilia_ to those objects which have the
same metaphysical and physical status as sense-data, without
necessarily being data to any mind. Thus the relation of a _sensibile_
to a sense-datum is like that of a man to a husband: a man becomes a
husband by entering into the relation of marriage, and similarly a
_sensibile_ becomes a sense-datum by entering into the relation of
acquaintance. It is important to have both terms; for we wish to
discuss whether an object which is at one time a sense-datum can still
exist at a time when it is not a sense-datum. We cannot ask "Can
sense-data exist without being given?" for that is like asking "Can
husbands exist without being married?" We must ask "Can _sensibilia_
exist without being given?" and also "Can a particular _sensibile_ be
at one time a sense-datum, and at another not?" Unless we have the
word _sensibile_ as well as the word "sense-datum," such questions are
apt to entangle us in trivial logical puzzles.

It will be seen that all sense-data are _sensibilia_. It is a
metaphysical question whether all _sensibilia_ are sense-data, and an
epistemological question whether there exist means of inferring
_sensibilia_ which are not data from those that are.

A few preliminary remarks, to be amplified as we proceed, will serve
to elucidate the use which I propose to make of _sensibilia_.

I regard sense-data as not mental, and as being, in fact, part of the
actual subject-matter of physics. There are arguments, shortly to be
examined, for their subjectivity, but these arguments seem to me only
to prove _physiological_ subjectivity, i.e. causal dependence on the
sense-organs, nerves, and brain. The appearance which a thing presents
to us is causally dependent upon these, in exactly the same way as it
is dependent upon intervening fog or smoke or coloured glass. Both
dependences are contained in the statement that the appearance which a
piece of matter presents when viewed from a given place is a function
not only of the piece of matter, but also of the intervening medium.
(The terms used in this statement--"matter," "view from a given
place," "appearance," "intervening medium"--will all be defined in the
course of the present paper.) We have not the means of ascertaining
how things appear from places not surrounded by brain and nerves and
sense-organs, because we cannot leave the body; but continuity makes
it not unreasonable to suppose that they present _some_ appearance at
such places. Any such appearance would be included among _sensibilia_.
If--_per impossibile_--there were a complete human body with no mind
inside it, all those _sensibilia_ would exist, in relation to that
body, which would be sense-data if there were a mind in the body. What
the mind adds to _sensibilia_, in fact, is _merely_ awareness:
everything else is physical or physiological.


IV. SENSE-DATA ARE PHYSICAL

Before discussing this question it will be well to define the sense in
which the terms "mental" and "physical" are to be used. The word
"physical," in all preliminary discussions, is to be understood as
meaning "what is dealt with by physics." Physics, it is plain, tells
us something about some of the constituents of the actual world; what
these constituents are may be doubtful, but it is they that are to be
called physical, whatever their nature may prove to be.

The definition of the term "mental" is more difficult, and can only be
satisfactorily given after many difficult controversies have been
discussed and decided. For present purposes therefore I must content
myself with assuming a dogmatic answer to these controversies. I shall
call a particular "mental" when it is aware of something, and I shall
call a fact "mental" when it contains a mental particular as a
constituent.

It will be seen that the mental and the physical are not necessarily
mutually exclusive, although I know of no reason to suppose that they
overlap.

The doubt as to the correctness of our definition of the "mental" is
of little importance in our present discussion. For what I am
concerned to maintain is that sense-data are physical, and this being
granted it is a matter of indifference in our present inquiry whether
or not they are also mental. Although I do not hold, with Mach and
James and the "new realists," that the difference between the mental
and the physical is _merely_ one of arrangement, yet what I have to
say in the present paper is compatible with their doctrine and might
have been reached from their standpoint.

In discussions on sense-data, two questions are commonly confused,
namely:

(1) Do sensible objects persist when we are not sensible of them? in
other words, do _sensibilia_ which are data at a certain time
sometimes continue to exist at times when they are not data? And (2)
are sense-data mental or physical?

I propose to assert that sense-data are physical, while yet
maintaining that they probably never persist unchanged after ceasing
to be data. The view that they do not persist is often thought, quite
erroneously in my opinion, to imply that they are mental; and this
has, I believe, been a potent source of confusion in regard to our
present problem. If there were, as some have held, a _logical
impossibility_ in sense-data persisting after ceasing to be data, that
certainly would tend to show that they were mental; but if, as I
contend, their non-persistence is merely a probable inference from
empirically ascertained causal laws, then it carries no such
implication with it, and we are quite free to treat them as part of
the subject-matter of physics.

Logically a sense-datum is an object, a particular of which the
subject is aware. It does not contain the subject as a part, as for
example beliefs and volitions do. The existence of the sense-datum is
therefore not logically dependent upon that of the subject; for the
only way, so far as I know, in which the existence of _A_ can be
_logically_ dependent upon the existence of _B_ is when _B_ is part of
_A_. There is therefore no _a priori_ reason why a particular which is
a sense-datum should not persist after it has ceased to be a datum,
nor why other similar particulars should not exist without ever being
data. The view that sense-data are mental is derived, no doubt, in
part from their physiological subjectivity, but in part also from a
failure to distinguish between sense-data and "sensations." By a
sensation I mean the fact consisting in the subject's awareness of the
sense-datum. Thus a sensation is a complex of which the subject is a
constituent and which therefore is mental. The sense-datum, on the
other hand, stands over against the subject as that external object of
which in sensation the subject is aware. It is true that the
sense-datum is in many cases in the subject's body, but the subject's
body is as distinct from the subject as tables and chairs are, and is
in fact merely a part of the material world. So soon, therefore, as
sense-data are clearly distinguished from sensations, and as their
subjectivity is recognised to be physiological not psychical, the
chief obstacles in the way of regarding them as physical are removed.


V. "SENSIBILIA" AND "THINGS"

But if "sensibilia" are to be recognised as the ultimate constituents
of the physical world, a long and difficult journey is to be performed
before we can arrive either at the "thing" of common sense or at the
"matter" of physics. The supposed impossibility of combining the
different sense-data which are regarded as appearances of the same
"thing" to different people has made it seem as though these
"sensibilia" must be regarded as mere subjective phantasms. A given
table will present to one man a rectangular appearance, while to
another it appears to have two acute angles and two obtuse angles; to
one man it appears brown, while to another, towards whom it reflects
the light, it appears white and shiny. It is said, not wholly without
plausibility, that these different shapes and different colours cannot
co-exist simultaneously in the same place, and cannot therefore both
be constituents of the physical world. This argument I must confess
appeared to me until recently to be irrefutable. The contrary opinion
has, however, been ably maintained by Dr. T.P. Nunn in an article
entitled: "Are Secondary Qualities Independent of Perception?"[29] The
supposed impossibility derives its apparent force from the phrase:
"_in the same place_," and it is precisely in this phrase that its
weakness lies. The conception of space is too often treated in
philosophy--even by those who on reflection would not defend such
treatment--as though it were as given, simple, and unambiguous as
Kant, in his psychological innocence, supposed. It is the unperceived
ambiguity of the word "place" which, as we shall shortly see, has
caused the difficulties to realists and given an undeserved advantage
to their opponents. Two "places" of different kinds are involved in
every sense-datum, namely the place _at_ which it appears and the
place _from_ which it appears. These belong to different spaces,
although, as we shall see, it is possible, with certain limitations,
to establish a correlation between them. What we call the different
appearances of the same thing to different observers are each in a
space private to the observer concerned. No place in the private world
of one observer is identical with a place in the private world of
another observer. There is therefore no question of combining the
different appearances in the one place; and the fact that they cannot
all exist in one place affords accordingly no ground whatever for
questioning their physical reality. The "thing" of common sense may in
fact be identified with the whole class of its appearances--where,
however, we must include among appearances not only those which are
actual sense-data, but also those "sensibilia," if any, which, on
grounds of continuity and resemblance, are to be regarded as belonging
to the same system of appearances, although there happen to be no
observers to whom they are data.

An example may make this clearer. Suppose there are a number of people
in a room, all seeing, as they say, the same tables and chairs, walls
and pictures. No two of these people have exactly the same sense-data,
yet there is sufficient similarity among their data to enable them to
group together certain of these data as appearances of one "thing" to
the several spectators, and others as appearances of another "thing."
Besides the appearances which a given thing in the room presents to
the actual spectators, there are, we may suppose, other appearances
which it would present to other possible spectators. If a man were to
sit down between two others, the appearance which the room would
present to him would be intermediate between the appearances which it
presents to the two others: and although this appearance would not
exist as it is without the sense organs, nerves and brain, of the
newly arrived spectator, still it is not unnatural to suppose that,
from the position which he now occupies, _some_ appearance of the
room existed before his arrival. This supposition, however, need
merely be noticed and not insisted upon.

Since the "thing" cannot, without indefensible partiality, be
identified with any single one of its appearances, it came to be
thought of as something distinct from all of them and underlying them.
But by the principle of Occam's razor, if the class of appearances
will fulfil the purposes for the sake of which the thing was invented
by the prehistoric metaphysicians to whom common sense is due, economy
demands that we should identify the thing with the class of its
appearances. It is not necessary to _deny_ a substance or substratum
underlying these appearances; it is merely expedient to abstain from
asserting this unnecessary entity. Our procedure here is precisely
analogous to that which has swept away from the philosophy of
mathematics the useless menagerie of metaphysical monsters with which
it used to be infested.


VI. CONSTRUCTIONS VERSUS INFERENCES

Before proceeding to analyse and explain the ambiguities of the word
"place," a few general remarks on method are desirable. The supreme
maxim in scientific philosophising is this:

  _Wherever possible, logical constructions are to be substituted
  for inferred entities._

Some examples of the substitution of construction for inference in the
realm of mathematical philosophy may serve to elucidate the uses of
this maxim. Take first the case of irrationals. In old days,
irrationals were inferred as the supposed limits of series of
rationals which had no rational limit; but the objection to this
procedure was that it left the existence of irrationals merely
optative, and for this reason the stricter methods of the present day
no longer tolerate such a definition. We now define an irrational
number as a certain class of ratios, thus constructing it logically by
means of ratios, instead of arriving at it by a doubtful inference
from them. Take again the case of cardinal numbers. Two equally
numerous collections appear to have something in common: this
something is supposed to be their cardinal number. But so long as the
cardinal number is inferred from the collections, not constructed in
terms of them, its existence must remain in doubt, unless in virtue of
a metaphysical postulate _ad hoc_. By defining the cardinal number of
a given collection as the class of all equally numerous collections,
we avoid the necessity of this metaphysical postulate, and thereby
remove a needless element of doubt from the philosophy of arithmetic.
A similar method, as I have shown elsewhere, can be applied to classes
themselves, which need not be supposed to have any metaphysical
reality, but can be regarded as symbolically constructed fictions.

The method by which the construction proceeds is closely analogous in
these and all similar cases. Given a set of propositions nominally
dealing with the supposed inferred entities, we observe the properties
which are required of the supposed entities in order to make these
propositions true. By dint of a little logical ingenuity, we then
construct some logical function of less hypothetical entities which
has the requisite properties. This constructed function we substitute
for the supposed inferred entities, and thereby obtain a new and less
doubtful interpretation of the body of propositions in question. This
method, so fruitful in the philosophy of mathematics, will be found
equally applicable in the philosophy of physics, where, I do not
doubt, it would have been applied long ago but for the fact that all
who have studied this subject hitherto have been completely ignorant
of mathematical logic. I myself cannot claim originality in the
application of this method to physics, since I owe the suggestion and
the stimulus for its application entirely to my friend and
collaborator Dr. Whitehead, who is engaged in applying it to the more
mathematical portions of the region intermediate between sense-data
and the points, instants and particles of physics.

A complete application of the method which substitutes constructions
for inferences would exhibit matter wholly in terms of sense-data, and
even, we may add, of the sense-data of a single person, since the
sense-data of others cannot be known without some element of
inference. This, however, must remain for the present an ideal, to be
approached as nearly as possible, but to be reached, if at all, only
after a long preliminary labour of which as yet we can only see the
very beginning. The inferences which are unavoidable can, however, be
subjected to certain guiding principles. In the first place they
should always be made perfectly explicit, and should be formulated in
the most general manner possible. In the second place the inferred
entities should, whenever this can be done, be similar to those whose
existence is given, rather than, like the Kantian _Ding an sich_,
something wholly remote from the data which nominally support the
inference. The inferred entities which I shall allow myself are of two
kinds: (_a_) the sense-data of other people, in favour of which there
is the evidence of testimony, resting ultimately upon the analogical
argument in favour of minds other than my own; (_b_) the "sensibilia"
which would appear from places where there happen to be no minds, and
which I suppose to be real although they are no one's data. Of these
two classes of inferred entities, the first will probably be allowed
to pass unchallenged. It would give me the greatest satisfaction to be
able to dispense with it, and thus establish physics upon a
solipsistic basis; but those--and I fear they are the majority--in
whom the human affections are stronger than the desire for logical
economy, will, no doubt, not share my desire to render solipsism
scientifically satisfactory. The second class of inferred entities
raises much more serious questions. It may be thought monstrous to
maintain that a thing can present any appearance at all in a place
where no sense organs and nervous structure exist through which it
could appear. I do not myself feel the monstrosity; nevertheless I
should regard these supposed appearances only in the light of a
hypothetical scaffolding, to be used while the edifice of physics is
being raised, though possibly capable of being removed as soon as the
edifice is completed. These "sensibilia" which are not data to anyone
are therefore to be taken rather as an illustrative hypothesis and as
an aid in preliminary statement than as a dogmatic part of the
philosophy of physics in its final form.


VII. PRIVATE SPACE AND THE SPACE OF PERSPECTIVES

We have now to explain the ambiguity in the word "place," and how it
comes that two places of different sorts are associated with every
sense-datum, namely the place _at_ which it is and the place _from_
which it is perceived. The theory to be advocated is closely analogous
to Leibniz's monadology, from which it differs chiefly in being less
smooth and tidy.

The first fact to notice is that, so far as can be discovered, no
sensibile is ever a datum to two people at once. The things seen by
two different people are often closely similar, so similar that the
same _words_ can be used to denote them, without which communication
with others concerning sensible objects would be impossible. But, in
spite of this similarity, it would seem that some difference always
arises from difference in the point of view. Thus each person, so far
as his sense-data are concerned, lives in a private world. This
private world contains its own space, or rather spaces, for it would
seem that only experience teaches us to correlate the space of sight
with the space of touch and with the various other spaces of other
senses. This multiplicity of private spaces, however, though
interesting to the psychologist, is of no great importance in regard
to our present problem, since a merely solipsistic experience enables
us to correlate them into the one private space which embraces all our
own sense-data. The place _at_ which a sense-datum is, is a place in
private space. This place therefore is different from any place in the
private space of another percipient. For if we assume, as logical
economy demands, that all position is relative, a place is only
definable by the things in or around it, and therefore the same place
cannot occur in two private worlds which have no common constituent.
The question, therefore, of combining what we call different
appearances of the same thing in the same place does not arise, and
the fact that a given object appears to different spectators to have
different shapes and colours affords no argument against the physical
reality of all these shapes and colours.

In addition to the private spaces belonging to the private worlds of
different percipients, there is, however, another space, in which one
whole private world counts as a point, or at least as a spatial unit.
This might be described as the space of points of view, since each
private world may be regarded as the appearance which the universe
presents from a certain point of view. I prefer, however, to speak of
it as the space of _perspectives_, in order to obviate the suggestion
that a private world is only real when someone views it. And for the
same reason, when I wish to speak of a private world without assuming
a percipient, I shall call it a "perspective."

We have now to explain how the different perspectives are ordered in
one space. This is effected by means of the correlated "sensibilia"
which are regarded as the appearances, in different perspectives, of
one and the same thing. By moving, and by testimony, we discover that
two different perspectives, though they cannot both contain the same
"sensibilia," may nevertheless contain very similar ones; and the
spatial order of a certain group of "sensibilia" in a private space of
one perspective is found to be identical with, or very similar to, the
spatial order of the correlated "sensibilia" in the private space of
another perspective. In this way one "sensibile" in one perspective is
correlated with one "sensibile" in another. Such correlated
"sensibilia" will be called "appearances of one thing." In Leibniz's
monadology, since each monad mirrored the whole universe, there was in
each perspective a "sensibile" which was an appearance of each thing.
In our system of perspectives, we make no such assumption of
completeness. A given thing will have appearances in some
perspectives, but presumably not in certain others. The "thing" being
defined as the class of its appearances, if [kappa] is the class of
perspectives in which a certain thing [theta] appears, then [theta] is
a member of the multiplicative class of [kappa], [kappa] being a class
of mutually exclusive classes of "sensibilia." And similarly a
perspective is a member of the multiplicative class of the things
which appear in it.

The arrangement of perspectives in a space is effected by means of the
differences between the appearances of a given thing in the various
perspectives. Suppose, say, that a certain penny appears in a number
of different perspectives; in some it looks larger and in some
smaller, in some it looks circular, in others it presents the
appearance of an ellipse of varying eccentricity. We may collect
together all those perspectives in which the appearance of the penny
is circular. These we will place on one straight line, ordering them
in a series by the variations in the apparent size of the penny. Those
perspectives in which the penny appears as a straight line of a
certain thickness will similarly be placed upon a plane (though in
this case there will be many different perspectives in which the penny
is of the same size; when one arrangement is completed these will form
a circle concentric with the penny), and ordered as before by the
apparent size of the penny. By such means, all those perspectives in
which the penny presents a visual appearance can be arranged in a
three-dimensional spatial order. Experience shows that the same
spatial order of perspectives would have resulted if, instead of the
penny, we had chosen any other thing which appeared in all the
perspectives in question, or any other method of utilising the
differences between the appearances of the same things in different
perspectives. It is this empirical fact which has made it possible to
construct the one all-embracing space of physics.

The space whose construction has just been explained, and whose
elements are whole perspectives, will be called "perspective-space."


VIII. THE PLACING OF "THINGS" AND "SENSIBILIA" IN PERSPECTIVE SPACE

The world which we have so far constructed is a world of six
dimensions, since it is a three-dimensional series of perspectives,
each of which is itself three-dimensional. We have now to explain the
correlation between the perspective space and the various private
spaces contained within the various perspectives severally. It is by
means of this correlation that the one three-dimensional space of
physics is constructed; and it is because of the unconscious
performance of this correlation that the distinction between
perspective space and the percipient's private space has been blurred,
with disastrous results for the philosophy of physics. Let us revert
to our penny: the perspectives in which the penny appears larger are
regarded as being nearer to the penny than those in which it appears
smaller, but as far as experience goes the apparent size of the penny
will not grow beyond a certain limit, namely, that where (as we say)
the penny is so near the eye that if it were any nearer it could not
be seen. By touch we may prolong the series until the penny touches
the eye, but no further. If we have been travelling along a line of
perspectives in the previously defined sense, we may, however, by
imagining the penny removed, prolong the line of perspectives by
means, say, of another penny; and the same may be done with any other
line of perspectives defined by means of the penny. All these lines
meet in a certain place, that is, in a certain perspective. This
perspective will be defined as "the place where the penny is."

It is now evident in what sense two places in constructed physical
space are associated with a given "sensibile." There is first the
place which is the perspective of which the "sensibile" is a member.
This is the place _from_ which the "sensibile" appears. Secondly there
is the place where the thing is of which the "sensibile" is a member,
in other words an appearance; this is the place _at_ which the
"sensibile" appears. The "sensibile" which is a member of one
perspective is correlated with another perspective, namely, that which
is the place where the thing is of which the "sensibile" is an
appearance. To the psychologist the "place from which" is the more
interesting, and the "sensibile" accordingly appears to him subjective
and where the percipient is. To the physicist the "place at which" is
the more interesting, and the "sensibile" accordingly appears to him
physical and external. The causes, limits and partial justification of
each of these two apparently incompatible views are evident from the
above duplicity of places associated with a given "sensibile."

We have seen that we can assign to a physical thing a place in the
perspective space. In this way different parts of our body acquire
positions in perspective space, and therefore there is a meaning
(whether true or false need not much concern us) in saying that the
perspective to which our sense-data belong is inside our head. Since
our mind is correlated with the perspective to which our sense-data
belong, we may regard this perspective as being the position of our
mind in perspective space. If, therefore, this perspective is, in the
above defined sense, inside our head, there is a good meaning for the
statement that the mind is in the head. We can now say of the various
appearances of a given thing that some of them are nearer to the thing
than others; those are nearer which belong to perspectives that are
nearer to "the place where the thing is." We can thus find a meaning,
true or false, for the statement that more is to be learnt about a
thing by examining it close to than by viewing it from a distance. We
can also find a meaning for the phrase "the things which intervene
between the subject and a thing of which an appearance is a datum to
him." One reason often alleged for the subjectivity of sense-data is
that the appearance of a thing may change when we find it hard to
suppose that the thing itself has changed--for example, when the
change is due to our shutting our eyes, or to our screwing them up so
as to make the thing look double. If the thing is defined as the class
of its appearances (which is the definition adopted above), there is
of course necessarily _some_ change in the thing whenever any one of
its appearances changes. Nevertheless there is a very important
distinction between two different ways in which the appearances may
change. If after looking at a thing I shut my eyes, the appearance of
my eyes changes in every perspective in which there is such an
appearance, whereas most of the appearances of the thing will remain
unchanged. We may say, as a matter of definition, that a thing changes
when, however near to the thing an appearance of it may be, there are
changes in appearances as near as, or still nearer to, the thing. On
the other hand we shall say that the change is in some other thing if
all appearances of the thing which are at not more than a certain
distance from the thing remain unchanged, while only comparatively
distant appearances of the thing are altered. From this consideration
we are naturally led to the consideration of _matter_, which must be
our next topic.


IX. THE DEFINITION OF MATTER

We defined the "physical thing" as the class of its appearances, but
this can hardly be taken as a definition of matter. We want to be able
to express the fact that the appearance of a thing in a given
perspective is causally affected by the matter between the thing and
the perspective. We have found a meaning for "between a thing and a
perspective." But we want matter to be something other than the whole
class of appearances of a thing, in order to state the influence of
matter on appearances.

We commonly assume that the information we get about a thing is more
accurate when the thing is nearer. Far off, we see it is a man; then
we see it is Jones; then we see he is smiling. Complete accuracy would
only be attainable as a limit: if the appearances of Jones as we
approach him tend towards a limit, that limit may be taken to be what
Jones really is. It is obvious that from the point of view of physics
the appearances of a thing close to "count" more than the appearances
far off. We may therefore set up the following tentative definition:

The _matter_ of a given thing is the limit of its appearances as their
distance from the thing diminishes.

It seems probable that there is something in this definition, but it
is not quite satisfactory, because empirically there is no such limit
to be obtained from sense-data. The definition will have to be eked
out by constructions and definitions. But probably it suggests the
right direction in which to look.

We are now in a position to understand in outline the reverse journey
from matter to sense-data which is performed by physics. The
appearance of a thing in a given perspective is a function of the
matter composing the thing and of the intervening matter. The
appearance of a thing is altered by intervening smoke or mist, by blue
spectacles or by alterations in the sense-organs or nerves of the
percipient (which also must be reckoned as part of the intervening
medium). The nearer we approach to the thing, the less its appearance
is affected by the intervening matter. As we travel further and
further from the thing, its appearances diverge more and more from
their initial character; and the causal laws of their divergence are
to be stated in terms of the matter which lies between them and the
thing. Since the appearances at very small distances are less affected
by causes other than the thing itself, we come to think that the limit
towards which these appearances tend as the distance diminishes is
what the thing "really is," as opposed to what it merely seems to be.
This, together with its necessity for the statement of causal laws,
seems to be the source of the entirely erroneous feeling that matter
is more "real" than sense-data.

Consider for example the infinite divisibility of matter. In looking
at a given thing and approaching it, one sense-datum will become
several, and each of these will again divide. Thus _one_ appearance
may represent _many_ things, and to this process there seems no end.
Hence in the limit, when we approach indefinitely near to the thing
there will be an indefinite number of units of matter corresponding to
what, at a finite distance, is only one appearance. This is how
infinite divisibility arises.

The whole causal efficacy of a thing resides in its matter. This is in
some sense an empirical fact, but it would be hard to state it
precisely, because "causal efficacy" is difficult to define.

What can be known empirically about the matter of a thing is only
approximate, because we cannot get to know the appearances of the
thing from very small distances, and cannot accurately infer the limit
of these appearances. But it _is_ inferred _approximately_ by means of
the appearances we can observe. It then turns out that these
appearances can be exhibited by physics as a function of the matter
in our immediate neighbourhood; e.g. the visual appearance of a
distant object is a function of the light-waves that reach the eyes.
This leads to confusions of thought, but offers no real difficulty.

One appearance, of a visible object for example, is not sufficient to
determine its other simultaneous appearances, although it goes a
certain distance towards determining them. The determination of the
hidden structure of a thing, so far as it is possible at all, can only
be effected by means of elaborate dynamical inferences.


X. TIME[30]

It seems that the one all-embracing time is a construction, like the
one all-embracing space. Physics itself has become conscious of this
fact through the discussions connected with relativity.

Between two perspectives which both belong to one person's experience,
there will be a direct time-relation of before and after. This
suggests a way of dividing history in the same sort of way as it is
divided by different experiences, but without introducing experience
or anything mental: we may define a "biography" as everything that is
(directly) earlier or later than, or simultaneous with, a given
"sensibile." This will give a series of perspectives, which _might_
all form parts of one person's experience, though it is not necessary
that all or any of them should actually do so. By this means, the
history of the world is divided into a number of mutually exclusive
biographies.

We have now to correlate the times in the different biographies. The
natural thing would be to say that the appearances of a given
(momentary) thing in two different perspectives belonging to different
biographies are to be taken as simultaneous; but this is not
convenient. Suppose _A_ shouts to _B_, and _B_ replies as soon as he
hears _A's_ shout. Then between _A's_ hearing of his own shout and his
hearing of _B's_ there is an interval; thus if we made _A's_ and _B's_
hearing of the same shout exactly simultaneous with each other, we
should have events exactly simultaneous with a given event but not
with each other. To obviate this, we assume a "velocity of sound."
That is, we assume that the time when _B_ hears _A's_ shout is
half-way between the time when _A_ hears his own shout and the time
when he hears _B's_. In this way the correlation is effected.

What has been said about sound applies of course equally to light. The
general principle is that the appearances, in different perspectives,
which are to be grouped together as constituting what a certain thing
is at a certain moment, are not to be all regarded as being at that
moment. On the contrary they spread outward from the thing with
various velocities according to the nature of the appearances. Since
no _direct_ means exist of correlating the time in one biography with
the time in another, this temporal grouping of the appearances
belonging to a given thing at a given moment is in part conventional.
Its motive is partly to secure the verification of such maxims as that
events which are exactly simultaneous with the same event are exactly
simultaneous with one another, partly to secure convenience in the
formulation of causal laws.


XI. THE PERSISTENCE OF THINGS AND MATTER

Apart from any of the fluctuating hypotheses of physics, three main
problems arise in connecting the world of physics with the world of
sense, namely:

    1. the construction of a single space;
    2. the construction of a single time;
    3. the construction of permanent things or matter.

We have already considered the first and second of these problems; it
remains to consider the third.

We have seen how correlated appearances in different perspectives are
combined to form one "thing" at one moment in the all-embracing time
of physics. We have now to consider how appearances at different times
are combined as belonging to one "thing," and how we arrive at the
persistent "matter" of physics. The assumption of permanent substance,
which technically underlies the procedure of physics, cannot of course
be regarded as metaphysically legitimate: just as the one thing
simultaneously seen by many people is a construction, so the one thing
seen at different times by the same or different people must be a
construction, being in fact nothing but a certain grouping of certain
"sensibilia."

We have seen that the momentary state of a "thing" is an assemblage of
"sensibilia," in different perspectives, not all simultaneous in the
one constructed time, but spreading out from "the place where the
thing is" with velocities depending upon the nature of the
"sensibilia." The time _at_ which the "thing" is in this state is the
lower limit of the times at which these appearances occur. We have now
to consider what leads us to speak of another set of appearances as
belonging to the same "thing" at a different time.

For this purpose, we may, at least to begin with, confine ourselves
within a single biography. If we can always say when two "sensibilia"
in a given biography are appearances of one thing, then, since we have
seen how to connect "sensibilia" in different biographies as
appearances of the same momentary state of a thing, we shall have all
that is necessary for the complete construction of the history of a
thing.

It is to be observed, to begin with, that the identity of a thing for
common sense is not always correlated with the identity of matter for
physics. A human body is one persisting thing for common sense, but
for physics its matter is constantly changing. We may say, broadly,
that the common-sense conception is based upon continuity in
appearances at the ordinary distances of sense-data, while the
physical conception is based upon the continuity of appearances at
very small distances from the thing. It is probable that the
common-sense conception is not capable of complete precision. Let us
therefore concentrate our attention upon the conception of the
persistence of matter in physics.

The first characteristic of two appearances of the same piece of
matter at different times is _continuity_. The two appearances must be
connected by a series of intermediaries, which, if time and space form
compact series, must themselves form a compact series. The colour of
the leaves is different in autumn from what it is in summer; but we
believe that the change occurs gradually, and that, if the colours are
different at two given times, there are intermediate times at which
the colours are intermediate between those at the given times.

But there are two considerations that are important as regards
continuity.

First, it is largely hypothetical. We do not observe any one thing
continuously, and it is merely a hypothesis to assume that, while we
are not observing it, it passes through conditions intermediate
between those in which it is perceived. During uninterrupted
observation, it is true, continuity is nearly verified; but even here,
when motions are very rapid, as in the case of explosions, the
continuity is not actually capable of direct verification. Thus we can
only say that the sense-data are found to _permit_ a hypothetical
complement of "sensibilia" such as will preserve continuity, and that
therefore there _may_ be such a complement. Since, however, we have
already made such use of hypothetical "sensibilia," we will let this
point pass, and admit such "sensibilia" as are required to preserve
continuity.

Secondly, continuity is not a sufficient criterion of material
identity. It is true that in many cases, such as rocks, mountains,
tables, chairs, etc., where the appearances change slowly, continuity
is sufficient, but in other cases, such as the parts of an
approximately homogeneous fluid, it fails us utterly. We can travel by
sensibly continuous gradations from any one drop of the sea at any one
time to any other drop at any other time. We infer the motions of
sea-water from the effects of the current, but they cannot be inferred
from direct sensible observation together with the assumption of
continuity.

The characteristic required in addition to continuity is conformity
with the laws of dynamics. Starting from what common sense regards as
persistent things, and making only such modifications as from time to
time seem reasonable, we arrive at assemblages of "sensibilia" which
are found to obey certain simple laws, namely those of dynamics. By
regarding "sensibilia" at different times as belonging to the same
piece of matter, we are able to define _motion_, which presupposes the
assumption or construction of something persisting throughout the
time of the motion. The motions which are regarded as occurring,
during a period in which all the "sensibilia" and the times of their
appearance are given, will be different according to the manner in
which we combine "sensibilia" at different times as belonging to the
same piece of matter. Thus even when the whole history of the world is
given in every particular, the question what motions take place is
still to a certain extent arbitrary even after the assumption of
continuity. Experience shows that it is possible to determine motions
in such a way as to satisfy the laws of dynamics, and that this
determination, roughly and on the whole, is fairly in agreement with
the common-sense opinions about persistent things. This determination,
therefore, is adopted, and leads to a criterion by which we can
determine, sometimes practically, sometimes only theoretically,
whether two appearances at different times are to be regarded as
belonging to the same piece of matter. The persistence of all matter
throughout all time can, I imagine, be secured by definition.

To recommend this conclusion, we must consider what it is that is
proved by the empirical success of physics. What is proved is that its
hypotheses, though unverifiable where they go beyond sense-data, are
at no point in contradiction with sense-data, but, on the contrary,
are ideally such as to render all sense-data calculable when a
sufficient collection of "sensibilia" is given. Now physics has found
it empirically possible to collect sense-data into series, each series
being regarded as belonging to one "thing," and behaving, with regard
to the laws of physics, in a way in which series not belonging to one
thing would in general not behave. If it is to be unambiguous whether
two appearances belong to the same thing or not, there must be only
one way of grouping appearances so that the resulting things obey the
laws of physics. It would be very difficult to prove that this is the
case, but for our present purposes we may let this point pass, and
assume that there is only one way. Thus we may lay down the following
definition: _Physical things are those series of appearances whose
matter obeys the laws of physics_. That such series exist is an
empirical fact, which constitutes the verifiability of physics.


XII. ILLUSIONS, HALLUCINATIONS, AND DREAMS

It remains to ask how, in our system, we are to find a place for
sense-data which apparently fail to have the usual connection with the
world of physics. Such sense-data are of various kinds, requiring
somewhat different treatment. But all are of the sort that would be
called "unreal," and therefore, before embarking upon the discussion,
certain logical remarks must be made upon the conceptions of reality
and unreality.

Mr. A. Wolf[31] says:

  "The conception of mind as a system of transparent activities is,
  I think, also untenable because of its failure to account for the
  very possibility of dreams and hallucinations. It seems impossible
  to realise how a bare, transparent activity can be directed to
  what is not there, to apprehend what is not given."

This statement is one which, probably, most people would endorse. But
it is open to two objections. First it is difficult to see how an
activity, however un-"transparent," can be directed towards a nothing:
a term of a relation cannot be a mere nonentity. Secondly, no reason
is given, and I am convinced that none can be given, for the assertion
that dream-objects are not "there" and not "given." Let us take the
second point first.

(1) The belief that dream-objects are not given comes, I think, from
failure to distinguish, as regards waking life, between the
sense-datum and the corresponding "thing." In dreams, there is no such
corresponding "thing" as the dreamer supposes; if, therefore, the
"thing" were given in waking life, as e.g. Meinong maintains,[32] then
there would be a difference in respect of givenness between dreams and
waking life. But if, as we have maintained, what is given is never the
thing, but merely one of the "sensibilia" which compose the thing,
then what we apprehend in a dream is just as much given as what we
apprehend in waking life.

Exactly the same argument applies as to the dream-objects being
"there." They have their position in the private space of the
perspective of the dreamer; where they fail is in their correlation
with other private spaces and therefore with perspective space. But in
the only sense in which "there" can be a datum, they are "there" just
as truly as any of the sense-data of waking life.

(2) The conception of "illusion" or "unreality," and the correlative
conception of "reality," are generally used in a way which embodies
profound logical confusions. Words that go in pairs, such as "real"
and "unreal," "existent" and "non-existent," "valid" and "invalid,"
etc., are all derived from the one fundamental pair, "true" and
"false." Now "true" and "false" are applicable only--except in
derivative significations--to _propositions_. Thus wherever the above
pairs can be significantly applied, we must be dealing either with
propositions or with such incomplete phrases as only acquire meaning
when put into a context which, with them, forms a proposition. Thus
such pairs of words can be applied to _descriptions_,[33] but not to
proper names: in other words, they have no application whatever to
data, but only to entities or non-entities described in terms of data.

Let us illustrate by the terms "existence" and "non-existence." Given
any datum _x_, it is meaningless either to assert or to deny that _x_
"exists." We might be tempted to say: "Of course _x_ exists, for
otherwise it could not be a datum." But such a statement is really
meaningless, although it is significant and true to say "My present
sense-datum exists," and it may also be true that "_x_ is my present
sense-datum." The inference from these two propositions to "_x_
exists" is one which seems irresistible to people unaccustomed to
logic; yet the apparent proposition inferred is not merely false, but
strictly meaningless. To say "My present sense-datum exists" is to say
(roughly): "There is an object of which 'my present sense-datum' is a
description." But we cannot say: "There is an object of which '_x_' is
a description," because '_x_' is (in the case we are supposing) a
name, not a description. Dr. Whitehead and I have explained this point
fully elsewhere (_loc. cit._) with the help of symbols, without which
it is hard to understand; I shall not therefore here repeat the
demonstration of the above propositions, but shall proceed with their
application to our present problem.

The fact that "existence" is only applicable to descriptions is
concealed by the use of what are grammatically proper names in a way
which really transforms them into descriptions. It is, for example, a
legitimate question whether Homer existed; but here "Homer" means
"the author of the Homeric poems," and is a description. Similarly we
may ask whether God exists; but then "God" means "the Supreme Being"
or "the _ens realissimum_" or whatever other description we may
prefer. If "God" were a proper name, God would have to be a datum; and
then no question could arise as to His existence. The distinction
between existence and other predicates, which Kant obscurely felt, is
brought to light by the theory of descriptions, and is seen to remove
"existence" altogether from the fundamental notions of metaphysics.

What has been said about "existence" applies equally to "reality,"
which may, in fact, be taken as synonymous with "existence."
Concerning the immediate objects in illusions, hallucinations, and
dreams, it is meaningless to ask whether they "exist" or are "real."
There they are, and that ends the matter. But we may legitimately
inquire as to the existence or reality of "things" or other
"sensibilia" inferred from such objects. It is the unreality of these
"things" and other "sensibilia," together with a failure to notice
that they are not data, which has led to the view that the objects of
dreams are unreal.

We may now apply these considerations in detail to the stock arguments
against realism, though what is to be said will be mainly a repetition
of what others have said before.

(1) We have first the variety of normal appearances, supposed to be
incompatible. This is the case of the different shapes and colours
which a given thing presents to different spectators. Locke's water
which seems both hot and cold belongs to this class of cases. Our
system of different perspectives fully accounts for these cases, and
shows that they afford no argument against realism.

(2) We have cases where the correlation between different senses is
unusual. The bent stick in water belongs here. People say it looks
bent but is straight: this only means that it is straight to the
touch, though bent to sight. There is no "illusion," but only a false
inference, if we think that the stick would feel bent to the touch.
The stick would look just as bent in a photograph, and, as Mr.
Gladstone used to say, "the photograph cannot lie."[34] The case of
seeing double also belongs here, though in this case the cause of the
unusual correlation is physiological, and would therefore not operate
in a photograph. It is a mistake to ask whether the "thing" is
duplicated when we see it double. The "thing" is a whole system of
"sensibilia," and it is only those visual "sensibilia" which are data
to the percipient that are duplicated. The phenomenon has a purely
physiological explanation; indeed, in view of our having two eyes, it
is in less need of explanation than the single visual sense-datum
which we normally obtain from the things on which we focus.

(3) We come now to cases like dreams, which may, at the moment of
dreaming, contain nothing to arouse suspicion, but are condemned on the
ground of their supposed incompatibility with earlier and later data. Of
course it often happens that dream-objects fail to behave in the
accustomed manner: heavy objects fly, solid objects melt, babies turn
into pigs or undergo even greater changes. But none of these unusual
occurrences _need_ happen in a dream, and it is not on account of such
occurrences that dream-objects are called "unreal." It is their lack of
continuity with the dreamer's past and future that makes him, when he
wakes, condemn them; and it is their lack of correlation with other
private worlds that makes others condemn them. Omitting the latter
ground, our reason for condemning them is that the "things" which we
infer from them cannot be combined according to the laws of physics with
the "things" inferred from waking sense-data. This might be used to
condemn the "things" inferred from the data of dreams. Dream-data are no
doubt appearances of "things," but not of such "things" as the dreamer
supposes. I have no wish to combat psychological theories of dreams,
such as those of the psycho-analysts. But there certainly are cases
where (whatever psychological causes may contribute) the presence of
physical causes also is very evident. For instance, a door banging may
produce a dream of a naval engagement, with images of battleships and
sea and smoke. The whole dream will be an appearance of the door
banging, but owing to the peculiar condition of the body (especially the
brain) during sleep, this appearance is not that expected to be produced
by a door banging, and thus the dreamer is led to entertain false
beliefs. But his sense-data are still physical, and are such as a
completed physics would include and calculate.

(4) The last class of illusions are those which cannot be discovered
within one person's experience, except through the discovery of
discrepancies with the experiences of others. Dreams might conceivably
belong to this class, if they were jointed sufficiently neatly into
waking life; but the chief instances are recurrent sensory
hallucinations of the kind that lead to insanity. What makes the
patient, in such cases, become what others call insane is the fact
that, within his own experience, there is nothing to show that the
hallucinatory sense-data do not have the usual kind of connection with
"sensibilia" in other perspectives. Of course he may learn this
through testimony, but he probably finds it simpler to suppose that
the testimony is untrue and that he is being wilfully deceived. There
is, so far as I can see, no theoretical criterion by which the patient
can decide, in such a case, between the two equally satisfactory
hypotheses of his madness and of his friends' mendacity.

From the above instances it would appear that abnormal sense-data, of
the kind which we regard as deceptive, have intrinsically just the
same status as any others, but differ as regards their correlations or
causal connections with other "sensibilia" and with "things." Since
the usual correlations and connections become part of our unreflective
expectations, and even seem, except to the psychologist, to form part
of our data, it comes to be thought, mistakenly, that in such cases
the data are unreal, whereas they are merely the causes of false
inferences. The fact that correlations and connections of unusual
kinds occur adds to the difficulty of inferring things from sense and
of expressing physics in terms of sense-data. But the unusualness
would seem to be always physically or physiologically explicable, and
therefore raises only a complication, not a philosophical objection.

I conclude, therefore, that no valid objection exists to the view
which regards sense-data as part of the actual substance of the
physical world, and that, on the other hand, this view is the only one
which accounts for the empirical verifiability of physics. In the
present paper, I have given only a rough preliminary sketch. In
particular, the part played by _time_ in the construction of the
physical world is, I think, more fundamental than would appear from
the above account. I should hope that, with further elaboration, the
part played by unperceived "sensibilia" could be indefinitely
diminished, probably by invoking the history of a "thing" to eke out
the inferences derivable from its momentary appearance.

FOOTNOTES:

[29] _Proc. Arist. Soc._, 1909-1910, pp. 191-218.

[30] On this subject, compare _A Theory of Time and Space_, by Mr.
A.A. Robb (Camb. Univ. Press), which first suggested to me the views
advocated here, though I have, for present purposes, omitted what is
most interesting and novel in his theory. Mr. Robb has given a sketch
of his theory in a pamphlet with the same title (Heffer and Sons,
Cambridge, 1913).

[31] "Natural Realism and Present Tendencies in Philosophy," _Proc.
Arist. Soc._, 1908-1909, p. 165.

[32] _Die Erfahrungsgrundlagen unseres Wissens_, p. 28.

[33] Cf. _Principia Mathematica_, Vol. I, * 14, and Introduction,
Chap. III. For the definition of _existence_, cf. * 14. 02.

[34] Cf. Edwin B. Holt, _The Place of Illusory Experience in a
Realistic World._ "The New Realism," p. 303, both on this point and as
regards _seeing double_.




IX

ON THE NOTION OF CAUSE


In the following paper I wish, first, to maintain that the word
"cause" is so inextricably bound up with misleading associations as to
make its complete extrusion from the philosophical vocabulary
desirable; secondly, to inquire what principle, if any, is employed in
science in place of the supposed "law of causality" which philosophers
imagine to be employed; thirdly, to exhibit certain confusions,
especially in regard to teleology and determinism, which appear to me
to be connected with erroneous notions as to causality.

All philosophers, of every school, imagine that causation is one of
the fundamental axioms or postulates of science, yet, oddly enough, in
advanced sciences such as gravitational astronomy, the word "cause"
never occurs. Dr. James Ward, in his _Naturalism and Agnosticism_,
makes this a ground of complaint against physics: the business of
those who wish to ascertain the ultimate truth about the world, he
apparently thinks, should be the discovery of causes, yet physics
never even seeks them. To me it seems that philosophy ought not to
assume such legislative functions, and that the reason why physics has
ceased to look for causes is that, in fact, there are no such things.
The law of causality, I believe, like much that passes muster among
philosophers, is a relic of a bygone age, surviving, like the
monarchy, only because it is erroneously supposed to do no harm. In
order to find out what philosophers commonly understand by "cause," I
consulted Baldwin's _Dictionary_, and was rewarded beyond my
expectations, for I found the following three mutually incompatible
definitions:--

  "CAUSALITY. (1) The necessary connection of events in the
     time-series....

  "CAUSE (notion of). Whatever may be included in the thought or
     perception of a process as taking place in consequence of
     another process....

  "CAUSE AND EFFECT. (1) Cause and effect ... are correlative terms
     denoting any two distinguishable things, phases, or aspects of
     reality, which are so related to each other that whenever the
     first ceases to exist the second comes into existence
     immediately after, and whenever the second comes into existence
     the first has ceased to exist immediately before."

Let us consider these three definitions in turn. The first, obviously,
is unintelligible without a definition of "necessary." Under this
head, Baldwin's _Dictionary_ gives the following:--

  "NECESSARY. That is necessary which not only is true, but would
     be true under all circumstances. Something more than brute
     compulsion is, therefore, involved in the conception; there is
     a general law under which the thing takes place."

The notion of cause is so intimately connected with that of necessity
that it will be no digression to linger over the above definition,
with a view to discovering, if possible, _some_ meaning of which it is
capable; for, as it stands, it is very far from having any definite
signification.

The first point to notice is that, if any meaning is to be given to
the phrase "would be true under all circumstances," the subject of it
must be a propositional function, not a proposition.[35] A
proposition is simply true or false, and that ends the matter: there
can be no question of "circumstances." "Charles I's head was cut off"
is just as true in summer as in winter, on Sundays as on Mondays. Thus
when it is worth saying that something "would be true under all
circumstances," the something in question must be a propositional
function, i.e. an expression containing a variable, and becoming a
proposition when a value is assigned to the variable; the varying
"circumstances" alluded to are then the different values of which the
variable is capable. Thus if "necessary" means "what is true under all
circumstances," then "if _x_ is a man, _x_ is mortal" is necessary,
because it is true for any possible value of _x_. Thus we should be
led to the following definition:--

  "NECESSARY is a predicate of a propositional function, meaning
     that it is true for all possible values of its argument or
     arguments."

Unfortunately, however, the definition in Baldwin's _Dictionary_ says
that what is necessary is not only "true under all circumstances" but
is also "true." Now these two are incompatible. Only propositions can
be "true," and only propositional functions can be "true under all
circumstances." Hence the definition as it stands is nonsense. What is
meant seems to be this: "A proposition is necessary when it is a value
of a propositional function which is true under all circumstances,
i.e. for all values of its argument or arguments." But if we adopt
this definition, the same proposition will be necessary or contingent
according as we choose one or other of its terms as the argument to
our propositional function. For example, "if Socrates is a man,
Socrates is mortal," is necessary if Socrates is chosen as argument,
but not if _man_ or _mortal_ is chosen. Again, "if Socrates is a man,
Plato is mortal," will be necessary if either Socrates or _man_ is
chosen as argument, but not if Plato or _mortal_ is chosen. However,
this difficulty can be overcome by specifying the constituent which is
to be regarded as argument, and we thus arrive at the following
definition:

"A proposition is _necessary_ with respect to a given constituent if
it remains true when that constituent is altered in any way compatible
with the proposition remaining significant."

We may now apply this definition to the definition of causality quoted
above. It is obvious that the argument must be the time at which the
earlier event occurs. Thus an instance of causality will be such as:
"If the event [Math: e_{1}] occurs at the time [Math: t_{1}], it will
be followed by the event [Math: e_{2}]." This proposition is intended
to be necessary with respect to [Math: t_{1}], i.e. to remain true
however [Math: t_{1}] may be varied. Causality, as a universal law,
will then be the following: "Given any event [Math: t_{1}], there is
an event [Math: e_{2}] such that, whenever [Math: t_{1}] occurs,
[Math: e_{2}] occurs later." But before this can be considered
precise, we must specify how much later [Math: e_{2}] is to occur.
Thus the principle becomes:--

"Given any event [Math: e_{1}], there is an event [Math: e_{2}] and a
time-interval [tau] such that, whenever [Math: e_{1}] occurs, [Math:
e_{2}] follows after an interval [tau]."

I am not concerned as yet to consider whether this law is true or
false. For the present, I am merely concerned to discover what the law
of causality is supposed to be. I pass, therefore, to the other
definitions quoted above.

The second definition need not detain us long, for two reasons. First,
because it is psychological: not the "thought or perception" of a
process, but the process itself, must be what concerns us in
considering causality. Secondly, because it is circular: in speaking
of a process as "taking place in consequence of" another process, it
introduces the very notion of cause which was to be defined.

The third definition is by far the most precise; indeed as regards
clearness it leaves nothing to be desired. But a great difficulty is
caused by the temporal contiguity of cause and effect which the
definition asserts. No two instants are contiguous, since the
time-series is compact; hence either the cause or the effect or both
must, if the definition is correct, endure for a finite time; indeed,
by the wording of the definition it is plain that both are assumed to
endure for a finite time. But then we are faced with a dilemma: if the
cause is a process involving change within itself, we shall require
(if causality is universal) causal relations between its earlier and
later parts; moreover, it would seem that only the later parts can be
relevant to the effect, since the earlier parts are not contiguous to
the effect, and therefore (by the definition) cannot influence the
effect. Thus we shall be led to diminish the duration of the cause
without limit, and however much we may diminish it, there will still
remain an earlier part which might be altered without altering the
effect, so that the true cause, as defined, will not have been
reached, for it will be observed that the definition excludes
plurality of causes. If, on the other hand, the cause is purely
static, involving no change within itself, then, in the first place,
no such cause is to be found in nature, and in the second place, it
seems strange--too strange to be accepted, in spite of bare logical
possibility--that the cause, after existing placidly for some time,
should suddenly explode into the effect, when it might just as well
have done so at any earlier time, or have gone on unchanged without
producing its effect. This dilemma, therefore, is fatal to the view
that cause and effect can be contiguous in time; if there are causes
and effects, they must be separated by a finite time-interval [tau],
as was assumed in the above interpretation of the first definition.

What is essentially the same statement of the law of causality as the
one elicited above from the first of Baldwin's definitions is given by
other philosophers. Thus John Stuart Mill says:--

"The Law of Causation, the recognition of which is the main pillar of
inductive science, is but the familiar truth, that invariability of
succession is found by observation to obtain between every fact in
nature and some other fact which has preceded it."[36]

And Bergson, who has rightly perceived that the law as stated by
philosophers is worthless, nevertheless continues to suppose that it
is used in science. Thus he says:--

"Now, it is argued, this law [the law of causality] means that every
phenomenon is determined by its conditions, or, in other words, that
the same causes produce the same effects."[37]

And again:--

"We perceive physical phenomena, and these phenomena obey laws. This
means: (1) That phenomena _a_, _b_, _c_, _d_, previously perceived,
can occur again in the same shape; (2) that a certain phenomenon P,
which appeared after the conditions _a_, _b_, _c_, _d_, and after
these conditions only, will not fail to recur as soon as the same
conditions are again present."[38]

A great part of Bergson's attack on science rests on the assumption
that it employs this principle. In fact, it employs no such principle,
but philosophers--even Bergson--are too apt to take their views on
science from each other, not from science. As to what the principle
is, there is a fair consensus among philosophers of different schools.
There are, however, a number of difficulties which at once arise. I
omit the question of plurality of causes for the present, since other
graver questions have to be considered. Two of these, which are forced
on our attention by the above statement of the law, are the
following:--

  (1) What is meant by an "event"?

  (2) How long may the time-interval be between cause and effect?

(1) An "event," in the statement of the law, is obviously intended to
be something that is likely to recur since otherwise the law becomes
trivial. It follows that an "event" is not a particular, but some
universal of which there may be many instances. It follows also that
an "event" must be something short of the whole state of the universe,
since it is highly improbable that this will recur. What is meant by
an "event" is something like striking a match, or dropping a penny
into the slot of an automatic machine. If such an event is to recur,
it must not be defined too narrowly: we must not state with what
degree of force the match is to be struck, nor what is to be the
temperature of the penny. For if such considerations were relevant,
our "event" would occur at most once, and the law would cease to give
information. An "event," then, is a universal defined sufficiently
widely to admit of many particular occurrences in time being instances
of it.

(2) The next question concerns the time-interval. Philosophers, no
doubt, think of cause and effect as contiguous in time, but this, for
reasons already given, is impossible. Hence, since there are no
infinitesimal time-intervals, there must be some finite lapse of time
[tau] between cause and effect. This, however, at once raises
insuperable difficulties. However short we make the interval [tau],
something may happen during this interval which prevents the expected
result. I put my penny in the slot, but before I can draw out my
ticket there is an earthquake which upsets the machine and my
calculations. In order to be sure of the expected effect, we must know
that there is nothing in the environment to interfere with it. But
this means that the supposed cause is not, by itself, adequate to
insure the effect. And as soon as we include the environment, the
probability of repetition is diminished, until at last, when the whole
environment is included, the probability of repetition becomes almost
_nil_.

In spite of these difficulties, it must, of course, be admitted that
many fairly dependable regularities of sequence occur in daily life.
It is these regularities that have suggested the supposed law of
causality; where they are found to fail, it is thought that a better
formulation could have been found which would have never failed. I am
far from denying that there may be such sequences which in fact never
do fail. It may be that there will never be an exception to the rule
that when a stone of more than a certain mass, moving with more than a
certain velocity, comes in contact with a pane of glass of less than
a certain thickness, the glass breaks. I also do not deny that the
observation of such regularities, even when they are not without
exceptions, is useful in the infancy of a science: the observation
that unsupported bodies in air usually fall was a stage on the way to
the law of gravitation. What I deny is that science assumes the
existence of invariable uniformities of sequence of this kind, or that
it aims at discovering them. All such uniformities, as we saw, depend
upon a certain vagueness in the definition of the "events." That
bodies fall is a vague qualitative statement; science wishes to know
how fast they fall. This depends upon the shape of the bodies and the
density of the air. It is true that there is more nearly uniformity
when they fall in a vacuum; so far as Galileo could observe, the
uniformity is then complete. But later it appeared that even there the
latitude made a difference, and the altitude. Theoretically, the
position of the sun and moon must make a difference. In short, every
advance in a science takes us farther away from the crude uniformities
which are first observed, into greater differentiation of antecedent
and consequent, and into a continually wider circle of antecedents
recognised as relevant.

The principle "same cause, same effect," which philosophers imagine to
be vital to science, is therefore utterly otiose. As soon as the
antecedents have been given sufficiently fully to enable the
consequent to be calculated with some exactitude, the antecedents have
become so complicated that it is very unlikely they will ever recur.
Hence, if this were the principle involved, science would remain
utterly sterile.

The importance of these considerations lies partly in the fact that
they lead to a more correct account of scientific procedure, partly in
the fact that they remove the analogy with human volition which makes
the conception of cause such a fruitful source of fallacies. The
latter point will become clearer by the help of some illustrations.
For this purpose I shall consider a few maxims which have played a
great part in the history of philosophy.

(1) "Cause and effect must more or less resemble each other." This
principle was prominent in the philosophy of occasionalism, and is
still by no means extinct. It is still often thought, for example,
that mind could not have grown up in a universe which previously
contained nothing mental, and one ground for this belief is that
matter is too dissimilar from mind to have been able to cause it. Or,
more particularly, what are termed the nobler parts of our nature are
supposed to be inexplicable, unless the universe always contained
something at least equally noble which could cause them. All such
views seem to depend upon assuming some unduly simplified law of
causality; for, in any legitimate sense of "cause" and "effect,"
science seems to show that they are usually very widely dissimilar,
the "cause" being, in fact, two states of the whole universe, and the
"effect" some particular event.

(2) "Cause is analogous to volition, since there must be an
intelligible _nexus_ between cause and effect." This maxim is, I
think, often unconsciously in the imaginations of philosophers who
would reject it when explicitly stated. It is probably operative in
the view we have just been considering, that mind could not have
resulted from a purely material world. I do not profess to know what
is meant by "intelligible"; it seems to mean "familiar to
imagination." Nothing is less "intelligible," in any other sense, than
the connection between an act of will and its fulfilment. But
obviously the sort of nexus desired between cause and effect is such
as could only hold between the "events" which the supposed law of
causality contemplates; the laws which replace causality in such a
science as physics leave no room for any two events between which a
nexus could be sought.

(3) "The cause _compels_ the effect in some sense in which the effect
does not compel the cause." This belief seems largely operative in the
dislike of determinism; but, as a matter of fact, it is connected with
our second maxim, and falls as soon as that is abandoned. We may
define "compulsion" as follows: "Any set of circumstances is said to
compel A when A desires to do something which the circumstances
prevent, or to abstain from something which the circumstances cause."
This presupposes that some meaning has been found for the word
"cause"--a point to which I shall return later. What I want to make
clear at present is that compulsion is a very complex notion,
involving thwarted desire. So long as a person does what he wishes to
do, there is no compulsion, however much his wishes may be calculable
by the help of earlier events. And where desire does not come in,
there can be no question of compulsion. Hence it is, in general,
misleading to regard the cause as compelling the effect.

A vaguer form of the same maxim substitutes the word "determine" for
the word "compel"; we are told that the cause _determines_ the effect
in a sense in which the effect does not _determine_ the cause. It is
not quite clear what is meant by "determining"; the only precise
sense, so far as I know, is that of a function or one-many relation.
If we admit plurality of causes, but not of effects, that is, if we
suppose that, given the cause, the effect must be such and such, but,
given the effect, the cause may have been one of many alternatives,
then we may say that the cause determines the effect, but not the
effect the cause. Plurality of causes, however, results only from
conceiving the effect vaguely and narrowly and the cause precisely and
widely. Many antecedents may "cause" a man's death, because his death
is vague and narrow. But if we adopt the opposite course, taking as
the "cause" the drinking of a dose of arsenic, and as the "effect" the
whole state of the world five minutes later, we shall have plurality
of effects instead of plurality of causes. Thus the supposed lack of
symmetry between "cause" and "effect" is illusory.

(4) "A cause cannot operate when it has ceased to exist, because what
has ceased to exist is nothing." This is a common maxim, and a still
more common unexpressed prejudice. It has, I fancy, a good deal to do
with the attractiveness of Bergson's "_dure_": since the past has
effects now, it must still exist in some sense. The mistake in this
maxim consists in the supposition that causes "operate" at all. A
volition "operates" when what it wills takes place; but nothing can
operate except a volition. The belief that causes "operate" results
from assimilating them, consciously or unconsciously, to volitions. We
have already seen that, if there are causes at all, they must be
separated by a finite interval of time from their effects, and thus
cause their effects after they have ceased to exist.

It may be objected to the above definition of a volition "operating"
that it only operates when it "causes" what it wills, not when it
merely happens to be followed by what it wills. This certainly
represents the usual view of what is meant by a volition "operating,"
but as it involves the very view of causation which we are engaged in
combating, it is not open to us as a definition. We may say that a
volition "operates" when there is some law in virtue of which a
similar volition in rather similar circumstances will usually be
followed by what it wills. But this is a vague conception, and
introduces ideas which we have not yet considered. What is chiefly
important to notice is that the usual notion of "operating" is not
open to us if we reject, as I contend that we should, the usual notion
of causation.

(5) "A cause cannot operate except where it is." This maxim is very
widespread; it was urged against Newton, and has remained a source of
prejudice against "action at a distance." In philosophy it has led to
a denial of transient action, and thence to monism or Leibnizian
monadism. Like the analogous maxim concerning temporal contiguity, it
rests upon the assumption that causes "operate," i.e. that they are in
some obscure way analogous to volitions. And, as in the case of
temporal contiguity, the inferences drawn from this maxim are wholly
groundless.

I return now to the question, What law or laws can be found to take
the place of the supposed law of causality?

First, without passing beyond such uniformities of sequence as are
contemplated by the traditional law, we may admit that, if any such
sequence has been observed in a great many cases, and has never been
found to fail, there is an inductive probability that it will be found
to hold in future cases. If stones have hitherto been found to break
windows, it is probable that they will continue to do so. This, of
course, assumes the inductive principle, of which the truth may
reasonably be questioned; but as this principle is not our present
concern, I shall in this discussion treat it as indubitable. We may
then say, in the case of any such frequently observed sequence, that
the earlier event is the _cause_ and the later event the _effect_.

Several considerations, however, make such special sequences very
different from the traditional relation of cause and effect. In the
first place, the sequence, in any hitherto unobserved instance, is no
more than probable, whereas the relation of cause and effect was
supposed to be necessary. I do not mean by this merely that we are not
sure of having discovered a true case of cause and effect; I mean
that, even when we have a case of cause and effect in our present
sense, all that is meant is that on grounds of observation, it is
probable that when one occurs the other will also occur. Thus in our
present sense, A may be the cause of B even if there actually are
cases where B does not follow A. Striking a match will be the cause of
its igniting, in spite of the fact that some matches are damp and fail
to ignite.

In the second place, it will not be assumed that _every_ event has
some antecedent which is its cause in this sense; we shall only
believe in causal sequences where we find them, without any
presumption that they always are to be found.

In the third place, _any_ case of sufficiently frequent sequence will
be causal in our present sense; for example, we shall not refuse to
say that night is the cause of day. Our repugnance to saying this
arises from the ease with which we can imagine the sequence to fail,
but owing to the fact that cause and effect must be separated by a
finite interval of time, _any_ such sequence _might_ fail through the
interposition of other circumstances in the interval. Mill, discussing
this instance of night and day, says:--

"It is necessary to our using the word cause, that we should believe
not only that the antecedent always _has_ been followed by the
consequent, but that as long as the present constitution of things
endures, it always _will_ be so."[39]

In this sense, we shall have to give up the hope of finding causal
laws such as Mill contemplated; any causal sequence which we have
observed may at any moment be falsified without a falsification of any
laws of the kind that the more advanced sciences aim at establishing.

In the fourth place, such laws of probable sequence, though useful in
daily life and in the infancy of a science, tend to be displaced by
quite different laws as soon as a science is successful. The law of
gravitation will illustrate what occurs in any advanced science. In
the motions of mutually gravitating bodies, there is nothing that can
be called a cause, and nothing that can be called an effect; there is
merely a formula. Certain differential equations can be found, which
hold at every instant for every particle of the system, and which,
given the configuration and velocities at one instant, or the
configurations at two instants, render the configuration at any other
earlier or later instant theoretically calculable. That is to say, the
configuration at any instant is a function of that instant and the
configurations at two given instants. This statement holds throughout
physics, and not only in the special case of gravitation. But there is
nothing that could be properly called "cause" and nothing that could
be properly called "effect" in such a system.

No doubt the reason why the old "law of causality" has so long
continued to pervade the books of philosophers is simply that the idea
of a function is unfamiliar to most of them, and therefore they seek
an unduly simplified statement. There is no question of repetitions of
the "same" cause producing the "same" effect; it is not in any
sameness of causes and effects that the constancy of scientific law
consists, but in sameness of relations. And even "sameness of
relations" is too simple a phrase; "sameness of differential
equations" is the only correct phrase. It is impossible to state this
accurately in non-mathematical language; the nearest approach would be
as follows: "There is a constant relation between the state of the
universe at any instant and the rate of change in the rate at which
any part of the universe is changing at that instant, and this
relation is many-one, i.e. such that the rate of change in the rate of
change is determinate when the state of the universe is given." If the
"law of causality" is to be something actually discoverable in the
practice of science, the above proposition has a better right to the
name than any "law of causality" to be found in the books of
philosophers.

In regard to the above principle, several observations must be made--

(1) No one can pretend that the above principle is _a priori_ or
self-evident or a "necessity of thought." Nor is it, in any sense, a
premiss of science: it is an empirical generalisation from a number of
laws which are themselves empirical generalisations.

(2) The law makes no difference between past and future: the future
"determines" the past in exactly the same sense in which the past
"determines" the future. The word "determine," here, has a purely
logical significance: a certain number of variables "determine"
another variable if that other variable is a function of them.

(3) The law will not be empirically verifiable unless the course of
events within some sufficiently small volume will be approximately
the same in any two states of the universe which only differ in regard
to what is at a considerable distance from the small volume in
question. For example, motions of planets in the solar system must be
approximately the same however the fixed stars may be distributed,
provided that all the fixed stars are very much farther from the sun
than the planets are. If gravitation varied directly as the distance,
so that the most remote stars made the most difference to the motions
of the planets, the world might be just as regular and just as much
subject to mathematical laws as it is at present, but we could never
discover the fact.

(4) Although the old "law of causality" is not assumed by science,
something which we may call the "uniformity of nature" is assumed, or
rather is accepted on inductive grounds. The uniformity of nature does
not assert the trivial principle "same cause, same effect," but the
principle of the permanence of laws. That is to say, when a law
exhibiting, e.g. an acceleration as a function of the configuration
has been found to hold throughout the observable past, it is expected
that it will continue to hold in the future, or that, if it does not
itself hold, there is some other law, agreeing with the supposed law
as regards the past, which will hold for the future. The ground of
this principle is simply the inductive ground that it has been found
to be true in very many instances; hence the principle cannot be
considered certain, but only probable to a degree which cannot be
accurately estimated.

The uniformity of nature, in the above sense, although it is assumed
in the practice of science, must not, in its generality, be regarded
as a kind of major premiss, without which all scientific reasoning
would be in error. The assumption that _all_ laws of nature are
permanent has, of course, less probability than the assumption that
this or that particular law is permanent; and the assumption that a
particular law is permanent for all time has less probability than the
assumption that it will be valid up to such and such a date. Science,
in any given case, will assume what the case requires, but no more. In
constructing the _Nautical Almanac_ for 1915 it will assume that the
law of gravitation will remain true up to the end of that year; but it
will make no assumption as to 1916 until it comes to the next volume
of the almanac. This procedure is, of course, dictated by the fact
that the uniformity of nature is not known _a priori_, but is an
empirical generalisation, like "all men are mortal." In all such
cases, it is better to argue immediately from the given particular
instances to the new instance, than to argue by way of a major
premiss; the conclusion is only probable in either case, but acquires
a higher probability by the former method than by the latter.

In all science we have to distinguish two sorts of laws: first, those
that are empirically verifiable but probably only approximate;
secondly, those that are not verifiable, but may be exact. The law of
gravitation, for example, in its applications to the solar system, is
only empirically verifiable when it is assumed that matter outside the
solar system may be ignored for such purposes; we believe this to be
only approximately true, but we cannot empirically verify the law of
universal gravitation which we believe to be exact. This point is very
important in connection with what we may call "relatively isolated
systems." These may be defined as follows:--

A system relatively isolated during a given period is one which,
within some assignable margin of error, will behave in the same way
throughout that period, however the rest of the universe may be
constituted.

A system may be called "practically isolated" during a given period
if, although there _might_ be states of the rest of the universe which
would produce more than the assigned margin of error, there is reason
to believe that such states do not in fact occur.

Strictly speaking, we ought to specify the respect in which the system
is relatively isolated. For example, the earth is relatively isolated
as regards falling bodies, but not as regards tides; it is
_practically_ isolated as regards economic phenomena, although, if
Jevons' sunspot theory of commercial crises had been true, it would
not have been even practically isolated in this respect.

It will be observed that we cannot prove in advance that a system is
isolated. This will be inferred from the observed fact that
approximate uniformities can be stated for this system alone. If the
complete laws for the whole universe were known, the isolation of a
system could be deduced from them; assuming, for example, the law of
universal gravitation, the practical isolation of the solar system in
this respect can be deduced by the help of the fact that there is very
little matter in its neighbourhood. But it should be observed that
isolated systems are only important as providing a possibility of
_discovering_ scientific laws; they have no theoretical importance in
the finished structure of a science.

The case where one event A is said to "cause" another event B, which
philosophers take as fundamental, is really only the most simplified
instance of a practically isolated system. It may happen that, as a
result of general scientific laws, whenever A occurs throughout a
certain period, it is followed by B; in that case, A and B form a
system which is practically isolated throughout that period. It is,
however, to be regarded as a piece of good fortune if this occurs; it
will always be due to special circumstances, and would not have been
true if the rest of the universe had been different though subject to
the same laws.

The essential function which causality has been supposed to perform is
the possibility of inferring the future from the past, or, more
generally, events at any time from events at certain assigned times.
Any system in which such inference is possible may be called a
"deterministic" system. We may define a deterministic system as
follows:--

  A system is said to be "deterministic" when, given certain data,
  [Math: e_{1}, e_{2}, ..., e_{n}, at times t_{1}, t_{2}, ...,
  t_{n}] respectively, concerning this system, if [Math: E_{t}] is
  the state of the system at any time _t_, there is a functional
  relation of the form

[Math: E_{t} = f (e_{1}, t_{1}, e_{2}, t_{2}, ..., e_{n}, t_{n}, t)]. (A)

  The system will be "deterministic throughout a given period" if
  _t_, in the above formula, may be any time within that period,
  though outside that period the formula may be no longer true. If
  the universe, as a whole, is such a system, determinism is true of
  the universe; if not, not. A system which is part of a
  deterministic system I shall call "determined"; one which is not
  part of any such system I shall call "capricious."

The events [Math: e_{1}, e_{2}, ..., e_{n}] I shall call "determinants"
of the system. It is to be observed that a system which has one set of
determinants will in general have many. In the case of the motions of
the planets, for example, the configurations of the solar system at any
two given times will be determinants.

We may take another illustration from the hypothesis of
psycho-physical parallelism. Let us assume, for the purposes of this
illustration, that to a given state of brain a given state of mind
always corresponds, and vice versa, i.e. that there is a one-one
relation between them, so that each is a function of the other. We may
also assume, what is practically certain, that to a given state of a
certain brain a given state of the whole material universe
corresponds, since it is highly improbable that a given brain is ever
twice in exactly the same state. Hence there will be a one-one
relation between the state of a given person's mind and the state of
the whole material universe. It follows that, if _n_ states of the
material universe are determinants of the material universe, then _n_
states of a given man's mind are determinants of the whole material
and mental universe--assuming, that is to say, that psycho-physical
parallelism is true.

The above illustration is important in connection with a certain
confusion which seems to have beset those who have philosophised on
the relation of mind and matter. It is often thought that, if the
state of the mind is determinate when the state of the brain is given,
and if the material world forms a deterministic system, then mind is
"subject" to matter in some sense in which matter is not "subject" to
mind. But if the state of the brain is also determinate when the state
of the mind is given, it must be exactly as true to regard matter as
subject to mind as it would be to regard mind as subject to matter. We
could, theoretically, work out the history of mind without ever
mentioning matter, and then, at the end, deduce that matter must
meanwhile have gone through the corresponding history. It is true that
if the relation of brain to mind were many-one, not one-one, there
would be a one-sided dependence of mind on brain, while conversely, if
the relation were one-many, as Bergson supposes, there would be a
one-aided dependence of brain on mind. But the dependence involved is,
in any case, only logical; it does not mean that we shall be
compelled to do things we desire not to do, which is what people
instinctively imagine it to mean.

As another illustration we may take the case of mechanism and
teleology. A system may be defined as "mechanical" when it has a set
of determinants that are purely material, such as the positions of
certain pieces of matter at certain times. It is an open question
whether the world of mind and matter, as we know it, is a mechanical
system or not; let us suppose, for the sake of argument, that it is a
mechanical system. This supposition--so I contend--throws no light
whatever on the question whether the universe is or is not a
"teleological" system. It is difficult to define accurately what is
meant by a "teleological" system, but the argument is not much
affected by the particular definition we adopt. Broadly, a
teleological system is one in which purposes are realised, i.e. in
which certain desires--those that are deeper or nobler or more
fundamental or more universal or what not--are followed by their
realisation. Now the fact--if it be a fact--that the universe is
mechanical has no bearing whatever on the question whether it is
teleological in the above sense. There might be a mechanical system in
which all wishes were realised, and there might be one in which all
wishes were thwarted. The question whether, or how far, our actual
world is teleological, cannot, therefore, be settled by proving that
it is mechanical, and the desire that it should be teleological is no
ground for wishing it to be not mechanical.

There is, in all these questions, a very great difficulty in avoiding
confusion between what we can infer and what is in fact determined.
Let us consider, for a moment, the various senses in which the future
may be "determined." There is one sense--and a very important one--in
which it is determined quite independently of scientific laws, namely,
the sense that it will be what it will be. We all regard the past as
determined simply by the fact that it has happened; but for the
accident that memory works backward and not forward, we should regard
the future as equally determined by the fact that it will happen.
"But," we are told, "you cannot alter the past, while you can to some
extent alter the future." This view seems to me to rest upon just
those errors in regard to causation which it has been my object to
remove. You cannot make the past other than it was--true, but this is
a mere application of the law of contradiction. If you already know
what the past was, obviously it is useless to wish it different. But
also you cannot make the future other than it will be; this again is
an application of the law of contradiction. And if you happen to know
the future--e.g. in the case of a forthcoming eclipse--it is just as
useless to wish it different as to wish the past different. "But," it
will be rejoined, "our wishes can _cause_ the future, sometimes, to be
different from what it would be if they did not exist, and they can
have no such effect upon the past." This, again, is a mere tautology.
An effect being _defined_ as something subsequent to its cause,
obviously we can have no _effect_ upon the past. But that does not
mean that the past would not have been different if our present wishes
had been different. Obviously, our present wishes are conditioned by
the past, and therefore could not have been different unless the past
had been different; therefore, if our present wishes were different,
the past would be different. Of course, the past cannot be different
from what it was, but no more can our present wishes be different from
what they are; this again is merely the law of contradiction. The
facts seem to be merely (1) that wishing generally depends upon
ignorance, and is therefore commoner in regard to the future than in
regard to the past; (2) that where a wish concerns the future, it and
its realisation very often form a "practically independent system,"
i.e. many wishes regarding the future are realised. But there seems no
doubt that the main difference in our feelings arises from the
accidental fact that the past but not the future can be known by
memory.

Although the sense of "determined" in which the future is determined
by the mere fact that it will be what it will be is sufficient (at
least so it seems to me) to refute some opponents of determinism,
notably M. Bergson and the pragmatists, yet it is not what most people
have in mind when they speak of the future as determined. What they
have in mind is a formula by means of which the future can be
exhibited, and at least theoretically calculated, as a function of the
past. But at this point we meet with a great difficulty, which besets
what has been said above about deterministic systems, as well as what
is said by others.

If formul of any degree of complexity, however great, are admitted,
it would seem that any system, whose state at a given moment is a
function of certain measurable quantities, must be a deterministic
system. Let us consider, in illustration, a single material particle,
whose co-ordinates at time _t_ are [Math: x_{t}, y_{t}, z_{t}]. Then,
however, the particle moves, there must be, theoretically, functions
[Math: f_{1}, f_{2}, f_{3}], such that

[Math: x_{t} = f_{t}(t), y_{t} = f_{2}(t), z_{t} = f_{3}(t).]

It follows that, theoretically, the whole state of the material
universe at time _t_ must be capable of being exhibited as a function
of _t_. Hence our universe will be deterministic in the sense defined
above. But if this be true, no information is conveyed about the
universe in stating that it is deterministic. It is true that the
formul involved may be of strictly infinite complexity, and therefore
not practically capable of being written down or apprehended. But
except from the point of view of our knowledge, this might seem to be
a detail: in itself, if the above considerations are sound, the
material universe _must_ be deterministic, _must_ be subject to laws.

This, however, is plainly not what was intended. The difference
between this view and the view intended may be seen as follows. Given
some formula which fits the facts hitherto--say the law of
gravitation--there will be an infinite number of other formul, not
empirically distinguishable from it in the past, but diverging from it
more and more in the future. Hence, even assuming that there are
persistent laws, we shall have no reason for assuming that the law of
the inverse square will hold in future; it may be some other hitherto
indistinguishable law that will hold. We cannot say that _every_ law
which has held hitherto must hold in the future, because past facts
which obey one law will also obey others, hitherto indistinguishable
but diverging in future. Hence there must, at every moment, be laws
hitherto unbroken which are now broken for the first time. What
science does, in fact, is to select the _simplest_ formula that will
fit the facts. But this, quite obviously, is merely a methodological
precept, not a law of Nature. If the simplest formula ceases, after a
time, to be applicable, the simplest formula that remains applicable
is selected, and science has no sense that an axiom has been
falsified. We are thus left with the brute fact that, in many
departments of science, quite simple laws have hitherto been found to
hold. This fact cannot be regarded as having any _a priori_ ground,
nor can it be used to support inductively the opinion that the same
laws will continue; for at every moment laws hitherto true are being
falsified, though in the advanced sciences these laws are less simple
than those that have remained true. Moreover it would be fallacious to
argue inductively from the state of the advanced sciences to the
future state of the others, for it may well be that the advanced
sciences are advanced simply because, hitherto, their subject-matter
has obeyed simple and easily ascertainable laws, while the
subject-matter of other sciences has not done so.

The difficulty we have been considering seems to be met partly, if not
wholly, by the principle that the _time_ must not enter explicitly
into our formul. All mechanical laws exhibit acceleration as a
function of configuration, not of configuration and time jointly; and
this principle of the irrelevance of the time may be extended to all
scientific laws. In fact we might interpret the "uniformity of nature"
as meaning just this, that no scientific law involves the time as an
argument, unless, of course, it is given in an integrated form, in
which case _lapse_ of time, though not absolute time, may appear in
our formul. Whether this consideration suffices to overcome our
difficulty completely, I do not know; but in any case it does much to
diminish it.

It will serve to illustrate what has been said if we apply it to the
question of free will.

(1) Determinism in regard to the will is the doctrine that our
volitions belong to some deterministic system, i.e. are "determined"
in the sense defined above. Whether this doctrine is true or false, is
a mere question of fact; no _a priori_ considerations (if our previous
discussions have been correct) can exist on either side. On the one
hand, there is no _a priori_ category of causality, but merely certain
observed uniformities. As a matter of fact, there are observed
uniformities in regard to volitions; thus there is some empirical
evidence that volitions are determined. But it would be very rash to
maintain that the evidence is overwhelming, and it is quite possible
that some volitions, as well as some other things, are not determined,
except in the sense in which we found that everything must be
determined.

(2) But, on the other hand, the subjective sense of freedom, sometimes
alleged against determinism, has no bearing on the question whatever.
The view that it has a bearing rests upon the belief that causes
compel their effects, or that nature enforces obedience to its laws as
governments do. These are mere anthropomorphic superstitions, due to
assimilation of causes with volitions and of natural laws with human
edicts. We feel that our will is not compelled, but that only means
that it is not other than we choose it to be. It is one of the
demerits of the traditional theory of causality that it has created an
artificial opposition between determinism and the freedom of which we
are introspectively conscious.

(3) Besides the general question whether volitions are determined,
there is the further question whether they are _mechanically_
determined, i.e. whether they are part of what was above defined as a
mechanical system. This is the question whether they form part of a
system with purely material determinants, i.e. whether there are laws
which, given certain material data, make all volitions functions of
those data. Here again, there is empirical evidence up to a point, but
it is not conclusive in regard to all volitions. It is important to
observe, however that even if volitions are part of a mechanical
system, this by no means implies any supremacy of matter over mind. It
may well be that the same system which is susceptible of material
determinants is also susceptible of mental determinants; thus a
mechanical system may be determined by sets of volitions, as well as
by sets of material facts. It would seem, therefore, that the reasons
which make people dislike the view that volitions are mechanically
determined are fallacious.

(4) The notion of _necessity_, which is often associated with
determinism, is a confused notion not legitimately deducible from
determinism. Three meanings are commonly confounded when necessity is
spoken of:--

([alpha]) An _action_ is necessary when it will be performed
however much the agent may wish to do otherwise. Determinism does not
imply that actions are necessary in this sense.

([beta]) A _propositional function_ is necessary when all its
values are true. This sense is not relevant to our present discussion.

([gamma]) A _proposition_ is necessary with respect to a given
constituent when it is the value, with that constituent as argument,
of a necessary propositional function, in other words, when it remains
true however that constituent may be varied. In this sense, in a
deterministic system, the connection of a volition with its
determinants is necessary, if the time at which the determinants occur
be taken as the constituent to be varied, the time-interval between
the determinants and the volition being kept constant. But this sense
of necessity is purely logical, and has no emotional importance.

We may now sum up our discussion of causality. We found first that the
law of causality, as usually stated by philosophers, is false, and is
not employed in science. We then considered the nature of scientific
laws, and found that, instead of stating that one event A is always
followed by another event B, they stated functional relations between
certain events at certain times, which we called determinants, and
other events at earlier or later times or at the same time. We were
unable to find any _a priori_ category involved: the existence of
scientific laws appeared as a purely empirical fact, not necessarily
universal, except in a trivial and scientifically useless form. We
found that a system with one set of determinants may very likely have
other sets of a quite different kind, that, for example, a
mechanically determined system may also be teleologically or
volitionally determined. Finally we considered the problem of free
will: here we found that the reasons for supposing volitions to be
determined are strong but not conclusive, and we decided that even if
volitions are mechanically determined, that is no reason for denying
freedom in the sense revealed by introspection, or for supposing that
mechanical events are not determined by volitions. The problem of free
will _versus_ determinism is therefore, if we were right, mainly
illusory, but in part not yet capable of being decisively solved.

FOOTNOTES:

[35] A propositional function is an expression containing a variable,
or undetermined constituent, and becoming a proposition as soon as a
definite value is assigned to the variable. Examples are: "A is A,"
"_x_ is a number." The variable is called the _argument_ of the
function.

[36] _Logic_, Bk. III, Chap. V,  2.

[37] _Time and Free Will_, p. 199.

[38] _Time and Free Will._ p. 202.

[39] _Loc. cit._,  6




X

KNOWLEDGE BY ACQUAINTANCE AND KNOWLEDGE BY DESCRIPTION


The object of the following paper is to consider what it is that we
know in cases where we know propositions about "the so-and-so" without
knowing who or what the so-and-so is. For example, I know that the
candidate who gets most votes will be elected, though I do not know
who is the candidate who will get most votes. The problem I wish to
consider is: What do we know in these cases, where the subject is
merely described? I have considered this problem elsewhere[40] from a
purely logical point of view; but in what follows I wish to consider
the question in relation to theory of knowledge as well as in relation
to logic, and in view of the above-mentioned logical discussions, I
shall in this paper make the logical portion as brief as possible.

In order to make clear the antithesis between "acquaintance" and
"description," I shall first of all try to explain what I mean by
"acquaintance." I say that I am _acquainted_ with an object when I
have a direct cognitive relation to that object, i.e. when I am
directly aware of the object itself. When I speak of a cognitive
relation here, I do not mean the sort of relation which constitutes
judgment, but the sort which constitutes presentation. In fact, I
think the relation of subject and object which I call acquaintance is
simply the converse of the relation of object and subject which
constitutes presentation. That is, to say that S has acquaintance with
O is essentially the same thing as to say that O is presented to S.
But the associations and natural extensions of the word _acquaintance_
are different from those of the word _presentation_. To begin with, as
in most cognitive words, it is natural to say that I am acquainted
with an object even at moments when it is not actually before my mind,
provided it has been before my mind, and will be again whenever
occasion arises. This is the same sense in which I am said to know
that 2+2=4 even when I am thinking of something else. In the second
place, the word _acquaintance_ is designed to emphasise, more than the
word _presentation_, the relational character of the fact with which
we are concerned. There is, to my mind, a danger that, in speaking of
presentation, we may so emphasise the object as to lose sight of the
subject. The result of this is either to lead to the view that there
is no subject, whence we arrive at materialism; or to lead to the view
that what is presented is part of the subject, whence we arrive at
idealism, and should arrive at solipsism but for the most desperate
contortions. Now I wish to preserve the dualism of subject and object
in my terminology, because this dualism seems to me a fundamental fact
concerning cognition. Hence I prefer the word _acquaintance_ because
it emphasises the need of a subject which is acquainted.

When we ask what are the kinds of objects with which we are
acquainted, the first and most obvious example is _sense-data_. When I
see a colour or hear a noise, I have direct acquaintance with the
colour or the noise. The sense-datum with which I am acquainted in
these cases is generally, if not always, complex. This is
particularly obvious in the case of sight. I do not mean, of course,
merely that the supposed physical object is complex, but that the
direct sensible object is complex and contains parts with spatial
relations. Whether it is possible to be aware of a complex without
being aware of its constituents is not an easy question, but on the
whole it would seem that there is no reason why it should not be
possible. This question arises in an acute form in connection with
self-consciousness, which we must now briefly consider.

In introspection, we seem to be immediately aware of varying
complexes, consisting of objects in various cognitive and conative
relations to ourselves. When I see the sun, it often happens that I
am aware of my seeing the sun, in addition to being aware of the sun;
and when I desire food, it often happens that I am aware of my desire
for food. But it is hard to discover any state of mind in which I am
aware of myself alone, as opposed to a complex of which I am a
constituent. The question of the nature of self-consciousness is too
large and too slightly connected with our subject, to be argued at
length here. It is difficult, but probably not impossible, to account
for plain facts if we assume that we do not have acquaintance with
ourselves. It is plain that we are not only _acquainted_ with the
complex "Self-acquainted-with-A," but we also _know_ the proposition
"I am acquainted with A." Now here the complex has been analysed, and
if "I" does not stand for something which is a direct object of
acquaintance, we shall have to suppose that "I" is something known by
description. If we wished to maintain the view that there is no
acquaintance with Self, we might argue as follows: We are acquainted
with _acquaintance_, and we know that it is a relation. Also we are
acquainted with a complex in which we perceive that acquaintance is
the relating relation. Hence we know that this complex must have a
constituent which is that which is acquainted, i.e. must have a
subject-term as well as an object-term. This subject-term we define
as "I." Thus "I" means "the subject-term in awarenesses of which _I_
am aware." But as a definition this cannot be regarded as a happy
effort. It would seem necessary, therefore, either to suppose that I
am acquainted with myself, and that "I," therefore, requires no
definition, being merely the proper name of a certain object, or to
find some other analysis of self-consciousness. Thus self-consciousness
cannot be regarded as throwing light on the question whether we can
know a complex without knowing its constituents. This question,
however, is not important for our present purposes, and I shall
therefore not discuss it further.

The awarenesses we have considered so far have all been awarenesses of
particular existents, and might all in a large sense be called
sense-data. For, from the point of view of theory of knowledge,
introspective knowledge is exactly on a level with knowledge derived
from sight or hearing. But, in addition to awareness of the above kind
of objects, which may be called awareness of _particulars_; we have
also (though not quite in the same sense) what may be called awareness
of _universals_. Awareness of universals is called _conceiving_, and a
universal of which we are aware is called a _concept_. Not only are we
aware of particular yellows, but if we have seen a sufficient number
of yellows and have sufficient intelligence, we are aware of the
universal _yellow_; this universal is the subject in such judgments as
"yellow differs from blue" or "yellow resembles blue less than green
does." And the universal yellow is the predicate in such judgments as
"this is yellow," where "this" is a particular sense-datum. And
universal relations, too, are objects of awarenesses; up and down,
before and after, resemblance, desire, awareness itself, and so on,
would seem to be all of them objects of which we can be aware.

In regard to relations, it might be urged that we are never aware of
the universal relation itself, but only of complexes in which it is a
constituent. For example, it may be said that we do not know directly
such a relation as _before_, though we understand such a proposition
as "this is before that," and may be directly aware of such a complex
as "this being before that." This view, however, is difficult to
reconcile with the fact that we often know propositions in which the
relation is the subject, or in which the relata are not definite given
objects, but "anything." For example, we know that if one thing is
before another, and the other before a third, then the first is before
the third; and here the things concerned are not definite things, but
"anything." It is hard to see how we could know such a fact about
"before" unless we were acquainted with "before," and not merely with
actual particular cases of one given object being before another given
object. And more directly: A judgment such as "this is before that,"
where this judgment is derived from awareness of a complex,
constitutes an analysis, and we should not understand the analysis if
we were not acquainted with the meaning of the terms employed. Thus we
must suppose that we are acquainted with the meaning of "before," and
not merely with instances of it.

There are thus at least two sorts of objects of which we are aware,
namely, particulars and universals. Among particulars I include all
existents, and all complexes of which one or more constituents are
existents, such as this-before-that, this-above-that,
the-yellowness-of-this. Among universals I include all objects of
which no particular is a constituent. Thus the disjunction
"universal-particular" includes all objects. We might also call it the
disjunction "abstract-concrete." It is not quite parallel with the
opposition "concept-percept," because things remembered or imagined
belong with particulars, but can hardly be called percepts. (On the
other hand, universals with which we are acquainted may be identified
with concepts.)

It will be seen that among the objects with which we are acquainted
are not included physical objects (as opposed to sense-data), nor
other people's minds. These things are known to us by what I call
"knowledge by description," which we must now consider.

By a "description" I mean any phrase of the form "a so-and-so" or "the
so-and-so." A phrase of the form "a so-and-so" I shall call an
"ambiguous" description; a phrase of the form "the so-and-so" (in the
singular) I shall call a "definite" description. Thus "a man" is an
ambiguous description, and "the man with the iron mask" is a definite
description. There are various problems connected with ambiguous
descriptions, but I pass them by, since they do not directly concern
the matter I wish to discuss. What I wish to discuss is the nature of
our knowledge concerning objects in cases where we know that there is
an object answering to a definite description, though we are not
_acquainted_ with any such object. This is a matter which is concerned
exclusively with _definite_ descriptions. I shall, therefore, in the
sequel, speak simply of "descriptions" when I mean "definite
descriptions." Thus a description will mean any phrase of the form
"the so-and-so" in the singular.

I shall say that an object is "known by description" when we know that
it is "_the_ so-and-so," i.e. when we know that there is one object,
and no more, having a certain property; and it will generally be
implied that we do not have knowledge of the same object by
acquaintance. We know that the man with the iron mask existed, and
many propositions are known about him; but we do not know who he was.
We know that the candidate who gets most votes will be elected, and in
this case we are very likely also acquainted (in the only sense in
which one can be acquainted with some one else) with the man who is,
in fact, the candidate who will get most votes, but we do not know
which of the candidates he is, i.e. we do not know any proposition of
the form "A is the candidate who will get most votes" where A is one
of the candidates by name. We shall say that we have "_merely_
descriptive knowledge" of the so-and-so when, although we know that
the so-and-so exists, and although we may possibly be acquainted with
the object which is, in fact, the so-and-so, yet we do not know any
proposition "_a_ is the so-and-so," where _a_ is something with which
we are acquainted.

When we say "the so-and-so exists," we mean that there is just one
object which is the so-and-so. The proposition "_a_ is the so-and-so"
means that _a_ has the property so-and-so, and nothing else has. "Sir
Joseph Larmor is the Unionist candidate" means "Sir Joseph Larmor is a
Unionist candidate, and no one else is." "The Unionist candidate
exists" means "some one is a Unionist candidate, and no one else is."
Thus, when we are acquainted with an object which we know to be the
so-and-so, we know that the so-and-so exists but we may know that the
so-and-so exists when we are not acquainted with any object which we
know to be the so-and-so, and even when we are not acquainted with any
object which, in fact, is the so-and-so.

Common words, even proper names, are usually really descriptions. That
is to say, the thought in the mind of a person using a proper name
correctly can generally only be expressed explicitly if we replace the
proper name by a description. Moreover, the description required to
express the thought will vary for different people, or for the same
person at different times. The only thing constant (so long as the
name is rightly used) is the object to which the name applies. But so
long as this remains constant, the particular description involved
usually makes no difference to the truth or falsehood of the
proposition in which the name appears.

Let us take some illustrations. Suppose some statement made about
Bismarck. Assuming that there is such a thing as direct acquaintance
with oneself, Bismarck himself might have used his name directly to
designate the particular person with whom he was acquainted. In this
case, if he made a judgment about himself, he himself might be a
constituent of the judgment. Here the proper name has the direct use
which it always wishes to have, as simply standing for a certain
object, and not for a description of the object. But if a person who
knew Bismarck made a judgment about him, the case is different. What
this person was acquainted with were certain sense-data which he
connected (rightly, we will suppose) with Bismarck's body. His body as
a physical object, and still more his mind, were only known as the
body and the mind connected with these sense-data. That is, they were
known by description. It is, of course, very much a matter of chance
which characteristics of a man's appearance will come into a friend's
mind when he thinks of him; thus the description actually in the
friend's mind is accidental. The essential point is that he knows that
the various descriptions all apply to the same entity, in spite of
not being acquainted with the entity in question.

When we, who did not know Bismarck, make a judgment about him, the
description in our minds will probably be some more or less vague mass
of historical knowledge--far more, in most cases, than is required to
identify him. But, for the sake of illustration, let us assume that we
think of him as "the first Chancellor of the German Empire." Here all
the words are abstract except "German." The word "German" will again
have different meanings for different people. To some it will recall
travels in Germany, to some the look of Germany on the map, and so on.
But if we are to obtain a description which we know to be applicable,
we shall be compelled, at some point, to bring in a reference to a
particular with which we are acquainted. Such reference is involved in
any mention of past, present, and future (as opposed to definite
dates), or of here and there, or of what others have told us. Thus it
would seem that, in some way or other, a description known to be
applicable to a particular must involve some reference to a particular
with which we are acquainted, if our knowledge about the thing
described is not to be merely what follows logically from the
description. For example, "the most long-lived of men" is a
description which must apply to some man, but we can make no judgments
concerning this man which involve knowledge about him beyond what the
description gives. If, however, we say, "the first Chancellor of the
German Empire was an astute diplomatist," we can only be assured of
the truth of our judgment in virtue of something with which we are
acquainted--usually a testimony heard or read. Considered
psychologically, apart from the information we convey to others, apart
from the fact about the actual Bismarck, which gives importance to
our judgment, the thought we really have contains the one or more
particulars involved, and otherwise consists wholly of concepts. All
names of places--London, England, Europe, the earth, the Solar
System--similarly involve, when used, descriptions which start from
some one or more particulars with which we are acquainted. I suspect
that even the Universe, as considered by metaphysics, involves such a
connection with particulars. In logic, on the contrary, where we are
concerned not merely with what does exist, but with whatever might or
could exist or be, no reference to actual particulars is involved.

It would seem that, when we make a statement about something only
known by description, we often _intend_ to make our statement, not in
the form involving the description, but about the actual thing
described. That is to say, when we say anything about Bismarck, we
should like, if we could, to make the judgment which Bismarck alone
can make, namely, the judgment of which he himself is a constituent.
In this we are necessarily defeated, since the actual Bismarck is
unknown to us. But we know that there is an object B called Bismarck,
and that B was an astute diplomatist. We can thus _describe_ the
proposition we should like to affirm, namely, "B was an astute
diplomatist," where B is the object which was Bismarck. What enables
us to communicate in spite of the varying descriptions we employ is
that we know there is a true proposition concerning the actual
Bismarck, and that, however we may vary the description (so long as
the description is correct), the proposition described is still the
same. This proposition, which is described and is known to be true, is
what interests us; but we are not acquainted with the proposition
itself, and do not know _it_, though we know it is true.

It will be seen that there are various stages in the removal from
acquaintance with particulars: there is Bismarck to people who knew
him, Bismarck to those who only know of him through history, the man
with the iron mask, the longest-lived of men. These are progressively
further removed from acquaintance with particulars, and there is a
similar hierarchy in the region of universals. Many universals, like
many particulars, are only known to us by description. But here, as in
the case of particulars, knowledge concerning what is known by
description is ultimately reducible to knowledge concerning what is
known by acquaintance.

The fundamental epistemological principle in the analysis of
propositions containing descriptions is this: _Every proposition which
we can understand must be composed wholly of constituents with which
we are acquainted._ From what has been said already, it will be plain
why I advocate this principle, and how I propose to meet the case of
propositions which at first sight contravene it. Let us begin with the
reasons for supposing the principle true.

The chief reason for supposing the principle true is that it seems
scarcely possible to believe that we can make a judgment or entertain
a supposition without knowing what it is that we are judging or
supposing about. If we make a judgment about (say) Julius Csar, it is
plain that the actual person who was Julius Csar is not a constituent
of the judgment. But before going further, it may be well to explain
what I mean when I say that this or that is a constituent of a
judgment, or of a proposition which we understand. To begin with
judgments: a judgment, as an occurrence, I take to be a relation of a
mind to several entities, namely, the entities which compose what is
judged. If, e.g. I judge that A loves B, the judgment as an event
consists in the existence, at a certain moment, of a specific
four-term relation, called _judging_, between me and A and love and B.
That is to say, at the time when I judge, there is a certain complex
whose terms are myself and A and love and B, and whose relating
relation is _judging_. My reasons for this view have been set forth
elsewhere,[41] and I shall not repeat them here. Assuming this view of
judgment, the constituents of the judgment are simply the constituents
of the complex which is the judgment. Thus, in the above case, the
constituents are myself and A and love and B and judging. But myself
and judging are constituents shared by all my judgments; thus the
_distinctive_ constituents of the particular judgment in question are
A and love and B. Coming now to what is meant by "understanding a
proposition," I should say that there is another relation possible
between me and A and love and B, which is called my _supposing_ that A
loves B.[42] When we can _suppose_ that A loves B, we "understand the
proposition" _A loves B_. Thus we often understand a proposition in
cases where we have not enough knowledge to make a judgment.
Supposing, like judging, is a many-term relation, of which a mind is
one term. The other terms of the relation are called the constituents
of the proposition supposed. Thus the principle which I enunciated may
be re-stated as follows: _Whenever a relation of supposing or judging
occurs, the terms to which the supposing or judging mind is related by
the relation of supposing or judging must be terms with which the mind
in question is acquainted._ This is merely to say that we cannot make
a judgment or a supposition without knowing what it is that we are
making our judgment or supposition about. It seems to me that the
truth of this principle is evident as soon as the principle is
understood; I shall, therefore, in what follows, assume the principle,
and use it as a guide in analysing judgments that contain
descriptions.

Returning now to Julius Csar, I assume that it will be admitted that
he himself is not a constituent of any judgment which I can make. But
at this point it is necessary to examine the view that judgments are
composed of something called "ideas," and that it is the "idea" of
Julius Csar that is a constituent of my judgment. I believe the
plausibility of this view rests upon a failure to form a right theory
of descriptions. We may mean by my "idea" of Julius Csar the things
that I know about him, e.g. that he conquered Gaul, was assassinated
on the Ides of March, and is a plague to schoolboys. Now I am
admitting, and indeed contending, that in order to discover what is
actually in my mind when I judge about Julius Csar, we must
substitute for the proper name a description made up of some of the
things I know about him. (A description which will often serve to
express my thought is "the man whose name was _Julius Csar_." For
whatever else I may have forgotten about him, it is plain that when I
mention him I have not forgotten that that was his name.) But although
I think the theory that judgments consist of ideas may have been
suggested in some such way, yet I think the theory itself is
fundamentally mistaken. The view seems to be that there is some
mental existent which may be called the "idea" of something outside
the mind of the person who has the idea, and that, since judgment is a
mental event, its constituents must be constituents of the mind of the
person judging. But in this view ideas become a veil between us and
outside things--we never really, in knowledge, attain to the things we
are supposed to be knowing about, but only to the ideas of those
things. The relation of mind, idea, and object, on this view, is
utterly obscure, and, so far as I can see, nothing discoverable by
inspection warrants the intrusion of the idea between the mind and the
object. I suspect that the view is fostered by the dislike of
relations, and that it is felt the mind could not know objects unless
there were something "in" the mind which could be called the state of
knowing the object. Such a view, however, leads at once to a vicious
endless regress, since the relation of idea to object will have to be
explained by supposing that the idea itself has an idea of the object,
and so on _ad infinitum_. I therefore see no reason to believe that,
when we are acquainted with an object, there is in us something which
can be called the "idea" of the object. On the contrary, I hold that
acquaintance is wholly a relation, not demanding any such constituent
of the mind as is supposed by advocates of "ideas." This is, of
course, a large question, and one which would take us far from our
subject if it were adequately discussed. I therefore content myself
with the above indications, and with the corollary that, in judging,
the actual objects concerning which we judge, rather than any supposed
purely mental entities, are constituents of the complex which is the
judgment.

When, therefore, I say that we must substitute for "Julius Csar" some
description of Julius Csar, in order to discover the meaning of a
judgment nominally about him, I am not saying that we must substitute
an idea. Suppose our description is "the man whose name was _Julius
Csar_." Let our judgment be "Julius Csar was assassinated." Then it
becomes "the man whose name was _Julius Csar_ was assassinated." Here
_Julius Csar_ is a noise or shape with which we are acquainted, and
all the other constituents of the judgment (neglecting the tense in
"was") are _concepts_ with which we are acquainted. Thus our judgment
is wholly reduced to constituents with which we are acquainted, but
Julius Csar himself has ceased to be a constituent of our judgment.
This, however, requires a proviso, to be further explained shortly,
namely that "the man whose name was _Julius Csar_" must not, as a
whole, be a constituent of our judgment, that is to say, this phrase
must not, as a whole, have a meaning which enters into the judgment.
Any right analysis of the judgment, therefore, must break up this
phrase, and not treat it as a subordinate complex which is part of the
judgment. The judgment "the man whose name was _Julius Csar_ was
assassinated" may be interpreted as meaning "one and only one man was
called _Julius Csar_, and that one was assassinated." Here it is
plain that there is no constituent corresponding to the phrase "the
man whose name was _Julius Csar_." Thus there is no reason to regard
this phrase as expressing a constituent of the judgment, and we have
seen that this phrase must be broken up if we are to be acquainted
with all the constituents of the judgment. This conclusion, which we
have reached from considerations concerned with the theory of
knowledge, is also forced upon us by logical considerations, which
must now be briefly reviewed.

It is common to distinguish two aspects, _meaning_ and _denotation_,
such phrases as "the author of Waverley." The meaning will be a
certain complex, consisting (at least) of authorship and Waverley with
some relation; the denotation will be Scott. Similarly "featherless
bipeds" will have a complex meaning, containing as constituents the
presence of two feet and the absence of feathers, while its denotation
will be the class of men. Thus when we say "Scott is the author of
Waverley" or "men are the same as featherless bipeds," we are
asserting an identity of denotation, and this assertion is worth
making because of the diversity of meaning.[43] I believe that the
duality of meaning and denotation, though capable of a true
interpretation, is misleading if taken as fundamental. The denotation,
I believe, is not a constituent of the proposition, except in the case
of proper names, i.e. of words which do not assign a property to an
object, but merely and solely name it. And I should hold further that,
in this sense, there are only two words which are strictly proper
names of particulars, namely, "I" and "this."[44]

One reason for not believing the denotation to be a constituent of the
proposition is that we may know the proposition even when we are not
acquainted with the denotation. The proposition "the author of
Waverley is a novelist" was known to people who did not know that "the
author of Waverley" denoted Scott. This reason has been already
sufficiently emphasised.

A second reason is that propositions concerning "the so-and-so" are
possible even when "the so-and-so" has no denotation. Take, e.g. "the
golden mountain does not exist" or "the round square is
self-contradictory." If we are to preserve the duality of meaning and
denotation, we have to say, with Meinong, that there are such objects
as the golden mountain and the round square, although these objects do
not have being. We even have to admit that the existent round square
is existent, but does not exist.[45] Meinong does not regard this as a
contradiction, but I fail to see that it is not one. Indeed, it seems
to me evident that the judgment "there is no such object as the round
square" does not presuppose that there is such an object. If this is
admitted, however, we are led to the conclusion that, by parity of
form, no judgment concerning "the so-and-so" actually involves the
so-and-so as a constituent.

Miss Jones[46] contends that there is no difficulty in admitting
contradictory predicates concerning such an object as "the present
King of France," on the ground that this object is in itself
contradictory. Now it might, of course, be argued that this object,
unlike the round square, is not self-contradictory, but merely
non-existent. This, however, would not go to the root of the matter.
The real objection to such an argument is that the law of
contradiction ought not to be stated in the traditional form "A is not
both B and not B," but in the form "no proposition is both true and
false." The traditional form only applies to certain propositions,
namely, to those which attribute a predicate to a subject. When the
law is stated of propositions, instead of being stated concerning
subjects and predicates, it is at once evident that propositions about
the present King of France or the round square can form no exception,
but are just as incapable of being both true and false as other
propositions. Miss Jones[47] argues that "Scott is the author of
Waverley" asserts identity of denotation between _Scott_ and _the
author of Waverley_. But there is some difficulty in choosing among
alternative meanings of this contention. In the first place, it should
be observed that _the author of Waverley_ is not a _mere_ name, like
_Scott_. _Scott_ is merely a noise or shape conventionally used to
designate a certain person; it gives us no information about that
person, and has nothing that can be called meaning as opposed to
denotation. (I neglect the fact, considered above, that even proper
names, as a rule, really stand for descriptions.) But _the author of
Waverley_ is not merely conventionally a name for Scott; the element
of mere convention belongs here to the separate words, _the_ and
_author_ and _of_ and _Waverley_. Given what these words stand for,
_the author of Waverley_ is no longer arbitrary. When it is said that
Scott is the author of Waverley, we are not stating that these are two
_names_ for one man, as we should be if we said "Scott is Sir Walter."
A man's name is what he is called, but however much Scott had been
called the author of Waverley, that would not have made him be the
author; it was necessary for him actually to write Waverley, which was
a fact having nothing to do with names.

If, then, we are asserting identity of denotation, we must not mean by
_denotation_ the mere relation of a name to the thing named. In fact,
it would be nearer to the truth to say that the _meaning_ of "Scott"
is the _denotation_ of "the author of Waverley." The relation of
"Scott" to Scott is that "Scott" means Scott, just as the relation of
"author" to the concept which is so called is that "author" means this
concept. Thus if we distinguish meaning and denotation in "the author
of Waverley," we shall have to say that "Scott" has meaning but not
denotation. Also when we say "Scott is the author of Waverley," the
_meaning_ of "the author of Waverley" is relevant to our assertion.
For if the denotation alone were relevant, any other phrase with the
same denotation would give the same proposition. Thus "Scott is the
author of Marmion" would be the same proposition as "Scott is the
author of Waverley." But this is plainly not the case, since from the
first we learn that Scott wrote Marmion and from the second we learn
that he wrote Waverley, but the first tells us nothing about Waverley
and the second nothing about Marmion. Hence the meaning of "the author
of Waverley," as opposed to the denotation, is certainly relevant to
"Scott is the author of Waverley."

We have thus agreed that "the author of Waverley" is not a mere name,
and that its meaning is relevant in propositions in which it occurs.
Thus if we are to say, as Miss Jones does, that "Scott is the author
of Waverley" asserts an identity of denotation, we must regard the
denotation of "the author of Waverley" as the denotation of what is
_meant_ by "the author of Waverley." Let us call the meaning of "the
author of Waverley" M. Thus M is what "the author of Waverley" means.
Then we are to suppose that "Scott is the author of Waverley" means
"Scott is the denotation of M." But here we are explaining our
proposition by another of the same form, and thus we have made no
progress towards a real explanation. "The denotation of M," like "the
author of Waverley," has both meaning and denotation, on the theory we
are examining. If we call its meaning M', our proposition becomes
"Scott is the denotation of M'." But this leads at once to an endless
regress. Thus the attempt to regard our proposition as asserting
identity of denotation breaks down, and it becomes imperative to find
some other analysis. When this analysis has been completed, we shall
be able to reinterpret the phrase "identity of denotation," which
remains obscure so long as it is taken as fundamental.

The first point to observe is that, in any proposition about "the
author of Waverley," provided Scott is not explicitly mentioned, the
denotation itself, i.e. Scott, does not occur, but only the concept of
denotation, which will be represented by a variable. Suppose we say
"the author of Waverley was the author of Marmion," we are certainly
not saying that both were Scott--we may have forgotten that there was
such a person as Scott. We are saying that there is some man who was
the author of Waverley and the author of Marmion. That is to say,
there is some one who wrote Waverley and Marmion, and no one else
wrote them. Thus the identity is that of a variable, i.e. of an
indefinite subject, "some one." This is why we can understand
propositions about "the author of Waverley," without knowing who he
was. When we say "the author of Waverley was a poet," we mean "one and
only one man wrote Waverley, and he was a poet"; when we say "the
author of Waverley was Scott" we mean "one and only one man wrote
Waverley, and he was Scott." Here the identity is between a variable,
i.e. an indeterminate subject ("he"), and Scott; "the author of
Waverley" has been analysed away, and no longer appears as a
constituent of the proposition.[48]

The reason why it is imperative to analyse away the phrase "the author
of Waverley" may be stated as follows. It is plain that when we say
"the author of Waverley is the author of Marmion," the _is_ expresses
identity. We have seen also that the common _denotation_, namely
Scott, is not a constituent of this proposition, while the _meanings_
(if any) of "the author of Waverley" and "the author of Marmion" are
not identical. We have seen also that, in any sense in which the
meaning of a word is a constituent of a proposition in whose verbal
expression the word occurs, "Scott" means the actual man Scott, in the
same sense (so far as concerns our present discussion) in which
"author" means a certain universal. Thus, if "the author of Waverley"
were a subordinate complex in the above proposition, its _meaning_
would have to be what was said to be identical with the _meaning_ of
"the author of Marmion." This is plainly not the case; and the only
escape is to say that "the author of Waverley" does not, by itself,
have a meaning, though phrases of which it is part do have a meaning.
That is, in a right analysis of the above proposition, "the author of
Waverley" must disappear. This is effected when the above proposition
is analysed as meaning: "Some one wrote Waverley and no one else did,
and that some one also wrote Marmion and no one else did." This may be
more simply expressed by saying that the propositional function "_x_
wrote Waverley and Marmion, and no one else did" is capable of truth,
i.e. some value of _x_ makes it true, but no other value does. Thus
the true subject of our judgment is a propositional function, i.e. a
complex containing an undetermined constituent, and becoming a
proposition as soon as this constituent is determined.

We may now define the denotation of a phrase. If we know that the
proposition "_a_ is the so-and-so" is true, i.e. that _a_ is so-and-so
and nothing else is, we call _a_ the denotation of the phrase "the
so-and-so." A very great many of the propositions we naturally make
about "the so-and-so" will remain true or remain false if we
substitute _a_ for "the so-and-so," where _a_ is the denotation of
"the so-and-so." Such propositions will also remain true or remain
false if we substitute for "the so-and-so" any other phrase having the
same denotation. Hence, as practical men, we become interested in the
denotation more than in the description, since the denotation decides
as to the truth or falsehood of so many statements in which the
description occurs. Moreover, as we saw earlier in considering the
relations of description and acquaintance, we often wish to reach the
denotation, and are only hindered by lack of acquaintance: in such
cases the description is merely the means we employ to get as near as
possible to the denotation. Hence it naturally comes to be supposed
that the denotation is part of the proposition in which the
description occurs. But we have seen, both on logical and on
epistemological grounds, that this is an error. The actual object (if
any) which is the denotation is not (unless it is explicitly
mentioned) a constituent of propositions in which descriptions occur;
and this is the reason why, in order to understand such propositions,
we need acquaintance with the constituents of the description, but do
not need acquaintance with its denotation. The first result of
analysis, when applied to propositions whose grammatical subject is
"the so-and-so," is to substitute a variable as subject; i.e. we
obtain a proposition of the form: "There is _something_ which alone is
so-and-so, and that _something_ is such-and-such." The further
analysis of propositions concerning "the so-and-so" is thus merged in
the problem of the nature of the variable, i.e. of the meanings of
_some_, _any_, and _all_. This is a difficult problem, concerning
which I do not intend to say anything at present.

To sum up our whole discussion. We began by distinguishing two sorts
of knowledge of objects, namely, knowledge by _acquaintance_ and
knowledge by _description_. Of these it is only the former that brings
the object itself before the mind. We have acquaintance with
sense-data, with many universals, and possibly with ourselves, but not
with physical objects or other minds. We have _descriptive_ knowledge
of an object when we know that it is _the_ object having some property
or properties with which we are acquainted; that is to say, when we
know that the property or properties in question belong to one object
and no more, we are said to have knowledge of that one object by
description, whether or not we are acquainted with the object. Our
knowledge of physical objects and of other minds is only knowledge by
description, the descriptions involved being usually such as involve
sense-data. All propositions intelligible to us, whether or not they
primarily concern things only known to us by description, are composed
wholly of constituents with which we are acquainted, for a constituent
with which we are not acquainted is unintelligible to us. A judgment,
we found, is not composed of mental constituents called "ideas," but
consists of an occurrence whose constituents are a mind[49] and
certain objects, particulars or universals. (One at least must be a
universal.) When a judgment is rightly analysed, the objects which are
constituents of it must all be objects with which the mind which is a
constituent of it is acquainted. This conclusion forces us to analyse
descriptive phrases occurring in propositions, and to say that the
objects denoted by such phrases are not constituents of judgments in
which such phrases occur (unless these objects are explicitly
mentioned). This leads us to the view (recommended also on purely
logical grounds) that when we say "the author of Marmion was the
author of Waverley," Scott himself is not a constituent of our
judgment, and that the judgment cannot be explained by saying that it
affirms identity of denotation with diversity of meaning. It also,
plainly, does not assert identity of meaning. Such judgments,
therefore, can only be analysed by breaking up the descriptive
phrases, introducing a variable, and making propositional functions
the ultimate subjects. In fact, "the so-and-so is such-and-such" will
mean that "_x_ is so-and-so and nothing else is, and _x_ is
such-and-such" is capable of truth. The analysis of such judgments
involves many fresh problems, but the discussion of these problems is
not undertaken in the present paper.

FOOTNOTES:

[40] See references later.

[41] _Philosophical Essays_, "The Nature of Truth." I have been
persuaded by Mr. Wittgenstein that this theory is somewhat unduly
simple, but the modification which I believe it to require does not
affect the above argument [1917].

[42] Cf. Meinong, _Ueber Annahmen_, _passim_. I formerly supposed,
contrary to Meinong's view, that the relationship of supposing might
be merely that of presentation. In this view I now think I was
mistaken, and Meinong is right. But my present view depends upon the
theory that both in judgment and in assumption there is no single
Objective, but the several constituents of the judgment or assumption
are in a many-term relation to the mind.

[43] This view has been recently advocated by Miss E.E.C. Jones. "A
New Law of Thought and its Implications," _Mind_, January, 1911.

[44] I should now exclude "I" from proper names in the strict sense,
and retain only "this" [1917].

[45] Meinong, _Ueber Annahmen_, 2nd ed., Leipzig, 1910, p. 141.

[46] _Mind_, July, 1910, p. 380.

[47] _Mind_, July, 1910, p. 379.

[48] The theory which I am advocating is set forth fully, with the
logical grounds in its favour, in _Principia Mathematica_, Vol. I.
Introduction, Chap. III; also, less fully, in _Mind_, October, 1905.

[49] I use this phrase merely to denote the something psychological
which enters into judgment, without intending to prejudge the question
as to what this something is.




INDEX


Achilles and the tortoise, 80 ff, 89 ff

Acquaintance, the relation of, 209 ff

Alexander, 125

American Realists, the, 134

Aristotle, 42, 76, 97


Bacon, 41

Bergson, 14 ff, 22, 105, 128, 185 ff, 203

Berkeley, 97, 132

Blake, 1

Bosanquet, 99

Broad, 89 _n_


Calculus, the, 82

Cantor, Georg, 64, 81 ff, 85, 91

Carlyle, 50, 82

Cause, the conception of, 135 _n_, 180 ff

Christianity and renunciation, 51

Chuang Tz[)u], 106

Construction of permanent things and matter, 169 ff

Constructions, logical, 155 ff


Darwin, 15, 23, 43

Dedekind, 64, 81 ff, 85

Descartes, 97, 126

Descriptions, 175, 214 ff


Education, 37 ff

Euclid, 62, 92, 94

Evolutionism, 23 ff, 28


Fano, 93

Faraday, 34

Free will, 205 ff

Frege, 78 _n_


Galileo, 42

Gladstone, 177

Good and evil, 26 ff


Hegel, 8, 10, 18, 85, 97, 105 ff

Heine, 113

Heraclitus, 1 ff, 10

Hertz, 34

Holt, 177 _n_

Hume, 1, 97


Infinite, the mathematical, 84 ff


James, William, 100

Jones, Miss E.E.C., 224 _n_, 225

Judgment, 219 ff


Kant, 85, 96, 97, 99, 118 ff

Knowledge by acquaintance, 209 ff;
  by description, 214 ff


Laplace, 23

Leibniz, 76, 79, 82 ff, 97, 126, 144, 160

Locke, 97

Logic, the laws of, 68 ff


Macaulay and Taylor's theorem, 95

Malthus, 43

Mathematics, 58 ff;
  and the Metaphysicians, 74 ff;
  and logic, 75 ff;
  and the infinitesimal, 82 ff

Matter, the nature of, 125 ff;
  definition of, 164 ff

Maxwell, 34

Meaning and denotation, 223 ff

Meinong, 174, 220 _n_, 225

Militarism, 50

Mill, 185, 193 ff

Mysticism and logic, 1 ff


Necessity, the notion of, 207 ff

Nietzsche, 22, 50

Nunn, 125, 137 _n_, 153


Parmenides, 7 ff, 18, 21

Particulars, awareness of, 210 ff

Peano, 78 ff, 93 ff

Perspectives, 139 ff;
  the space of, 158 ff

Philosophy and logic, 111

Physics, sense-data and, 145 ff

Pierce, 76 _n_

Plato, 1 ff, 10, 30, 60, 97

Pragmatism, 22, 105


Realism and the analytic method, 120 ff

Reason and intuition, 12 ff

Relatives, the logic of, 76

Robb, 167 _n_


Santayana, 20

Sense-data, 147, 210 ff;
  and physics, 145 ff

Sensibilia, 148 ff

Space, 138 ff;
  private, 158 ff;
  the logical problem, 114 ff;
  the problem in physics, 115 ff;
  the epistemological problem, 118 ff

Systems, deterministic, 199;
  practically isolated, 198;
  relatively isolated, 197;
  mechanical, 201


Time, 10, 21 ff, 141 ff, 167 ff

Tristram Shandy, the paradox of, 90 ff


Unity and Plurality, 18 ff

Universals, awareness of, 212 ff


Ward, 180

Weierstrass, 80, 82, 95

Whitehead, 117, 157, 175

Wolf, 173


Zeno the Eleatic, 64, 80, 84, 89 ff




[Illustration]

GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD

_London: 40 Museum Street, W.C. 1_

_Auckland: 24 Wyndham Street_
_Bombay: 15 Graham Road, Ballard Estate, Bombay 1_
_Calcutta: 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13_
_Cape Town: 109 Long Street_
_Karachi: Metherson's Estate, Wood Street, Karachi 2_
_New Delhi: 13-14 Ajmeri Gate Extension, New Delhi 1_
_So Paulo: Avenida 9 de Julho 1138--Ap. 51_
_Singapore, South East Asia and Far East, 36c, Prinsep Street_
_Sydney, N.S.W.: Bradbury House, 55 York Street_
_Toronto: 91 Wellington Street West_

       *       *       *       *       *

    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Typographical errors corrected in text:                   |
    |                                                           |
    | Page 111: charateristic replaced with characteristic      |
    | Page  71: inexpugnable replaced with inexpungable         |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MYSTICISM AND LOGIC AND OTHER ESSAYS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given awayyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

     You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.
    
     You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
        works.
    
     You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
     You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenbergs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundations EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your states laws.

The Foundations business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundations website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.











