of instinct. It is the combination of love, children, and a common life that

makes the best relation between a man and a woman. The law at present

confines children and a common life within the bonds of monogamy, but it

cannot confine love. By forcing many to separate love from children and a

common life, the law cramps their lives, prevents them from reaching the full

measure  of  their  possible  development,  and  inflicts  a  wholly  unnecessary

torture upon those who are not content to become frivolous.

  To sum up: The present state of the law, of public opinion, and of our

economic system is tending to degrade the quality of the race, by making the

worst  half  of  the  population  the  parents  of  more  than  half  of  the  next

generation. At the same time, women’s claim to liberty is making the old

form of marriage a hindrance to the development of both men and women. A

new system is required, if the European nations are not to degenerate, and if

the relations of men and women are to have the strong happiness and organic

seriousness which belonged to the best marriages in the past. The new system

must be based upon the fact that to produce children is a service to the State,

and ought not to expose parents to heavy pecuniary penalties. It will have to

recognize that neither the law nor public opinion should concern itself with

the  private  relations  of  men  and  women,  except  where  children  are

concerned. It ought to remove the inducements to make relations clandestine

and childless. It ought to admit that, although lifelong monogamy is best

when  it  is  successful,  the  increasing  complexity  of  our  needs  makes  it

increasingly often a failure for which divorce is the best preventive. Here, as

elsewhere, liberty is the basis of political wisdom. And when liberty has been

won, what remains to be desired must be left to the conscience and religion of

individual men and women.

                                             VII 

                  RELIGION AND THE CHURCHES


        Almost all the changes which the world has undergone since the end of the Middle Ages

are due to the discovery and diffusion of new knowledge. This was the primary cause of the
Renaissance, the Reformation, and the industrial revolution. It was also, very directly, the cause of the
decay of dogmatic religion. The study of classical texts and early Church history, Copernican
astronomy and physics, Darwinian biology and comparative anthropology, have each in turn battered
down some part of the edifice of Catholic dogma, until, for almost all thinking and instructed people,
the most that seems defensible is some inner spirit, some vague hope, and some not very definite
feeling of moral obligation. This result might perhaps have remained limited to the educated minority
but for the fact that the Churches have almost everywhere opposed political progress with the same
bitterness with which they have opposed progress in thought. Political conservatism has brought the
Churches into conflict with whatever was vigorous in the working classes, and has spread free
thought in wide circles which might otherwise have remained orthodox for centuries. The decay of
dogmatic religion is, for good or evil, one of the most important facts in the modern world. Its effects
have hardly yet begun to show themselves: what they will be it is impossible to say, but they will
certainly be profound and far-reaching.

  Religion  is  partly  personal,  partly  social:  to  the  Protestant  primarily

personal, to the Catholic primarily social. It is only when the two elements

are intimately blended that religion becomes a powerful force in molding

society. The Catholic Church, as it existed from the time of Constantine to

the  time  of  the  Reformation,  represented  a  blending  which  would  have

seemed incredible if it had not been actually achieved, the blending of Christ

and Cæsar, of the morality of humble submission with the pride of Imperial

Rome. Those who loved the one could find it in the Thebaid; those who loved

the other could admire it in the pomp of metropolitan archbishops. In St.

Francis  and  Innocent  III  the  same  two  sides  of  the  Church  are  still

represented.  But  since  the  Reformation  personal  religion  has  been

increasingly  outside  the  Catholic  Church,  while  the  religion  which  has

remained Catholic has been increasingly a matter of institutions and politics

and  historic  continuity.  This  division  has  weakened  the  force  of  religion:

religious bodies have not been strengthened by the enthusiasm and single-

mindedness of the men in whom personal religion is strong, and these men

have not found their teaching diffused and made permanent by the power of

ecclesiastical institutions.

  The Catholic Church achieved, during the Middle Ages, the most organic

society and the most harmonious inner synthesis of instinct, mind, and spirit,

that the Western world has ever known. St. Francis, Thomas Aquinas, andDante  represent  its  summit  as  regards  individual  development.  The

cathedrals, the mendicant Orders, and the triumph of the Papacy over the

Empire represent its supreme political success. But the perfection which had

been achieved was a narrow perfection: instinct, mind, and spirit all suffered

from curtailment in order to fit into the pattern; laymen found themselves

subject to the Church in ways which they resented, and the Church used its

power for rapacity and oppression. The perfect synthesis was an enemy to

new growth, and after the time of Dante all that was living in the world had

first to fight for its right to live against the representatives of the old order.

This fight is even now not ended. Only when it is quite ended, both in the

external world of politics and in the internal world of men’s own thoughts,

will it be possible for a new organic society and a new inner synthesis to take

the place which the Church held for a thousand years.

  The clerical profession suffers from two causes, one of which it shares

with some other professions, while the other is peculiar to itself. The cause

peculiar to it is the convention that clergymen are more virtuous than other

men. Any average selection of mankind, set apart and told that it excels the

rest  in  virtue,  must  tend  to  sink  below  the  average.  This  is  an  ancient

commonplace  in  regard  to  princes  and  those  who  used  to  be  called  “the

great.”  But  it  is  no  less  true  as  regards  those  of  the  clergy  who  are  not

genuinely  and  by  nature  as  much  better  than  the  average  as  they  are

conventionally  supposed  to  be.  The  other  source  of  harm  to  the  clerical

profession is endowments. Property which is only available for those who

will  support  an  established  institution  has  a  tendency  to  warp  men’s

judgments as to the excellence of the institution. The tendency is aggravated

when the property is associated with social consideration and opportunities

for petty power. It is at its worst when the institution is tied by law to an

ancient creed, almost impossible to change, and yet quite out of touch with

the  unfettered  thought  of  the  present  day.  All  these  causes  combine  to

damage the moral force of the Church.

  It is not so much that the creed of the Church is the wrong one. What is

amiss is the mere existence of a creed. As soon as income, position, and

power are dependent upon acceptance of no matter what creed, intellectual

honesty is imperiled. Men will tell themselves that a formal assent is justified

by the good which it will enable them to do. They fail to realize that, in those

whose mental life has any vigor, loss of complete intellectual integrity putsan end to the power of doing good, by producing gradually in all directions

an  inability  to  see  truth  simply.  The  strictness  of  party  discipline  has

introduced the same evil in politics; there, because the evil is comparatively

new, it is visible to many who think it unimportant as regards the Church. But

the  evil  is  greater  as  regards  the  Church,  because  religion  is  of  more

importance than politics, and because it is more necessary that the exponents

of religion should be wholly free from taint.

  The evils we have been considering seem inseparable from the existence

of a professional priesthood. If religion is not to be harmful in a world of

rapid change, it must, like the Society of Friends, be carried on by men who

have other occupations during the week, who do their religious work from

enthusiasm,  without  receiving  any  payment.  And  such  men,  because  they

know the everyday world, are not likely to fall into a remote morality which

no one regards as applicable to common life. Being free, they will not be

bound to reach certain conclusions decided in advance, but will be able to

consider moral and religious questions genuinely, without bias. Except in a

quite stationary society, no religious life can be living or a real support to the

spirit unless it is freed from the incubus of a professional priesthood.

  It is largely for these reasons that so little of what is valuable in morals

and religion comes nowadays from the men who are eminent in the religious

world.  It  is  true  that  among  professed  believers  there  are  many  who  are

wholly  sincere,  who  feel  still  the  inspiration  which  Christianity  brought

before it had been weakened by the progress of knowledge. These sincere

believers are valuable to the world because they keep alive the conviction that

the life of the spirit is what is of most importance to men and women. Some

of them, in all the countries now at war, have had the courage to preach peace

and love in the name of Christ, and have done what lay in their power to

mitigate the bitterness of hatred. All praise is due to these men, and without

them the world would be even worse than it is.

  But it is not through even the most sincere and courageous believers in the

traditional religion that a new spirit can come into the world. It is not through

them that religion can be brought back to those who have lost it because their

minds  were  active,  not  because  their  spirit  was  dead.  Believers  in  the

traditional religion necessarily look to the past for inspiration rather than to

the future. They seek wisdom in the teaching of Christ, which, admirable as it

is, remains quite inadequate for many of the social and spiritual issues ofmodern life. Art and intellect and all the problems of government are ignored

in  the  Gospels.  Those  who,  like  Tolstoy,  endeavor  seriously  to  take  the

Gospels as a guide to life are compelled to regard the ignorant peasant as the

best type of man, and to brush aside political questions by an extreme and

impracticable anarchism.

  If a religious view of life and the world is ever to reconquer the thoughts

and feelings of free-minded men and women, much that we are accustomed

to associate with religion will have to be discarded. The first and greatest

change that is required is to establish a morality of initiative, not a morality of

submission, a morality of hope rather than fear, of things to be done rather

than of things to be left undone. It is not the whole duty of man to slip

through the world so as to escape the wrath of God. The world is our world,

and it rests with us to make it a heaven or a hell. The power is ours, and the

kingdom and the glory would be ours also if we had courage and insight to

create them. The religious life that we must seek will not be one of occasional

solemnity and superstitious prohibitions, it will not be sad or ascetic, it will

concern itself little with rules of conduct. It will be inspired by a vision of

what human life may be, and will be happy with the joy of creation, living in

a large free world of initiative and hope. It will love mankind, not for what

they are to the outward eye, but for what imagination shows that they have it

in them to become. It will not readily condemn, but it will give praise to

positive achievement rather than negative sinlessness, to the joy of life, the

quick affection, the creative insight, by which the world may grow young and

beautiful and filled with vigor.

  “Religion” is a word which has many meanings and a long history. In

origin,  it  was  concerned  with  certain  rites,  inherited  from  a  remote  past,

performed originally for some reason long since forgotten, and associated

from  time  to  time  with  various  myths  to  account  for  their  supposed

importance. Much of this lingers still. A religious man is one who goes to

church,  a  communicant,  one  who  “practises,”  as  Catholics  say.  How  he

behaves otherwise, or how he feels concerning life and man’s place in the

world,  does  not  bear  upon  the  question  whether  he  is  “religious”  in  this

simple but historically correct sense. Many men and women are religious in

this sense without having in their natures anything that deserves to be called

religion in the sense in which I mean the word. The mere familiarity of the

Church service has made them impervious to it; they are unconscious of allthe history and human experience by which the liturgy has been enriched, and

unmoved by the glibly repeated words of the Gospel, which condemn almost

all the activities of those who fancy themselves disciples of Christ. This fate

must overtake any habitual rite: it is impossible that it should continue to

produce  much  effect  after  it  has  been  performed  so  often  as  to  grow

mechanical.

  The activities of men may be roughly derived from three sources, not in

actual fact sharply separate one from another, but sufficiently distinguishable

to deserve different names. The three sources I mean are instinct, mind, and

spirit, and of these three it is the life of the spirit that makes religion.

  The life of instinct includes all that man shares with the lower animals, all

that is concerned with self-preservation and reproduction and the desires and

impulses derivative from these. It includes vanity and love of possessions,

love of family, and even much of what makes love of country. It includes all

the  impulses  that  are  essentially  concerned  with  the  biological  success  of

oneself or one’s group—for among gregarious animals the life of instinct

includes the group. The impulses which it includes may not in fact make for

success, and may often in fact militate against it, but are nevertheless those of

which success is the raison d’être, those which express the animal nature of

man and his position among a world of competitors.

  The life of the mind is the life of pursuit of knowledge, from mere childish

curiosity up to the greatest efforts of thought. Curiosity exists in animals, and

serves an obvious biological purpose; but it is only in men that it passes

beyond  the  investigation  of  particular  objects  which  may  be  edible  or

poisonous, friendly or hostile. Curiosity is the primary impulse out of which

the whole edifice of scientific knowledge has grown. Knowledge has been

found so useful that most actual acquisition of it is no longer prompted by

curiosity; innumerable other motives now contribute to foster the intellectual

life. Nevertheless, direct love of knowledge and dislike of error still play a

very large part, especially with those who are most successful in learning. No

man acquires much knowledge unless the acquisition is in itself delightful to

him, apart from any consciousness of the use to which the knowledge may be

put. The impulse to acquire knowledge and the activities which center round

it constitute what I mean by the life of the mind. The life of the mind consists

of  thought  which  is  wholly  or  partially  impersonal,  in  the  sense  that  it

concerns itself with objects on their own account, and not merely on accountof their bearing upon our instinctive life.

  The life of the spirit centers round impersonal feeling, as the life of the

mind centers round impersonal thought. In this sense, all art belongs to the

life of the spirit, though its greatness is derived from its being also intimately

bound up with the life of instinct. Art starts from instinct and rises into the

region of the spirit; religion starts from the spirit and endeavors to dominate

and inform the life of instinct. It is possible to feel the same interest in the

joys and sorrows of others as in our own, to love and hate independently of

all  relation  to  ourselves,  to  care  about  the  destiny  of  man  and  the

development  of  the  universe  without  a  thought  that  we  are  personally

involved. Reverence and worship, the sense of an obligation to mankind, the

feeling of imperativeness and acting under orders which traditional religion

has interpreted as Divine inspiration, all belong to the life of the spirit. And

deeper than all these lies the sense of a mystery half revealed, of a hidden

wisdom and glory, of a transfiguring vision in which common things lose

their solid importance and become a thin veil behind which the ultimate truth

of the world is dimly seen. It is such feelings that are the source of religion,

and if they were to die most of what is best would vanish out of life.

  Instinct, mind, and spirit are all essential to a full life; each has its own

excellence and its own corruption. Each can attain a spurious excellence at

the expense of the others; each has a tendency to encroach upon the others;

but  in  the  life  which  is  to  be  sought  all  three  will  be  developed  in

coördination, and intimately blended in a single harmonious whole. Among

uncivilized men instinct is supreme, and mind and spirit hardly exist. Among

educated men at the present day mind is developed, as a rule, at the expense

of both instinct and spirit, producing a curious inhumanity and lifelessness, a

paucity of both personal and impersonal desires, which leads to cynicism and

intellectual destructiveness. Among ascetics and most of those who would be

called  saints,  the  life  of  the  spirit  has  been  developed  at  the  expense  of

instinct and mind, producing an outlook which is impossible to those who

have a healthy animal life and to those who have a love of active thought. It

is not in any of these one-sided developments that we can find wisdom or a

philosophy which will bring new life to the civilized world.

  Among  civilized  men  and  women  at  the  present  day  it  is  rare  to  find

instinct, mind, and spirit in harmony. Very few have achieved a practical

philosophy which gives its due place to each; as a rule, instinct is at war witheither mind or spirit, and mind and spirit are at war with each other. This

strife  compels  men  and  women  to  direct  much  of  their  energy  inwards,

instead of being able to expend it all in objective activities. When a man

achieves a precarious inward peace by the defeat of a part of his nature, his

vital force is impaired, and his growth is no longer quite healthy. If men are

to remain whole, it is very necessary that they should achieve a reconciliation

of instinct, mind, and spirit.

  Instinct  is  the  source  of  vitality,  the  bond  that  unites  the  life  of  the

individual with the life of the race, the basis of all profound sense of union

with others, and the means by which the collective life nourishes the life of

the separate units. But instinct by itself leaves us powerless to control the

forces  of  Nature,  either  in  ourselves  or  in  our  physical  environment,  and

keeps us in bondage to the same unthinking impulse by which the trees grow.

Mind can liberate us from this bondage, by the power of impersonal thought,

which enables us to judge critically the purely biological purposes towards

which  instinct  more  or  less  blindly  tends.  But  mind,  in  its  dealings  with

instinct,  is merely  critical:  so  far  as  instinct  is  concerned,  the  unchecked

activity of the mind is apt to be destructive and to generate cynicism. Spirit is

an antidote to the cynicism of mind: it universalizes the emotions that spring

from instinct, and by universalizing them makes them impervious to mental

criticism.  And  when  thought  is  informed  by  spirit  it  loses  its  cruel,

destructive quality; it no longer promotes the death of instinct, but only its

purification from insistence and ruthlessness and its emancipation from the

prison walls of accidental circumstance. It is instinct that gives force, mind

that  gives  the  means  of  directing  force  to  desired  ends,  and  spirit  that

suggests impersonal uses for force of a kind that thought cannot discredit by

criticism. This is an outline of the parts that instinct, mind, and spirit would

play in a harmonious life.

  Instinct,  mind,  and  spirit  are  each  a  help  to  the  others  when  their

development is free and unvitiated; but when corruption comes into any one

of the three, not only does that one fail, but the others also become poisoned.

All three must grow together. And if they are to grow to their full stature in

any one man or woman, that man or woman must not be isolated, but must be

one of a society where growth is not thwarted and made crooked.

  The life of instinct, when it is unchecked by mind or spirit, consists of

instinctive cycles, which begin with impulses to more or less definite acts,and  pass  on  to  satisfaction  of  needs  through  the  consequences  of  these

impulsive acts. Impulse and desire are not directed towards the whole cycle,

but only towards its initiation: the rest is left to natural causes. We desire to

eat, but we do not desire to be nourished unless we are valetudinarians. Yet

without the nourishment eating is a mere momentary pleasure, not part of the

general impulse to life. Men desire sexual intercourse, but they do not as a

rule desire children strongly or often. Yet without the hope of children and its

occasional realization, sexual intercourse remains for most people an isolated

and separate pleasure, not uniting their personal life with the life of mankind,

not continuous with the central purposes by which they live, and not capable

of bringing that profound sense of fulfilment which comes from completion

by children. Most men, unless the impulse is atrophied through disuse, feel a

desire to create something, great or small according to their capacities. Some

few are able to satisfy this desire: some happy men can create an Empire, a

science, a poem, or a picture. The men of science, who have less difficulty

than  any  others  in  finding  an  outlet  for  creativeness,  are  the  happiest  of

intelligent men in the modern world, since their creative activity affords full

satisfaction to mind and spirit as well as to the instinct of creation.21 In them

a beginning is to be seen of the new way of life which is to be sought; in their

happiness  we  may  perhaps  find  the  germ  of  a  future  happiness  for  all

mankind.  The  rest,  with  few  exceptions,  are  thwarted  in  their  creative

impulses. They cannot build their own house or make their own garden, or

direct their own labor to producing what their free choice would lead them to

produce. In this way the instinct of creation, which should lead on to the life

of mind and spirit, is checked and turned aside. Too often it is turned to

destruction, as the only effective action which remains possible. Out of its

defeat  grows  envy,  and  out  of  envy  grows  the  impulse  to  destroy  the

creativeness of more fortunate men. This is one of the greatest sources of

corruption in the life of instinct.

  The life of instinct is important, not only on its own account, or because of

the direct usefulness of the actions which it inspires, but also because, if it is

unsatisfactory, the individual life becomes detached and separated from the

general life of man. All really profound sense of unity with others depends

upon instinct, upon coöperation or agreement in some instinctive purpose.

This is most obvious in the relations of men and women and parents and

children. But it is true also in wider relations. It is true of large assembliesswayed by a strong common emotion, and even of a whole nation in times of

stress. It is part of what makes the value of religion as a social institution.

Where this feeling is wholly absent, other human beings seem distant and

aloof. Where it is actively thwarted, other human beings become objects of

instinctive hostility. The aloofness or the instinctive hostility may be masked

by religious love, which can be given to all men regardless of their relation to

ourselves. But religious love does not bridge the gulf that parts man from

man: it looks across the gulf, it views others with compassion or impersonal

sympathy, but it does not live with the same life with which they live. Instinct

alone can do this, but only when it is fruitful and sane and direct. To this end

it is necessary that instinctive cycles should be fairly often completed, not

interrupted  in  the  middle  of  their  course.  At  present  they  are  constantly

interrupted, partly by purposes which conflict with them for economic or

other reasons, partly by the pursuit of pleasure, which picks out the most

agreeable part of the cycle and avoids the rest. In this way instinct is robbed

of its importance and seriousness; it becomes incapable of bringing any real

fulfilment, its demands grow more and more excessive, and life becomes no

longer a whole with a single movement, but a series of detached moments,

some  of  them  pleasurable,  most  of  them  full  of  weariness  and

discouragement.

  The life of the mind, although supremely excellent in itself, cannot bring

health into the life of instinct, except when it results in a not too difficult

outlet for the instinct of creation. In other cases it is, as a rule, too widely

separated  from  instinct,  too  detached,  too  destitute  of  inward  growth,  to

afford either a vehicle for instinct or a means of subtilizing and refining it.

Thought is in its essence impersonal and detached, instinct is in its essence

personal and tied to particular circumstances: between the two, unless both

reach a high level, there is a war which is not easily appeased. This is the

fundamental reason for vitalism, futurism, pragmatism, and the various other

philosophies  which  advertise  themselves  as  vigorous  and  virile.  All  these

represent the attempt to find a mode of thought which shall not be hostile to

instinct. The attempt, in itself, is deserving of praise, but the solution offered

is far too facile. What is proposed amounts to a subordination of thought to

instinct, a refusal to allow thought to achieve its own ideal. Thought which

does not rise above what is personal is not thought in any true sense: it is

merely a more or less intelligent use of instinct. It is thought and spirit thatraise man above the level of the brutes. By discarding them we may lose the

proper  excellence  of  men,  but  cannot  acquire  the  excellence  of  animals.

Thought must achieve its full growth before a reconciliation with instinct is

attempted.

  When refined thought and unrefined instinct coexist, as they do in many

intellectual men, the result is a complete disbelief in any important good to be

achieved by the help of instinct. According to their disposition, some such

men will as far as possible discard instinct and become ascetic, while others

will accept it as a necessity, leaving it degraded and separated from all that is

really important in their lives. Either of these courses prevents instinct from

remaining vital, or from being a bond with others; either produces a sense of

physical solitude, a gulf across which the minds and spirits of others may

speak, but not their instincts. To very many men, the instinct of patriotism,

when the war broke out, was the first instinct that had bridged the gulf, the

first  that  had  made  them  feel  a  really  profound  unity  with  others.  This

instinct, just because, in its intense form, it was new and unfamiliar, had

remained uninfected by thought, not paralyzed or devitalized by doubt and

cold detachment. The sense of unity which it brought is capable of being

brought by the instinctive life of more normal times, if thought and spirit are

not hostile to it. And so long as this sense of unity is absent, instinct and spirit

cannot be in harmony, nor can the life of the community have vigor and the

seeds of new growth.

  The life of the mind, because of its detachment, tends to separate a man

inwardly from other men, so long as it is not balanced by the life of the spirit.

For this reason, mind without spirit can render instinct corrupt or atrophied,

but cannot add any excellence to the life of instinct. On this ground, some

men  are  hostile  to  thought.  But  no  good  purpose  is  served  by  trying  to

prevent the growth of thought, which has its own insistence, and if checked in

the directions in which it tends naturally, will turn into other directions where

it is more harmful. And thought is in itself god-like: if the opposition between

thought and instinct were irreconcilable, it would be thought that ought to

conquer. But the opposition is not irreconciliable: all that is necessary is that

both thought and instinct should be informed by the life of the spirit.

  In  order  that  human  life  should  have  vigor,  it  is  necessary  for  the

instinctive  impulses  to  be  strong  and  direct;  but  in  order  that  human  life

should be good, these impulses must be dominated and controlled by desiresless personal and ruthless, less liable to lead to conflict than those that are

inspired  by  instinct  alone.  Something  impersonal  and  universal  is  needed

over and above what springs out of the principle of individual growth. It is

this that is given by the life of the spirit.

  Patriotism  affords  an  example  of  the  kind  of  control  which  is  needed.

Patriotism  is  compounded  out  of  a  number  of  instinctive  feelings  and

impulses: love of home, love of those whose ways and outlook resemble our

own,  the  impulse  to  coöperation  in  a  group,  the  sense  of  pride  in  the

achievements of one’s group. All these impulses and desires, like everything

belonging to the life of instinct, are personal, in the sense that the feelings

and actions which they inspire towards others are determined by the relation

of those others to ourselves, not by what those others are intrinsically. All

these impulses and desires unite to produce a love of man’s own country

which is more deeply implanted in the fiber of his being, and more closely

united to his vital force, than any love not rooted in instinct. But if spirit does

not enter in to generalize love of country, the exclusiveness of instinctive

love makes it a source of hatred of other countries. What spirit can effect is to

make us realize that other countries equally are worthy of love, that the vital

warmth which makes us love our own country reveals to us that it deserves to

be loved, and that only the poverty of our nature prevents us from loving all

countries as we love our own. In this way instinctive love can be extended in

imagination, and a sense of the value of all mankind can grow up, which is

more living and intense than any that is possible to those whose instinctive

love is weak. Mind can only show us that it is irrational to love our own

country best; it can weaken patriotism, but cannot strengthen the love of all

mankind. Spirit alone can do this, by extending and universalizing the love

that is born of instinct. And in doing this it checks and purifies whatever is

insistent or ruthless or oppressively personal in the life of instinct.

  The  same  extension  through  spirit  is  necessary  with  other  instinctive

loves, if they are not to be enfeebled or corrupted by thought. The love of

husband and wife is capable of being a very good thing, and when men and

women  are  sufficiently  primitive  nothing  but  instinct  and  good  fortune  is

needed to make it reach a certain limited perfection. But as thought begins to

assert its right to criticize instinct the old simplicity becomes impossible. The

love of husband and wife, as unchecked instinct leaves it, is too narrow and

personal to stand against the shafts of satire, until it is enriched by the life ofthe spirit. The romantic view of marriage, which our fathers and mothers

professed to believe, will not survive an imaginative peregrination down a

street  of  suburban  villas,  each  containing  its  couple,  each  couple  having

congratulated themselves as they first crossed the threshold, that here they

could love in peace, without interruption from others, without contact with

the cold outside world. The separateness and stuffiness, the fine names for

cowardices and timid vanities, that are shut within the four walls of thousands

upon thousands of little villas, present themselves coldly and mercilessly to

those in whom mind is dominant at the expense of spirit.

  Nothing is good in the life of a human being except the very best that his

nature can achieve. As men advance, things which have been good cease to

be good, merely because something better is possible. So it is with the life of

instinct: for those whose mental life is strong, much that was really good

while mind remained less developed has now become bad merely through the

greater degree of truth in their outlook on the world. The instinctive man in

love feels that his emotion is unique, that the lady of his heart has perfections

such as no other woman ever equaled. The man who has acquired the power

of impersonal thought realizes, when he is in love, that he is one of so many

millions of men who are in love at this moment, that not more than one of all

the millions can be right in thinking his love supreme, and that it is not likely

that that one is oneself. He perceives that the state of being in love in those

whose instinct is unaffected by thought or spirit, is a state of illusion, serving

the ends of Nature and making a man a slave to the life of the species, not a

willing minister to the impersonal ends which he sees to be good. Thought

rejects this slavery; for no end that Nature may have in view will thought

abdicate, or forgo its right to think truly. “Better the world should perish than

that I or any other human being should believe a lie”—this is the religion of

thought, in whose scorching flames the dross of the world is being burnt

away. It is a good religion, and its work of destruction must be completed.

But  it  is  not  all  that  man  has  need  of.  New  growth  must  come  after  the

destruction, and new growth can come only through the spirit.

  Both patriotism and the love of man and woman, when they are merely

instinctive,  have  the  same  defects:  their  exclusions,  their  enclosing  walls,

their  indifference  or  hostility  to  the  outside  world.  It  is  through  this  that

thought is led to satire, that comedy has infected what men used to consider

their holiest feelings. The satire and the comedy are justified, but not thedeath  of  instinct  which  they  may  produce  if  they  remain  in  supreme

command.  They  are  justified,  not  as  the  last  word  of  wisdom  but  as  the

gateway of pain through which men pass to a new life, where instinct is

purified and yet nourished by the deeper desires and insight of spirit.

  The man who has the life of the spirit within him views the love of man

and woman, both in himself and in others, quite differently from the man who

is exclusively dominated by mind. He sees, in his moments of insight, that in

all human beings there is something deserving of love, something mysterious,

something appealing, a cry out of the night, a groping journey, and a possible

victory. When his instinct loves, he welcomes its help in seeing and feeling

the  value  of  the  human  being  whom  he  loves.  Instinct  becomes  a

reinforcement  to  spiritual  insight.  What  instinct  tells  him  spiritual  insight

confirms, however much the mind may be aware of littlenesses, limitations,

and  enclosing  walls  that  prevent  the  spirit  from  shining  forth.  His  spirit

divines in all men what his instinct shows him in the object of his love.

  The love of parents for children has need of the same transformation. The

purely  instinctive  love,  unchecked  by  thought,  uninformed  by  spirit,  is

exclusive, ruthless, and unjust. No benefit to others is felt, by the purely

instinctive parent, to be worth an injury to one’s own children. Honor and

conventional  morality  place  certain  important  practical  limitations  on  the

vicarious selfishness of parents, since a civilized community exacts a certain

minimum before it will give respect. But within the limits allowed by public

opinion,  parental  affection,  when  it  is  merely  instinctive,  will  seek  the

advantage of children without regard to others. Mind can weaken the impulse

to injustice, and diminish the force of instinctive love, but it cannot keep the

whole force of instinctive love and turn it to more universal ends. Spirit can

do this. It can leave the instinctive love of children undimmed, and extend the

poignant  devotion  of  a  parent,  in  imagination,  to  the  whole  world.  And

parental love itself will prompt the parent who has the life of the spirit to give

to his children the sense of justice, the readiness for service, the reverence,

the will that controls self-seeking, which he feels to be a greater good than

any personal success.

  The life of the spirit has suffered in recent times by its association with

traditional religion, by its apparent hostility to the life of the mind, and by the

fact that it has seemed to center in renunciation. The life of the spirit demands

readiness for renunciation when the occasion arises, but is in its essence aspositive and as capable of enriching individual existence as mind and instinct

are. It brings with it the joy of vision, of the mystery and profundity of the

world, of the contemplation of life, and above all the joy of universal love. It

liberates  those  who  have  it  from  the  prison-house  of  insistent  personal

passion  and  mundane  cares.  It  gives  freedom  and  breadth  and  beauty  to

men’s thoughts and feelings, and to all their relations with others. It brings

the solution of doubts, the end of the feeling that all is vanity. It restores

harmony between mind and instinct, and leads the separated unit back into

his place in the life of mankind. For those who have once entered the world

of thought, it is only through spirit that happiness and peace can return.

                                             VIII 

                              WHAT WE CAN DO


        What can we do for the world while we live?

  Many  men  and  women  would  wish  to  serve  mankind,  but  they  are

perplexed and their power seems infinitesimal. Despair seizes them; those

who have the strongest passion suffer most from the sense of impotence, and

are most liable to spiritual ruin through lack of hope.

  So long as we think only of the immediate future, it seems that what we

can do is not much. It is probably impossible for us to bring the war to an

end.  We  cannot  destroy  the  excessive  power  of  the  State  or  of  private

property. We cannot, here and now, bring new life into education. In such

matters, though we may see the evil, we cannot quickly cure it by any of the

ordinary methods of politics. We must recognize that the world is ruled in a

wrong spirit, and that a change of spirit will not come from one day to the

next. Our expectations must not be for to-morrow, but for the time when what

is thought now by a few shall have become the common thought of many. If

we have courage and patience, we can think the thoughts and feel the hopes

by  which,  sooner  or  later,  men  will  be  inspired,  and  weariness  and

discouragement will be turned into energy and ardor. For this reason, the first

thing we have to do is to be clear in our own minds as to the kind of life we

think good and the kind of change that we desire in the world.

  The ultimate power of those whose thought is vital is far greater than it

seems  to  men  who  suffer  from  the  irrationality  of  contemporary  politics.

Religious  toleration  was  once  the  solitary  speculation  of  a  few  bold

philosophers.  Democracy,  as  a  theory,  arose  among  a  handful  of  men  in

Cromwell’s army; by them, after the Restoration, it was carried to America,

where  it  came  to  fruition  in  the  War  of  Independence.  From  America,

Lafayette and the other Frenchmen who fought by the side of Washington

brought the theory of democracy to France, where it united itself with the

teaching of Rousseau and inspired the Revolution. Socialism, whatever we

may think of its merits, is a great and growing power, which is transforming

economic and political life; and socialism owes its origin to a very small

number of isolated theorists. The movement against the subjection of women,

which has become irresistible and is not far from complete triumph, began inthe  same  way  with  a  few  impracticable  idealists—Mary  Wollstonecraft,

Shelley, John Stuart Mill. The power of thought, in the long run, is greater

than any other human power. Those who have the ability to think and the

imagination to think in accordance with men’s needs, are likely to achieve the

good they aim at sooner or later, though probably not while they are still

alive.

  But those who wish to gain the world by thought must be content to lose it

as  a  support  in  the  present.  Most  men  go  through  life  without  much

questioning,  accepting  the  beliefs  and  practices  which  they  find  current,

feeling  that  the  world  will  be  their  ally  if  they  do  not  put  themselves  in

opposition  to  it.  New  thought  about  the  world  is  incompatible  with  this

comfortable  acquiescence;  it  requires  a  certain  intellectual  detachment,  a

certain solitary energy, a power of inwardly dominating the world and the

outlook that the world engenders. Without some willingness to be lonely new

thought cannot be achieved. And it will not be achieved to any purpose if the

loneliness is accompanied by aloofness, so that the wish for union with others

dies, or if intellectual detachment leads to contempt. It is because the state of

mind required is subtle and difficult, because it is hard to be intellectually

detached yet not aloof, that fruitful thought on human affairs is not common,

and that most theorists are either conventional or sterile. The right kind of

thought  is  rare  and  difficult,  but  it  is  not  impotent.  It  is  not  the  fear  of

impotence that need turn us aside from thought if we have the wish to bring

new hope into the world.

  In seeking a political theory which is to be useful at any given moment,

what is wanted is not the invention of a Utopia, but the discovery of the best

direction  of  movement.  The  direction  which  is  good  at  one  time  may  be

superficially very different from that which is good at another time. Useful

thought is that which indicates the right direction for the present time. But in

judging what is the right direction there are two general principles which are

always applicable.

  1.  The  growth  and  vitality  of  individuals  and  communities  is  to  be

promoted as far as possible.

  2. The growth of one individual or one community is to be as little as

possible at the expense of another.

  The second of these principles, as applied by an individual in his dealings

with others, is the principle of reverence, that the life of another has the sameimportance  which  we  feel  in  our  own  life.  As  applied  impersonally  in

politics, it is the principle of liberty, or rather it includes the principle of

liberty as a part. Liberty in itself is a negative principle; it tells us not to

interfere, but does not give any basis for construction. It shows that many

political and social institutions are bad and ought to be swept away, but it

does not show what ought to be put in their place. For this reason a further

principle is required, if our political theory is not to be purely destructive.

  The combination of our two principles is not in practice an easy matter.

Much  of  the  vital  energy  of  the  world  runs  into  channels  which  are

oppressive. The Germans have shown themselves extraordinarily full of vital

energy,  but  unfortunately  in  a  form  which  seems  incompatible  with  the

vitality  of  their  neighbors.  Europe  in  general  has  more  vital  energy  than

Africa, but it has used its energy to drain Africa, through industrialism, of

even such life as the negroes possessed. The vitality of southeastern Europe is

being  drained  to  supply  cheap  labor  for  the  enterprise  of  American

millionaires.  The  vitality  of  men  has  been  in  the  past  a  hindrance  to  the

development of women, and it is possible that in the near future women may

become  a  similar  hindrance  to  men.  For  such  reasons  the  principle  of

reverence, though not in itself sufficient, is of very great importance, and is

able to indicate many of the political changes that the world requires.

  In order that both principles may be capable of being satisfied, what is

needed is a unifying or integration, first of our individual lives, then of the

life of the community and of the world, without sacrifice of individuality.

The  life  of  an  individual,  the  life  of  a  community,  and  even  the  life  of

mankind, ought to be, not a number of separate fragments but in some sense a

whole. When this is the case, the growth of the individual is fostered, and is

not incompatible with the growth of other individuals. In this way the two

principles are brought into harmony.

  What  integrates  an  individual  life  is  a  consistent  creative  purpose  or

unconscious direction. Instinct alone will not suffice to give unity to the life

of  a  civilized  man  or  woman:  there  must  be  some  dominant  object,  an

ambition, a desire for scientific or artistic creation, a religious principle, or

strong  and  lasting  affections.  Unity  of  life  is  very  difficult  for  a  man  or

woman who has suffered a certain kind of defeat, the kind by which what

should have been the dominant impulse is checked and made abortive. Most

professions inflict this kind of defeat upon a man at the very outset. If a manbecomes a journalist, he probably has to write for a newspaper whose politics

he dislikes; this kills his pride in work and his sense of independence. Most

medical  men  find  it  very  hard  to  succeed  without  humbug,  by  which

whatever scientific conscience they may have had is destroyed. Politicians

are obliged, not only to swallow the party program but to pretend to be saints,

in  order  to  conciliate  religious  supporters;  hardly  any  man  can  enter

Parliament without hypocrisy. In no profession is there any respect for the

native pride without which a man cannot remain whole; the world ruthlessly

crushes it out, because it implies independence, and men desire to enslave

others  more  than  they  desire  to  be  free  themselves.  Inward  freedom  is

infinitely precious, and a society which will preserve it is immeasurably to be

desired.

  The principle of growth in a man is not crushed necessarily by preventing

him from doing some definite thing, but it is often crushed by persuading him

to do something else. The things that crush growth are those that produce a

sense of impotence in the directions in which the vital impulse wishes to be

effective. The worst things are those to which the will assents. Often, chiefly

from failure of self-knowledge, a man’s will is on a lower level than his

impulse:  his  impulse  is  towards  some  kind  of  creation,  while  his  will  is

towards a conventional career, with a sufficient income and the respect of his

contemporaries.  The  stereotyped  illustration  is  the  artist  who  produces

shoddy work to please the public. But something of the artist’s definiteness of

impulse exists in very many men who are not artists. Because the impulse is

deep and dumb, because what is called common sense is often against it,

because a young man can only follow it if he is willing to set up his own

obscure  feelings  against  the  wisdom  and  prudent  maxims  of  elders  and

friends, it happens in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred that the creative

impulse, out of which a free and vigorous life might have sprung, is checked

and thwarted at the very outset: the young man consents to become a tool, not

an independent workman; a mere means to the fulfilment of others, not the

artificer of what his own nature feels to be good. In the moment when he

makes this act of consent something dies within him. He can never again

become  a  whole  man,  never  again  have  the  undamaged  self-respect,  the

upright pride, which might have kept him happy in his soul in spite of all

outward troubles and difficulties—except, indeed, through conversion and a

fundamental change in his way of life.  Outward  prohibitions,  to  which  the  will  gives  no  assent,  are  far  less

harmful  than  the  subtler  inducements  which  seduce  the  will.  A  serious

disappointment in love may cause the most poignant pain, but to a vigorous

man  it  will  not  do  the  same  inward  damage  as  is  done  by  marrying  for

money. The achievement of this or that special desire is not what is essential:

what is essential is the direction, the kind of effectiveness which is sought.

When the fundamental impulse is opposed by will, it is made to feel helpless:

it  has  no  longer  enough  hope  to  be  powerful  as  a  motive.  Outward

compulsion does not do the same damage unless it produces the same sense

of impotence; and it will not produce the same sense of impotence if the

impulse  is  strong  and  courageous.  Some  thwarting  of  special  desires  is

unavoidable  even  in  the  best  imaginable  community,  since  some  men’s

desires, unchecked, lead to the oppression or destruction of others. In a good

community  Napoleon  could  not  have  been  allowed  the  profession  of  his

choice, but he might have found happiness as a pioneer in Western America.

He  could  not  have  found  happiness  as  a  City  clerk,  and  no  tolerable

organization of society would compel him to become a City clerk.

  The  integration  of  an  individual  life  requires  that  it  should  embody

whatever creative impulse a man may possess, and that his education should

have  been  such  as  to  elicit  and  fortify  this  impulse.  The  integration  of  a

community requires that the different creative impulses of different men and

women  should  work  together  towards  some  common  life,  some  common

purpose,  not  necessarily  conscious,  in  which  all  the  members  of  the

community find a help to their individual fulfilment. Most of the activities

that  spring  from  vital  impulses  consist  of  two  parts:  one  creative,  which

furthers one’s own life and that of others with the same kind of impulse or

circumstances, and one possessive, which hinders the life of some group with

a different kind of impulse or circumstances. For this reason, much of what is

in  itself  most  vital  may  nevertheless  work  against  life,  as,  for  example,

seventeenth-century  Puritanism  did  in  England,  or  as  nationalism  does

throughout  Europe  at  the  present  day.  Vitality  easily  leads  to  strife  or

oppression, and so to loss of vitality. War, at its outset, integrates the life of a

nation, but it disintegrates the life of the world, and in the long run the life of

a nation too, when it is as severe as the present war.

  The  war  has  made  it  clear  that  it  is  impossible  to  produce  a  secure

integration  of  the  life  of  a  single  community  while  the  relations  betweencivilized countries are governed by aggressiveness and suspicion. For this

reason any really powerful movement of reform will have to be international.

A  merely  national  movement  is  sure  to  fail  through  fear  of  danger  from

without. Those who desire a better world, or even a radical improvement in

their own country, will have to coöperate with those who have similar desires

in other countries, and to devote much of their energy to overcoming that

blind hostility which the war has intensified. It is not in partial integrations,

such as patriotism alone can produce, that any ultimate hope is to be found.

The problem is, in national and international questions as in the individual

life, to keep what is creative in vital impulses, and at the same time to turn

into other channels the part which is at present destructive.

  Men’s impulses and desires may be divided into those that are creative and

those that are possessive. Some of our activities are directed to creating what

would not otherwise exist, others are directed towards acquiring or retaining

what  exists  already.  The  typical  creative  impulse  is  that  of  the  artist;  the

typical possessive impulse is that of property. The best life is that in which

creative impulses play the largest part and possessive impulses the smallest.

The  best  institutions  are  those  which  produce  the  greatest  possible

creativeness and the least possessiveness compatible with self-preservation.

Possessiveness  may  be  defensive  or  aggressive:  in  the  criminal  law  it  is

defensive, and in criminals it is aggressive. It may perhaps be admitted that

the  criminal  law  is  less  abominable  than  the  criminal,  and  that  defensive

possessiveness is unavoidable so long as aggressive possessiveness exists.

But  not  even  the  most  purely  defensive  forms  of  possessiveness  are  in

themselves admirable; indeed, as soon as they are strong they become hostile

to the creative impulses. “Take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or

What shall we drink, or Wherewithal shall we be clothed?” Whoever has

known a strong creative impulse has known the value of this precept in its

exact  and  literal  sense:  it  is  preoccupation  with  possessions,  more  than

anything else, that prevents men from living freely and nobly. The State and

Property are the great embodiments of possessiveness; it is for this reason

that they are against life, and that they issue in war. Possession means taking

or  keeping  some  good  thing  which  another  is  prevented  from  enjoying;

creation means putting into the world a good thing which otherwise no one

would  be  able  to  enjoy.  Since  the  material  goods  of  the  world  must  be

divided among the population, and since some men are by nature brigands,there  must  be  defensive  possession,  which  will  be  regulated,  in  a  good

community, by some principle of impersonal justice. But all this is only the

preface to a good life or good political institutions, in which creation will

altogether  outweigh  possession,  and  distributive  justice  will  exist  as  an

uninteresting matter of course.

  The supreme principle, both in politics and in private life, should be to

promote all that is creative, and so to diminish the impulses and desires that

center round possession. The State at present is very largely an embodiment

of  possessive  impulses:  internally,  it  protects  the  rich  against  the  poor;

externally,  it  uses  force  for  the  exploitation  of  inferior  races,  and  for

competition  with  other  States.  Our  whole  economic  system  is  concerned

exclusively  with  possession;  yet  the  production  of  goods  is  a  form  of

creation,  and  except  in  so  far  as  it  is  irredeemably  mechanical  and

monotonous, it might afford a vehicle for creative impulses. A great deal

might be achieved towards this end by forming the producers of a certain

kind of commodity into an autonomous democracy, subject to State control

as  regards  the  price  of  their  commodity  but  not  as  to  the  manner  of  its

production.

  Education,  marriage,  and  religion  are  essentially  creative,  yet  all  three

have  been  vitiated  by  the  intrusion  of  possessive  motives.  Education  is

usually  treated  as  a  means  of  prolonging  the status  quo  by  instilling

prejudices, rather than of creating free thought and a noble outlook by the

example  of  generous  feeling  and  the  stimulus  of  mental  adventure.  In

marriage,  love,  which  is  creative,  is  kept  in  chains  by  jealousy,  which  is

possessive. Religion, which should set free the creative vision of the spirit, is

usually  more  concerned  to  repress  the  life  of  instinct  and  to  combat  the

subversiveness  of  thought.  In  all  these  ways  the  fear  that  grows  out  of

precarious possession has replaced the hope inspired by creative force. The

wish to plunder others is recognized, in theory, to be bad; but the fear of

being plundered is little better. Yet these two motives between them dominate

nine-tenths of politics and private life.

  The creative impulses in different men are essentially harmonious, since

what one man creates cannot be a hindrance to what another is wishing to

create. It is the possessive impulses that involve conflict. Although, morally

and  politically,  the  creative  and  possessive  impulses  are  opposites,  yet

psychologically either passes easily into the other, according to the accidentsof  circumstance  and  opportunity.  The  genesis  of  impulses  and  the  causes

which  make  them  change  ought  to  be  studied;  education  and  social

institutions  ought  to  be  made  such  as  to  strengthen  the  impulses  which

harmonize in different men, and to weaken those that involve conflict. I have

no doubt that what might be accomplished in this way is almost unlimited.

  It is rather through impulse than through will that individual lives and the

life of the community can derive the strength unity of a single direction. Will

is of two kinds, of which one is directed outward and the other inward. The

first,  which  is  directed  outward,  is  called  into  play  by  external  obstacles,

either the opposition of others or the technical difficulties of an undertaking.

This  kind  of  will  is  an  expression  of  strong  impulse  or  desire,  whenever

instant success is impossible; it exists in all whose life is vigorous, and only

decays when their vital force is enfeebled. It is necessary to success in any

difficult enterprise, and without it great achievement is very rare. But the will

which  is  directed  inward  is  only  necessary  in  so  far  as  there  is  an  inner

conflict of impulses or desires; a perfectly harmonious nature would have no

occasion  for  inward  will.  Such  perfect  harmony  is  of  course  a  scarcely

realizable ideal: in all men impulses arise which are incompatible with their

central purpose, and which must be checked if their life as a whole is not to

be a failure. But this will happen least with those whose central impulses are

strongest; and it will happen less often in a society which aims at freedom

than in a society like ours, which is full of artificial incompatibilities created

by antiquated institutions and a tyrannous public opinion. The power to exert

inward will when the occasion arises must always be needed by those who

wish their lives to embody some central purpose, but with better institutions

the occasions when inward will is necessary might be made fewer and less

important. This result is very much to be desired, because when will checks

impulses which are only accidentally harmful, it diverts a force which might

be spent on overcoming outward obstacles, and if the impulses checked are

strong and serious, it actually diminishes the vital force available. A life full

of  inhibitions  is  likely  not  to  remain  a  very  vigorous  life  but  to  become

listless and without zest. Impulse tends to die when it is constantly held in

check, and if it does not die, it is apt to work underground, and issue in some

form much worse than that in which it has been checked. For these reasons

the necessity for using inward will ought to be avoided as much as possible,

and consistency of action ought to spring rather from consistency of impulsethan from control of impulse by will.

  The unifying of life ought not to demand the suppression of the casual

desires that make amusement and play; on the contrary, everything ought to

be done to make it easy to combine the main purposes of life with all kinds of

pleasure  that  are  not  in  their  nature  harmful.  Such  things  as  habitual

drunkenness, drugs, cruel sports, or pleasure in inflicting pain are essentially

harmful, but most of the amusements that civilized men naturally enjoy are

either not harmful at all or only accidentally harmful through some effect

which might be avoided in a better society. What is needed is, not asceticism

or a drab Puritanism, but capacity for strong impulses and desires directed

towards large creative ends. When such impulses and desires are vigorous,

they bring with them, of themselves, what is needed to make a good life.

  But although amusement and adventure ought to have their share, it is

impossible  to  create  a  good  life  if  they  are  what  is  mainly  desired.

Subjectivism, the habit of directing thought and desire to our own states of

mind rather than to something objective, inevitably makes life fragmentary

and unprogressive. The man to whom amusement is the end of life tends to

lose interest gradually in the things out of which he has been in the habit of

obtaining  amusement,  since  he  does  not  value  these  things  on  their  own

account, but on account of the feelings which they arouse in him. When they

are  no  longer  amusing,  boredom  drives  him  to  seek  some  new  stimulus,

which  fails  him  in  its  turn.  Amusement  consists  in  a  series  of  moments

without any essential continuity; a purpose which unifies life is one which

requires some prolonged activity, and is like building a monument rather than

a child’s castle in the sand.

  Subjectivism has other forms beside the mere pursuit of amusement. Many

men, when they are in love, are more interested in their own emotion than in

the object of their love; such love does not lead to any essential union, but

leaves  fundamental  separateness  undiminished.  As  soon  as  the  emotion

grows less vivid the experience has served its purpose, and there seems no

motive for prolonging it. In another way, the same evil of subjectivism was

fostered by Protestant religion and morality, since they directed attention to

sin and the state of the soul rather than to the outer world and our relations

with it. None of these forms of subjectivism can prevent a man’s life from

being fragmentary and isolated. Only a life which springs out of dominant

impulses  directed  to  objective  ends  can  be  a  satisfactory  whole,  or  beintimately united with the lives of others.

  The  pursuit  of  pleasure  and  the  pursuit  of  virtue  alike  suffer  from

subjectivism: Epicureanism and Stoicism are infected with the same taint.

Marcus Aurelius, enacting good laws in order that he might be virtuous, is

not an attractive figure. Subjectivism is a natural outcome of a life in which

there  is  much  more  thought  than  action:  while  outer  things  are  being

remembered or desired, not actually experienced, they seem to become mere

ideas. What they are in themselves becomes less interesting to us than the

effects  which  they  produce  in  our  own  minds.  Such  a  result  tends  to  be

brought  about  by  increasing  civilization,  because  increasing  civilization

continually  diminishes  the  need  for  vivid  action  and  enhances  the

opportunities for thought. But thought will not have this bad result if it is

active thought, directed towards achieving some purpose; it is only passive

thought  that  leads  to  subjectivism.  What  is  needed  is  to  keep  thought  in

intimate union with impulses and desires, making it always itself an activity

with an objective purpose. Otherwise, thought and impulse become enemies,

to the great detriment of both.

  In order to make the lives of average men and women less fragmentary

and  separate,  and  to  give  greater  opportunity  for  carrying  out  creative

impulses, it is not enough to know the goal we wish to reach, or to proclaim

the excellence of what we desire to achieve. It is necessary to understand the

effect of institutions and beliefs upon the life of impulse, and to discover

ways of improving this effect by a change in institutions. And when this

intellectual work has been done, our thought will still remain barren unless

we can bring it into relation with some powerful political force. The only

powerful political force from which any help is to be expected in bringing

about such changes as seem needed is Labor. The changes required are very

largely such as Labor may be expected to welcome, especially during the

time of hardship after the war. When the war is over, labor discontent is sure

to be very prevalent throughout Europe, and to constitute a political force by

means of which a great and sweeping reconstruction may be effected.

  The civilized world has need of fundamental change if it is to be saved

from decay—change both in its economic structure and in its philosophy of

life. Those of us who feel the need of change must not sit still in dull despair:

we can, if we choose, profoundly influence the future. We can discover and

preach the kind of change that is required—the kind that preserves what ispositive in the vital beliefs of our time, and, by eliminating what is negative

and  inessential,  produces  a  synthesis  to  which  all  that  is  not  purely

reactionary can give allegiance. As soon as it has become clear what kind of

change is required, it will be possible to work out its parts in more detail. But

until the war is ended there is little use in detail, since we do not know what

kind of world the war will leave. The only thing that seems indubitable is that

much new thought will be required in the new world produced by the war.

Traditional views will give little help. It is clear that men’s most important

actions  are  not  guided  by  the  sort  of  motives  that  are  emphasized  in

traditional political philosophies. The impulses by which the war has been

produced  and  sustained  come  out  of  a  deeper  region  than  that  of  most

political argument. And the opposition to the war on the part of those few

who have opposed it comes from the same deep region. A political theory, if

it is to hold in times of stress, must take account of the impulses that underlie

explicit thought: it must appeal to them, and it must discover how to make

them fruitful rather than destructive.

  Economic systems have a great influence in promoting or destroying life.

Except slavery, the present industrial system is the most destructive of life

that has ever existed. Machinery and large-scale production are ineradicable,

and must survive in any better system which is to replace the one under

which we live. Industrial federal democracy is probably the best direction for

reform to take.

  Philosophies of life, when they are widely believed, also have a very great

influence  on  the  vitality  of  a  community.  The  most  widely  accepted

philosophy of life at present is that what matters most to a man’s happiness is

his income. This philosophy, apart from other demerits, is harmful because it

leads men to aim at a result rather than an activity, an enjoyment of material

goods in which men are not differentiated, rather than a creative impulse

which embodies each man’s individuality. More refined philosophies, such as

are instilled by higher education, are too apt to fix attention on the past rather

than the future, and on correct behavior rather than effective action. It is not

in such philosophies that men will find the energy to bear lightly the weight

of tradition and of ever-accumulating knowledge.

  The world has need of a philosophy, or a religion, which will promote life.

But in order to promote life it is necessary to value something other than

mere life. Life devoted only to life is animal without any real human value,incapable of preserving men permanently from weariness and the feeling that

all is vanity. If life is to be fully human it must serve some end which seems,

in some sense, outside human life, some end which is impersonal and above

mankind, such as God or truth or beauty. Those who best promote life do not

have life for their purpose. They aim rather at what seems like a gradual

incarnation,  a  bringing  into  our  human  existence  of  something  eternal,

something that appears to imagination to live in a heaven remote from strife

and failure and the devouring jaws of Time. Contact with this eternal world—

even  if  it  be  only  a  world  of  our  imagining—brings  a  strength  and  a

fundamental peace which cannot be wholly destroyed by the struggles and

apparent failures of our temporal life. It is this happy contemplation of what

is eternal that Spinoza calls the intellectual love of God. To those who have

once known it, it is the key of wisdom.

  What we have to do practically is different for each one of us, according to

our capacities and opportunities. But if we have the life of the spirit within

us, what we must do and what we must avoid will become apparent to us.

  By contact with what is eternal, by devoting our life to bringing something

of the Divine into this troubled world, we can make our own lives creative

even now, even in the midst of the cruelty and strife and hatred that surround

us on every hand. To make the individual life creative is far harder in a

community based on possession than it would be in such a community as

human effort may be able to build up in the future. Those who are to begin

the  regeneration  of  the  world  must  face  loneliness,  opposition,  poverty,

obloquy.  They  must  be  able  to  live  by  truth  and  love,  with  a  rational

unconquerable hope; they must be honest and wise, fearless, and guided by a

consistent purpose. A body of men and women so inspired will conquer—

first the difficulties and perplexities of their individual lives, then, in time,

though perhaps only in a long time, the outer world. Wisdom and hope are

what the world needs; and though it fights against them, it gives its respect to

them in the end.

  When the Goths sacked Rome, St. Augustine wrote the “City of God,”

putting  a  spiritual  hope  in  place  of  the  material  reality  that  had  been

destroyed. Throughout the centuries that followed St. Augustine’s hope lived

and  gave  life,  while  Rome  sank  to  a  village  of  hovels.  For  us,  too,  it  is

necessary to create a new hope, to build up by our thought a better world than

the one which is hurling itself into ruin. Because the times are bad, more isrequired of us than would be required in normal times. Only a supreme fire of

thought and spirit can save future generations from the death that has befallen

the generation which we knew and loved.

  It has been my good fortune to come in contact as a teacher with young

men  of  many  different  nations—young  men  in  whom  hope  was  alive,  in

whom the creative energy existed that would have realized in the world some

part at least of the imagined beauty by which they lived. They have been

swept into the war, some on one side, some on the other. Some are still

fighting, some are maimed for life, some are dead; of those who survive it is

to be feared that many will have lost the life of the spirit, that hope will have

died, that energy will be spent, and that the years to come will be only a

weary journey towards the grave. Of all this tragedy, not a few of those who

teach  seem  to  have  no  feeling:  with  ruthless  logic,  they  prove  that  these

young men have been sacrificed unavoidably for some coldly abstract end;

undisturbed themselves, they lapse quickly into comfort after any momentary

assault of feeling. In such men the life of the spirit is dead. If it were living, it

would go out to meet the spirit in the young, with a love as poignant as the

love of father or mother. It would be unaware of the bounds of self; their

tragedy would be its own. Something would cry out: “No, this is not right;

this is not good; this is not a holy cause, in which the brightness of youth is

destroyed and dimmed. It is we, the old, who have sinned; we have sent these

young men to the battlefield for our evil passions, our spiritual death, our

failure to live generously out of the warmth of the heart and out of the living

vision of the spirit. Let us come out of this death, for it is we who are dead,

not the young men who have died through our fear of life. Their very ghosts

have more life than we: they hold us up for ever to the shame and obloquy of

all the ages to come. Out of their ghosts must come life, and it is we whom

they must vivify.”

      THE END  FOOTNOTES


  1 On this subject compare Bernard Hart’s “Psychology of Insanity”

(Cambridge University Press, 1914), chap. v, especially pp. 62–5.

  2 This was written before Christianity had become punishable by hard

labor, penal servitude, or even death, under the Military Service Act (No. 2).

[Note added in 1916.]

  3 The blasphemy prosecutions.

  4 The syndicalist prosecutions. [The punishment of conscientious

objectors must now be added, 1916.]

  5 In a democratic country it is the majority who must after all rule, and

the minority will be obliged to submit with the best grace possible

(Westminster Gazette on Conscription, December 29, 1915).

  6 Some very strong remarks on the conduct of the “white feather” women

were made by Mr. Reginald Kemp, the Deputy Coroner for West

Middlesex, at an inquest at Ealing on Saturday on Richard Charles Roberts,

aged thirty-four, a taxicab driver, of Shepherd’s Bush, who committed

suicide in consequence of worry caused by his rejection from the Army and

the taunts of women and other amateur recruiters.

  It was stated that he tried to join the Army in October, but was rejected on

    account of a weak heart. That alone, said his widow, had depressed him,

        and he had been worried because he thought he would lose his license

  owing to the state of his heart. He had also been troubled by the dangerous

                                                                      illness of a child.

      A soldier relative said that the deceased’s life had been made “a perfect

    misery” by women who taunted him and called him a coward because he

  did not join the Army. A few days ago two women in Maida Vale insulted

                                                          him “something shocking.”

          The Coroner, speaking with some warmth, said the conduct of such

  women was abominable. It was scandalous that women who knew nothing

            of individual circumstances should be allowed to go about making

unbearable the lives of men who had tried to do their duty. It was a pity they

  had nothing better to do. Here was a man who perhaps had been driven to

death by a pack of silly women. He hoped something would soon be done to

                        put a stop to such conduct (Daily News, July 26, 1915).  7 By England in South Africa, America in the Philippines, France in

Morocco, Italy in Tripoli, Germany in Southwest Africa, Russia in Persia

and Manchuria, Japan in Manchuria.

  8 This was written in 1915.

  9 This would be as true under a syndicalist régime as it is at present.

    10 These changes, which are to be desired on their own account, not only

in order to prevent war, will be discussed in later lectures.

    11 What is said on this subject in the present lecture is only preliminary,

since the subsequent lectures all deal with some aspect of the same

problem.

    12 Except by that small minority who are capable of artistic enjoyment.

    13 Booth’s “Life and Labour of the People,” vol. iii.

    14 As regards the education of young children, Madame Montessori’s

  methods seem to me full of wisdom.

          15



 
              The Teaching of Patriotism. His Majesty’s Approval.

      The King has been graciously pleased to accept a copy of the little book

  containing suggestions to local education authorities and teachers in Wales

    as to the teaching of patriotism which has just been issued by the Welsh

Department of the Board of Education in connection with the observance of

    the National Anniversary of St. David’s Day. His Private Secretary (Lord

  Stamfordham), in writing to Mr. Alfred T. Davies, the Permanent Secretary

    of the Welsh Department, says that his Majesty is much pleased with the

  contents of the book, and trusts that the principles inculcated in it will bear

  good fruit in the lives and characters of the coming generation.—Morning

                                                                Post, January 29, 1916.

    16 What Madame Montessori has achieved in the way of minimizing

  obedience and discipline with advantage to education is almost miraculous.

    17 There was a provision for suits in forma pauperis, but for various

reasons this provision was nearly useless; a new and somewhat better  provision has recently been made, but is still very far from satisfactory.

    18 The following letter (New Statesman, December 4, 1915) illustrates

the nature of his activities:—


                                  Divorce and War.


                      To the Editor of the “New Statesman.”


    Sir
          ,—The following episodes may be of interest to your readers. Under

    the new facilities for divorce offered to the London poor, a poor woman

    recently obtained a decree nisi for divorce against her husband, who had

  often covered her body with bruises, infected her with a dangerous disease,

    and committed bigamy. By this bigamous marriage the husband had ten

    illegitimate children. In order to prevent this decree being made absolute,

    the Treasury spent at least £200 of the taxes in briefing a leading counsel

    and an eminent junior counsel and in bringing about ten witnesses from a

  city a hundred miles away to prove that this woman had committed casual

      acts of adultery in 1895 and 1898. The net result is that this woman will

probably be forced by destitution into further adultery, and that the husband

            will be able to treat his mistress exactly as he treated his wife, with

      impunity, so far as disease is concerned. In nearly every other civilized

    country the marriage would have been dissolved, the children could have

  been legitimated by subsequent marriage, and the lawyers employed by the

Treasury would not have earned the large fees they did from the community

      for an achievement which seems to most other lawyers thoroughly anti-

    social in its effects. If any lawyers really feel that society is benefited by

  this sort of litigation, why cannot they give their services for nothing, like

    the lawyers who assisted the wife? If we are to practise economy in war-

time, why cannot the King’s Proctor be satisfied with a junior counsel only?

    The fact remains that many persons situated like the husband and wife in

        question prefer to avoid having illegitimate children, and the birth-rate

                                                                    accordingly suffers.

    The other episode is this. A divorce was obtained by Mr. A. against Mrs.

    A. and Mr. B. Mr. B. was married and Mrs. B., on hearing of the divorce

  proceedings, obtained a decree nisi against Mr. B. Mr. B. is at any moment

liable to be called to the Front, but Mrs. B. has for some months declined to    make the decree nisi absolute, and this prevents him marrying Mrs. A., as

    he feels in honor bound to do. Yet the law allows any petitioner, male or

    female, to obtain a decree nisi and to refrain from making it absolute for

motives which are probably discreditable. The Divorce Law Commissioners

      strongly condemned this state of things, and the hardship in question is

    immensely aggravated in war-time, just as the war has given rise to many

  cases of bigamy owing to the chivalrous desire of our soldiers to obtain for

the de facto wife and family the separation allowance of the State. The legal

wife is often united by similar ties to another man. I commend these facts to

  consideration in your columns, having regard to your frequent complaints of

        a falling birth-rate. The iniquity of our marriage laws is an important

                                            contributory cause to the fall in question.

Yours, etc.,

  E. S. P. Haynes
                            .

                                      November 29th.

    19 Some interesting facts were given by Mr. Sidney Webb in two letters

to The Times, October 11 and 16, 1906; there is also a Fabian tract on the

  subject: “The Decline in the Birth-Rate,” by Sidney Webb (No. 131). Some

further information may be found in “The Declining Birth-Rate: Its

National and International Significance,” by A. Newsholme, M.D.,

  M.R.C.S. (Cassell, 1911).

    20 The fall in the death-rate, and especially in the infant mortality, which

has occurred concurrently with the fall in the birth-rate, has hitherto been

  sufficiently great to allow the population of Great Britain to go on

  increasing. But there are obvious limits to the fall of the death-rate,

  whereas the birth-rate might easily fall to a point which would make an

actual diminution of numbers unavoidable.

    21 I should add artists but for the fact that most modern artists seem to

find much greater difficulty in creation than men of science usually find.

 

             Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy

                                       Contents

 

  PREFACE

  EDITOR'S NOTE

  CHAPTER I     THE SERIES OF NATURAL NUMBERS

  CHAPTER II     DEFINITION OF NUMBER

  CHAPTER III     FINITUDE AND MATHEMATICAL INDUCTION

  CHAPTER IV     THE DEFINITION OF ORDER

  CHAPTER V     KINDS OF RELATIONS

  CHAPTER VI     SIMILARITY OF RELATIONS

  CHAPTER VII     RATIONAL, REAL, AND COMPLEX NUMBERS

  CHAPTER VIII     INFINITE CARDINAL NUMBERS

  CHAPTER IX     INFINITE SERIES AND ORDINALS

  CHAPTER X     LIMITS AND CONTINUITY

  CHAPTER XI     LIMITS AND CONTINUITY OF FUNCTIONS

  CHAPTER XII     SELECTIONS AND THE MULTIPLICATIVE AXIOM

  CHAPTER XIII     THE AXIOM OF INFINITY AND LOGICAL TYPES

  CHAPTER XIV     INCOMPATIBILITY AND THE THEORY OF 

  DEDUCTION

  CHAPTER XV     PROPOSITIONAL FUNCTIONS

  CHAPTER XVI     DESCRIPTIONS

  CHAPTER XVII     CLASSES

  CHAPTER XVIII     MATHEMATICS AND LOGIC

                                         PREFACE

  THIS book is intended essentially as an "Introduction," and does not aim at giving an exhaustive
discussion of the problems with which it deals. It seemed desirable to set forth certain results, hitherto
only available to those who have mastered logical symbolism, in a form offering the minimum of
difficulty to the beginner. The utmost endeavour has been made to avoid dogmatism on such
questions as are still open to serious doubt, and this endeavour has to some extent dominated the
choice of topics considered. The beginnings of mathematical logic are less definitely known than its
later portions, but are of at least equal philosophical interest. Much of what is set forth in the
following chapters is not properly to be called "philosophy," though the matters concerned were
included in philosophy so long as no satisfactory science of them existed. The nature of infinity and
continuity, for example, belonged in former days to philosophy, but belongs now to mathematics.
Mathematical philosophy, in the strict sense, cannot, perhaps, be held to include such definite
scientific results as have been obtained in this region; the philosophy of mathematics will naturally be
expected to deal with questions on the frontier of knowledge, as to which comparative certainty is not
yet attained. But speculation on such questions is hardly likely to be fruitful unless the more scientific
parts of the principles of mathematics are known. A book dealing with those parts may, therefore,
claim to be an introduction to mathematical philosophy, though it can hardly claim, except where it
steps outside its province,  to be actually dealing with a part of philosophy. It does deal, however, with
a body of knowledge which, to those who accept it, appears to invalidate much traditional philosophy,
and even a good deal of what is current in the present day. In this way, as well as by its bearing on still
unsolved problems, mathematical logic is relevant to philosophy. For this reason, as well as on
account of the intrinsic importance of the subject, some purpose may be served by a succinct account
of the main results of mathematical logic in a form requiring neither a knowledge of mathematics nor
an aptitude for mathematical symbolism. Here, however, as elsewhere, the method is more important
than the results, from the point of view of further research; and the method cannot well be explained
within the framework of such a book as the following. It is to be hoped that some readers may be
sufficiently interested to advance to a study of the method by which mathematical logic can be made
helpful in investigating the traditional problems of philosophy. But that is a topic with which the
following pages have not attempted to deal.

  BERTRAND RUSSELL.

                                   EDITOR'S NOTE

  THOSE who, relying on the distinction between Mathematical Philosophy and the Philosophy of
Mathematics, think that this book is out of place in the present Library, may be referred to what the
author himself says on this head in the Preface. It is not necessary to agree with what he there suggests
as to the readjustment of the field of philosophy by the transference from it to mathematics of such
problems as those of class, continuity, infinity, in order to perceive the bearing of the definitions and
discussions that follow on the work of "traditional philosophy." If philosophers cannot consent to
relegate the criticism of these categories to any of the special sciences, it is essential, at any rate, that
they should know the precise meaning that the science of mathematics, in which these concepts play
so large a part, assigns to them. If, on the other hand, there be mathematicians to whom these
definitions and discussions seem to be an elaboration and complication of the simple, it may be well
to remind them from the side of philosophy that here, as elsewhere, apparent simplicity may conceal a 
complexity which it is the business of somebody, whether philosopher or mathematician, or, like the 
author of this volume, both in one, to unravel.  





                                       CHAPTER I 


              THE SERIES OF NATURAL NUMBERS

    MATHEMATICS is a study which, when we start from its most familiar portions, may be pursued
in either of two opposite directions. The more familiar direction is constructive, towards gradually
increasing complexity: from integers to fractions, real numbers, complex numbers; from addition and
multiplication to differentiation and integration, and on to higher mathematics. The other direction,
which is less familiar, proceeds, by analysing, to greater and greater abstractness and logical
simplicity; instead of asking what can be defined and deduced from what is assumed to begin with, we
ask instead what more general ideas and principles can be found, in terms of which what was our
starting-point can be defined or deduced. It is the fact of pursuing this opposite direction that
characterises mathematical philosophy as opposed to ordinary mathematics. But it should be
understood that the distinction is one, not in the subject matter, but in the state of mind of the
investigator. Early Greek geometers, passing from the empirical rules of Egyptian land-surveying to
the general propositions by which those rules were found to be justifiable, and thence to Euclid's
axioms and postulates, were engaged in mathematical philosophy, according to the above definition;
but when once the axioms and postulates had been reached, their deductive employment, as we find it
in Euclid, belonged to mathematics in the  ordinary sense. The distinction between mathematics and
mathematical philosophy is one which depends upon the interest inspiring the research, and upon the
stage which the research has reached; not upon the propositions with which the research is concerned.

  We may state the same distinction in another way. The most obvious and

easy things in mathematics are not those that come logically at the beginning;

they  are  things  that,  from  the  point  of  view  of  logical  deduction,  come

somewhere in the middle. Just as the easiest bodies to see are those that are

neither very near nor very far, neither very small nor very great, so the easiest

conceptions to grasp are those that are neither very complex nor very simple

(using "simple" in a logical sense). And as we need two sorts of instruments,

the telescope and the microscope, for the enlargement of our visual powers,

so  we  need  two  sorts  of  instruments  for  the  enlargement  of  our  logical

powers, one to take us forward to the higher mathematics, the other to take us

backward to the logical foundations of the things that we are inclined to take

for  granted  in  mathematics.  We  shall  find  that  by  analysing  our  ordinary

mathematical notions we acquire fresh insight, new powers, and the means of

reaching whole new mathematical subjects by adopting fresh lines of advance

after  our  backward  journey.  It  is  the  purpose  of  this  book  to  explain

mathematical philosophy simply and untechnically, without enlarging upon

those portions which are so doubtful or difficult that an elementary treatment

is scarcely possible. A full treatment will be found in Principia Mathematica;

[1] the treatment in the present volume is intended merely as an introduction.

[1]Cambridge University Press, vol. I., 1910; vol. II., 1911; vol. III., 1913.By Whitehead and Russell.

  To the average educated person of the present day, the obvious starting-

point of mathematics would be the series of whole numbers,




  Probably only a person with some mathematical knowledge would think

of beginning with 0 instead of with 1, but we will presume this degree of

knowledge; we will take as our starting-point the series:




  and it is this series that we shall mean when we speak of the "series of

natural numbers."

  It is only at a high stage of civilisation that we could take this series as our

starting-point. It must have required many ages to discover that a brace of

pheasants and a couple of days were both instances of the number 2: the

degree of abstraction involved is far from easy. And the discovery that 1 is a

number must have been difficult. As for 0, it is a very recent addition; the

Greeks  and  Romans  had  no  such  digit.  If  we  had  been  embarking  upon

mathematical philosophy in earlier days, we should have had to start with

something less abstract than the series of natural numbers, which we should

reach as a stage on our backward journey. When the logical foundations of

mathematics have grown more familiar, we shall be able to start further back,

at what is now a late stage in our analysis. But for the moment the natural

numbers seem to represent what is easiest and most familiar in mathematics.

  But  though  familiar,  they  are  not  understood.  Very  few  people  are

prepared with a definition of what is meant by "number," or "0," or "1." It is

not very difficult to see that, starting from 0, any other of the natural numbers

can be reached by repeated additions of 1, but we shall have to define what

we mean by "adding 1," and what we mean by "repeated." These questions

are by no means easy. It was believed until recently that some, at least, of

these first notions of arithmetic must be accepted as too simple and primitive

to be defined. Since all terms that are defined are defined by means of other

terms, it is clear that human knowledge must always be content to accept

some terms as intelligible without definition, in order  to have a starting-point

for its definitions. It is not clear that there must be terms which are incapableof definition: it is possible that, however far back we go in defining, we

always might go further still. On the other hand, it is also possible that, when

analysis  has  been  pushed  far  enough,  we  can  reach  terms  that  really  are

simple, and therefore logically incapable of the sort of definition that consists

in analysing. This is a question which it is not necessary for us to decide; for

our purposes it is sufficient to observe that, since human powers are finite,

the  definitions  known  to  us  must  always  begin  somewhere,  with  terms

undefined for the moment, though perhaps not permanently.

  All traditional pure mathematics, including analytical geometry, may be

regarded as consisting wholly of propositions about the natural numbers. That

is  to  say,  the  terms  which  occur  can  be  defined  by  means  of  the  natural

numbers,  and  the  propositions  can  be  deduced  from  the  properties  of  the

natural  numbers—with  the  addition,  in  each  case,  of  the  ideas  and

propositions of pure logic.

  That  all  traditional  pure  mathematics  can  be  derived  from  the  natural

numbers  is  a  fairly  recent  discovery,  though  it  had  long  been  suspected.

Pythagoras,  who  believed  that  not  only  mathematics,  but  everything  else

could  be  deduced  from  numbers,  was  the  discoverer  of  the  most  serious

obstacle in the way of what is called the "arithmetising" of mathematics. It

was Pythagoras who discovered the existence of incommensurables, and, in

particular, the incommensurability of the side of a square and the diagonal. If

the length of the side is 1 inch, the number of inches in the diagonal is the

square root of 2, which appeared not to be a number at all. The problem thus

raised was solved only in our own day, and was only solved completely by

the help of the reduction of arithmetic to logic, which will be explained in

following  chapters.  For  the  present,  we  shall  take  for  granted  the

arithmetisation of mathematics, though this was a feat of the very greatest 

importance.  

  Having  reduced  all  traditional  pure  mathematics  to  the  theory  of  the

natural numbers, the next step in logical analysis was to reduce this theory

itself to the smallest set of premisses and undefined terms from which it

could be derived. This work was accomplished by Peano. He showed that the

entire theory of the natural numbers could be derived from three primitive

ideas and five primitive propositions in addition to those of pure logic. These

three ideas and five propositions thus became, as it were, hostages for the

whole of traditional pure mathematics. If they could be defined and proved interms of others, so could all pure mathematics. Their logical "weight," if one

may use such an expression, is equal to that of the whole series of sciences

that have been deduced from the theory of the natural numbers; the truth of

this whole series is assured if the truth of the five primitive propositions is

guaranteed, provided, of course, that there is nothing erroneous in the purely

logical apparatus which is also involved. The work of analysing mathematics

is extraordinarily facilitated by this work of Peano's.

  The three primitive ideas in Peano's arithmetic are:




  By "successor" he means the next number in the natural order. That is to

say, the successor of 0 is 1, the successor of 1 is 2, and so on. By "number"

he means, in this connection, the class of the natural numbers.[2] He is not

assuming that we know all the members of this class, but only that we know

what we mean when we say that this or that is a number, just as we know

what we mean when we say "Jones is a man," though we do not know all

men individually.

[2]We shall use "number" in this sense in the present chapter. Afterwards

the word will be used in a more general sense.

  The five primitive propositions which Peano assumes are:

  (1) 0 is a number.

  (2) The successor of any number is a number.

  (3) No two numbers have the same successor.  

  (4) 0 is not the successor of any number.

  (5) Any property which belongs to 0, and also to the successor of every

number which has the property, belongs to all numbers.
  The last of these is the principle of mathematical induction. We shall have much to say concerning
mathematical induction in the sequel; for the present, we are concerned with it only as it occurs in
Peano's analysis of arithmetic.

  Let us consider briefly the kind of way in which the theory of the natural

numbers results from these three ideas and five propositions. To begin with,

we define 1 as "the successor of 0," 2 as "the successor of 1," and so on. We

can obviously go on as long as we like with these definitions, since, in virtue

of (2), every number that we reach will have a successor, and, in virtue of (3),

this cannot be any of the numbers already defined, because, if it were, two

different numbers would have the same successor; and in virtue of (4) noneof the numbers we reach in the series of successors can be 0. Thus the series

of successors gives us an endless series of continually new numbers. In virtue

of (5) all numbers come in this series, which begins with 0 and travels on

through successive successors: for (a) 0 belongs to this series, and (b) if a

number belongs  to  it,  so  does  its  successor,  whence,  by  mathematical

induction, every number belongs to the series.

  Suppose we wish to define the sum of two numbers. Taking any number ,

we define as , and as the successor of . In virtue of (5) this gives a definition

of the sum of and , whatever number may be. Similarly we can define the

product of any two numbers. The reader can easily convince himself that any

ordinary elementary proposition of arithmetic can be proved by means of our

five premisses, and if he has any difficulty he can find the proof in Peano.

  It is time now to turn to the considerations which make it necessary to

advance beyond the standpoint of Peano, who  represents the last perfection

of the "arithmetisation" of mathematics, to that of Frege, who first succeeded

in "logicising" mathematics, i.e. in reducing to logic the arithmetical notions

which his predecessors had shown to be sufficient for mathematics. We shall

not,  in  this  chapter,  actually  give  Frege's  definition  of  number  and  of

particular  numbers,  but  we  shall  give  some  of  the  reasons  why  Peano's

treatment is less final than it appears to be.

  In the first place, Peano's three primitive ideas—namely, "0," "number,"

and  "successor"—are  capable  of  an  infinite  number  of  different

interpretations, all of which will satisfy the five primitive propositions. We

will give some examples.

  (1) Let "0" be taken to mean 100, and let "number" be taken to mean the

numbers from 100 onward in the series of natural numbers. Then all our

primitive propositions are satisfied, even the fourth, for, though 100 is the

successor of 99, 99 is not a "number" in the sense which we are now giving

to the word "number." It is obvious that any number may be substituted for

100 in this example.

  (2)  Let  "0"  have  its  usual  meaning,  but  let  "number"  mean  what  we

usually call "even numbers," and let the "successor" of a number be what

results from adding two to it. Then "1" will stand for the number two, "2" will

stand for the number four, and so on; the series of "numbers" now will be  All Peano's five premisses are satisfied still.

  (3) Let "0" mean the number one, let "number" mean the set


  and let "successor" mean "half." Then all Peano's five axioms will be true

of this set.

  It is clear that such examples might be multiplied indefinitely. In fact,

given any series




  which  is  endless,  contains  no  repetitions,  has  a  beginning,  and  has  no

terms that cannot be reached from the beginning in a finite number of steps,

we have a set of terms verifying Peano's axioms. This is easily seen, though

the formal proof is somewhat long. Let "0" mean , let "number" mean the

whole set of terms, and let the "successor" of mean . Then

  (1) "0 is a number," i.e. is a member of the set.

  (2) "The successor of any number is a number," i.e. taking any term in the

set, is also in the set.

  (3)  "No  two  numbers  have  the  same  successor," i.e.  if and are  two

different members of the set, and are different; this results from the fact that

(by hypothesis) there are no repetitions in the set.

  (4) "0 is not the successor of any number," i.e. no term in the set comes

before .

  (5)  This  becomes:  Any  property  which  belongs  to ,  and  belongs  to

provided it belongs to , belongs to all the 's.

  This follows from the corresponding property for numbers.

  A series of the form




  in which there is a first term, a successor to each term (so that there is no

last term), no repetitions, and every term can be reached from the start in a

finite  number  of  steps,  is  called  a progression.  Progressions  are  of  great

importance in the principles of mathematics. As we have just seen, every

progression verifies Peano's five axioms. It can be proved, conversely, that

every series which verifies Peano's five axioms is a progression. Hence these

five axioms may be used to define the class of progressions: "progressions"are "those series which verify these five axioms." Any progression may be

taken as the basis of pure mathematics: we may give the name "0" to its first

term,  the  name  "number"  to  the  whole  set  of  its  terms,  and  the  name

"successor"  to  the  next  in  the  progression.  The  progression  need  not  be

composed of numbers: it may be  composed of points in space, or moments

of time, or any other terms of which there is an infinite supply. Each different

progression will give rise to a different interpretation of all the propositions

of  traditional  pure  mathematics;  all  these  possible  interpretations  will  be

equally true.

  In Peano's system there is nothing to enable us to distinguish between

these different interpretations of his primitive ideas. It is assumed that we

know what is meant by "0," and that we shall not suppose that this symbol

means 100 or Cleopatra's Needle or any of the other things that it might

mean.

  This point, that "0" and "number" and "successor" cannot be defined by

means  of  Peano's  five  axioms,  but  must  be  independently  understood,  is

important. We want our numbers not merely to verify mathematical formulæ,

but to apply in the right way to common objects. We want to have ten fingers

and two eyes and one nose. A system in which "1" meant 100, and "2" meant

101, and so on, might be all right for pure mathematics, but would not suit

daily  life.  We  want  "0"  and  "number"  and  "successor"  to  have  meanings

which will give us the right allowance of fingers and eyes and noses. We

have already some knowledge (though not sufficiently articulate or analytic)

of  what  we  mean  by  "1"  and  "2"  and  so  on,  and  our  use  of  numbers  in

arithmetic must conform to this knowledge. We cannot secure that this shall

be the case by Peano's method; all that we can do, if we adopt his method, is

to say "we know what we mean by '0' and 'number' and 'successor,' though

we cannot explain what we mean in terms of other simpler concepts." It is

quite legitimate to say this when we must, and at some point we all must; but

it is the object of mathematical philosophy to put off saying it as long as

possible. By the logical theory of arithmetic we are able to put it off for a

very long time.

  It might be suggested that, instead of setting up "0" and "number" and

"successor" as terms of which we know the meaning although we cannot

define them, we might let them  stand for any three terms that verify Peano's

five axioms. They will then no longer be terms which have a meaning that isdefinite though undefined: they will be "variables," terms concerning which

we make certain hypotheses, namely, those stated in the five axioms, but

which are otherwise undetermined. If we adopt this plan, our theorems will

not  be  proved  concerning  an  ascertained  set  of  terms  called  "the  natural

numbers," but concerning all sets of terms having certain properties. Such a

procedure  is  not  fallacious;  indeed  for  certain  purposes  it  represents  a

valuable  generalisation.  But  from  two  points  of  view  it  fails  to  give  an

adequate basis for arithmetic. In the first place, it does not enable us to know

whether there are any sets of terms verifying Peano's axioms; it does not even

give the faintest suggestion of any way of discovering whether there are such

sets. In the second place, as already observed, we want our numbers to be

such as can be used for counting common objects, and this requires that our

numbers should have a definite meaning, not merely that they should have 

certain formal properties. This definite meaning is defined by the logical 

theory of arithmetic.                                      CHAPTER II 


                        DEFINITION OF NUMBER

  THE question "What is a number?" is one which has been often asked, but has only been correctly
answered in our own time. The answer was given by Frege in 1884, in his Grundlagen der Arithmetik.
[3] Although this book is quite short, not difficult, and of the very highest importance, it attracted
almost no attention, and the definition of number which it contains remained practically unknown
until it was rediscovered by the present author in 1901.

[3]The same answer is given more fully and with more development in his

Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, vol. I., 1893.

  In seeking a definition of number, the first thing to be clear about is what

we  may  call  the  grammar  of  our  inquiry.  Many  philosophers,  when

attempting to define number, are really setting to work to define plurality,

which is quite a different thing. Number is what is characteristic of numbers,

as man is what is characteristic of men. A plurality is not an instance of

number, but of some particular number. A trio of men, for example, is an

instance of the number 3, and the number 3 is an instance of number; but the

trio  is  not  an  instance  of  number.  This  point  may  seem  elementary  and

scarcely worth mentioning; yet it has proved too subtle for the philosophers,

with few exceptions.

  A particular number is not identical with any collection of terms having

that number: the number 3 is not identical with  the trio consisting of Brown,

Jones, and Robinson. The number 3 is something which all trios have in

common, and which distinguishes them from other collections. A number is

something that characterises certain collections, namely, those that have that

number.

  Instead of speaking of a "collection," we shall as a rule speak of a "class,"

or sometimes a "set." Other words used in mathematics for the same thing are

"aggregate"  and  "manifold."  We  shall  have  much  to  say  later  on  about

classes. For the present, we will say as little as possible. But there are some

remarks that must be made immediately.

  A class or collection may be defined in two ways that at first sight seem

quite  distinct.  We  may  enumerate  its  members,  as  when  we  say,  "The

collection I mean is Brown, Jones, and Robinson." Or we may mention a

defining property, as when we speak of "mankind" or "the inhabitants of

London."  The  definition  which  enumerates  is  called  a  definition  by

"extension,"  and  the  one  which  mentions  a  defining  property  is  called  adefinition  by  "intension."  Of  these  two  kinds  of  definition,  the  one  by

intension  is  logically  more  fundamental.  This  is  shown  by  two

considerations: (1) that the extensional definition can always be reduced to an

intensional one; (2) that the intensional one often cannot even theoretically be

reduced  to  the  extensional  one.  Each  of  these  points  needs  a  word  of

explanation.

  (1) Brown, Jones, and Robinson all of them possess a certain property

which  is  possessed  by  nothing  else  in  the  whole  universe,  namely,  the

property of being either Brown or Jones or Robinson. This property can be

used to give a definition by intension of the class consisting of Brown and

Jones and Robinson. Consider such a formula as " is Brown or is Jones or is

Robinson." This formula will be true for just three 's, namely, Brown and

Jones and Robinson. In this respect it resembles a cubic equation with its

three roots. It may be taken as assigning a property common to the members

of the class consisting of these three  men, and peculiar to them. A similar

treatment can obviously be applied to any other class given in extension.

  (2) It is obvious that in practice we can often know a great deal about a

class  without  being  able  to  enumerate  its  members.  No  one  man  could

actually enumerate all men, or even all the inhabitants of London, yet a great

deal  is  known  about  each  of  these  classes.  This  is  enough  to  show  that

definition  by  extension  is  not necessary  to  knowledge  about  a  class.  But

when we come to consider infinite classes, we find that enumeration is not

even theoretically possible for beings who only live for a finite time. We

cannot enumerate all the natural numbers: they are 0, 1, 2, 3, and so on. At

some  point  we  must  content  ourselves  with  "and  so  on."  We  cannot

enumerate all fractions or all irrational numbers, or all of any other infinite

collection. Thus our knowledge in regard to all such collections can only be

derived from a definition by intension.

  These remarks are relevant, when we are seeking the definition of number,

in three different ways. In the first place, numbers themselves form an infinite

collection, and cannot therefore be defined by enumeration. In the second

place, the collections having a given number of terms themselves presumably

form an infinite collection: it is to be presumed, for example, that there are an

infinite collection of trios in the world, for if this were not the case the total

number of things in the world would be finite, which, though possible, seems

unlikely. In the third place, we wish to define "number" in such a way thatinfinite  numbers  may  be  possible;  thus  we  must  be  able  to  speak  of  the

number  of  terms  in  an  infinite  collection,  and  such  a  collection  must  be

defined  by  intension, i.e.  by  a  property  common  to  all  its  members  and

peculiar to them.

  For  many  purposes,  a  class  and  a  defining  characteristic  of  it  are

practically interchangeable. The vital difference between the two consists in

the fact that there is only one class having a given set of members, whereas

there are always many different characteristics by which a given class may be

defined. Men  may be defined as featherless bipeds, or as rational animals, or

(more correctly) by the traits by which Swift delineates the Yahoos. It is this

fact that a defining characteristic is never unique which makes classes useful;

otherwise we could be content with the properties common and peculiar to

their members.[4] Any one of these properties can be used in place of the

class whenever uniqueness is not important.

[4]As will be explained later, classes may be regarded as logical fictions,

manufactured out of defining characteristics. But for the present it will

simplify our exposition to treat classes as if they were real.

  Returning now to the definition of number, it is clear that number is a way

of  bringing  together  certain  collections,  namely,  those  that  have  a  given

number  of  terms.  We  can  suppose  all  couples  in  one  bundle,  all  trios  in

another, and so on. In this way we obtain various bundles of collections, each

bundle consisting of all the collections that have a certain number of terms.

Each bundle is a class whose members are collections, i.e. classes; thus each

is a class of classes. The bundle consisting of all couples, for example, is a

class of classes: each couple is a class with two members, and the whole

bundle of couples is a class with an infinite number of members, each of

which is a class of two members.

  How shall we decide whether two collections are to belong to the same

bundle? The answer that suggests itself is: "Find out how many members

each has, and put them in the same bundle if they have the same number of

members." But this presupposes that we have defined numbers, and that we

know how to discover how many terms a collection has. We are so used to

the  operation  of  counting  that  such  a  presupposition  might  easily  pass

unnoticed. In fact, however, counting, though familiar, is logically a very

complex operation; moreover it is only available, as a means of discovering

how many terms a collection has, when the collection is finite. Our definitionof number must not assume in advance that all numbers are finite; and we

cannot in any case, without a vicious circle,  use counting to define numbers,

because  numbers  are  used  in  counting.  We  need,  therefore,  some  other

method of deciding when two collections have the same number of terms.

  In actual fact, it is simpler logically to find out whether two collections

have the same number of terms than it is to define what that number is. An

illustration  will  make  this  clear.  If  there  were  no  polygamy  or  polyandry

anywhere in the world, it is clear that the number of husbands living at any

moment would be exactly the same as the number of wives. We do not need a

census to assure us of this, nor do we need to know what is the actual number

of husbands and of wives. We know the number must be the same in both

collections,  because  each  husband  has  one  wife  and  each  wife  has  one

husband. The relation of husband and wife is what is called "one-one."

  A relation is said to be "one-one" when, if has the relation in question to ,

no other term ' has the same relation to , and does not have the same relation

to any term ' other than . When only the first of these two conditions is

fulfilled, the relation is called "one-many"; when only the second is fulfilled,

it is called "many-one." It should be observed that the number 1 is not used in

these definitions.

  In  Christian  countries,  the  relation  of  husband  to  wife  is  one-one;  in

Mahometan countries it is one-many; in Tibet it is many-one. The relation of

father to son is one-many; that of son to father is many-one, but that of eldest

son to father is one-one. If is any number, the relation of to is one-one; so is

the relation of to or to . When we are considering only positive numbers, the

relation of to is one-one; but when negative numbers are admitted, it becomes

two-one, since and have the same square. These instances should suffice to

make clear the notions of one-one, one-many, and many-one relations, which

play a great part in the principles of mathematics, not only in relation to the

definition of numbers, but in many other connections.

  Two classes are said to be "similar" when there is a one-one  relation

which correlates the terms of the one class each with one term of the other

class,  in  the  same  manner  in  which  the  relation  of  marriage  correlates

husbands with wives. A few preliminary definitions will help us to state this

definition more precisely. The class of those terms that have a given relation

to something or other is called the domain of that relation: thus fathers are the

domain of the relation of father to child, husbands are the domain of therelation of husband to wife, wives are the domain of the relation of wife to

husband, and husbands and wives together are the domain of the relation of

marriage.  The  relation  of  wife  to  husband  is  called  the converse  of  the

relation of husband to wife. Similarly less is the converse of greater, later is

the converse of earlier, and so on. Generally, the converse of a given relation

is that relation which holds between and whenever the given relation holds

between and .  The converse  domain  of  a  relation  is  the  domain  of  its

converse: thus the class of wives is the converse domain of the relation of

husband to wife. We may now state our definition of similarity as follows:—

          One	 class	 is	 said	 to	 be	 "similar"	 to	 another	 when	 there	 is	 a	 one-one

    relation	 of	 which	 the	 one	 class	 is	 the	 domain,	 while	 the	 other	 is	 the

converse	domain.

  It is easy to prove (1) that every class is similar to itself, (2) that if a class

is similar to a class , then is similar to , (3) that if is similar to and to , then is

similar to . A relation is said to be reflexive when it possesses the first of

these properties, symmetrical when it possesses the second, and transitive

when it possesses the third. It is obvious that a relation which is symmetrical

and  transitive  must  be  reflexive  throughout  its  domain.  Relations  which

possess these properties are an important kind, and it is worth while to note

that similarity is one of this kind of relations.

  It  is  obvious  to  common  sense  that  two  finite  classes  have  the  same

number of terms if they are similar, but not otherwise. The act of counting

consists  in  establishing  a  one-one correlation  between  the  set  of  objects

counted  and  the  natural  numbers  (excluding  0)  that  are  used  up  in  the

process. Accordingly common sense concludes that there are as many objects

in the set to be counted as there are numbers up to the last number used in the

counting. And we also know that, so long as we confine ourselves to finite

numbers, there are just numbers from 1 up to . Hence it follows that the last

number used in counting a collection is the number of terms in the collection,

provided the collection is finite. But this result, besides being only applicable

to  finite  collections,  depends  upon  and  assumes  the  fact  that  two  classes

which are similar have the same number of terms; for what we do when we

count (say) 10 objects is to show that the set of these objects is similar to the

set of numbers 1 to 10. The notion of similarity is logically presupposed in

the operation of counting, and is logically simpler though less familiar. Incounting, it is necessary to take the objects counted in a certain order, as first,

second, third, etc., but order is not of the essence of number: it is an irrelevant

addition, an unnecessary complication from the logical point of view. The

notion of similarity does not demand an order: for example, we saw that the

number of husbands is the same as the number of wives, without having to

establish an order of precedence among them. The notion of similarity also

does not require that the classes which are similar should be finite. Take, for

example,  the  natural  numbers  (excluding  0)  on  the  one  hand,  and  the

fractions which have 1 for their numerator on the other hand: it is obvious

that we can correlate 2 with , 3 with , and so on, thus proving that the two

classes are similar.

  We may thus use the notion of "similarity" to decide when two collections

are to belong to the same bundle, in the sense in which we were asking this

question earlier in this chapter. We want to make one bundle containing the

class that has no members: this will be for the number 0. Then we want a

bundle of all the classes that have one member: this will be for the number 1.

Then, for the number 2, we want a bundle consisting  of all couples; then one

of all trios; and so on. Given any collection, we can define the bundle it is to

belong to as being the class of all those collections that are "similar" to it. It is

very easy to see that if (for example) a collection has three members, the

class of all those collections that are similar to it will be the class of trios.

And whatever number of terms a collection may have, those collections that

are "similar" to it will have the same number of terms. We may take this as a

definition of "having the same number of terms." It is obvious that it gives

results  conformable  to  usage  so  long  as  we  confine  ourselves  to  finite

collections.

  So far we have not suggested anything in the slightest degree paradoxical.

But when we come to the actual definition of numbers we cannot avoid what

must at first sight seem a paradox, though this impression will soon wear off.

We  naturally  think  that  the  class  of  couples  (for  example)  is  something

different from the number 2. But there is no doubt about the class of couples:

it is indubitable and not difficult to define, whereas the number 2, in any

other sense, is a metaphysical entity about which we can never feel sure that

it exists or that we have tracked it down. It is therefore more prudent to

content ourselves with the class of couples, which we are sure of, than to hunt

for a problematical number 2 which must always remain elusive. Accordinglywe set up the following definition:—

        The	number	of	a	class	is	the	class	of	all	those	classes	that	are	similar	to	it.

  Thus the number of a couple will be the class of all couples. In fact, the

class of all couples will be the number 2, according to our definition. At the

expense  of  a  little  oddity,  this  definition  secures  definiteness  and

indubitableness; and it is not difficult to prove that numbers so defined have

all the properties that we expect numbers to have.

  We may now go on to define numbers in general as any one of the bundles

into which similarity collects classes. A number will be a set of classes such

as that any two are similar to each  other, and none outside the set are similar

to any inside the set. In other words, a number (in general) is any collection

which is the number of one of its members; or, more simply still:

      A	number	is	anything	which	is	the	number	of	some	class.

  Such a definition has a verbal appearance of being circular, but in fact it is

not. We define "the number of a given class" without using the notion of

number in general; therefore we may define number in general in terms of

"the number of a given class" without committing any logical error.

  Definitions of this sort are in fact very common. The class of fathers, for

example, would have to be defined by first defining what it is to be the father

of somebody; then the class of fathers will be all those who are somebody's

father. Similarly if we want to define square numbers (say), we must first

define what we mean by saying that one number is the square of another, and

then define square numbers as those that are the squares of other numbers.

This kind of procedure is very common, and it is important to realise that it is

legitimate and even often necessary.

  We have now given a definition of numbers which will serve for finite 

collections. It remains to be seen how it will serve for infinite collections. But 

first we must decide what we mean by "finite" and "infinite," which cannot 

be done within the limits of the present chapter.                                      CHAPTER III 


        FINITUDE AND MATHEMATICAL INDUCTION

  THE series of natural numbers, as we saw in Chapter I., can all be defined if we know what we
mean by the three terms "0," "number," and "successor." But we may go a step farther: we can define
all the natural numbers if we know what we mean by "0" and "successor." It will help us to understand
the difference between finite and infinite to see how this can be done, and why the method by which it
is done cannot be extended beyond the finite. We will not yet consider how "0" and "successor" are to
be defined: we will for the moment assume that we know what these terms mean, and show how
thence all other natural numbers can be obtained.

  It is easy to see that we can reach any assigned number, say 30,000. We

first define "1" as "the successor of 0," then we define "2" as "the successor

of 1," and so on. In the case of an assigned number, such as 30,000, the proof

that we can reach it by proceeding step by step in this fashion may be made,

if we have the patience, by actual experiment: we can go on until we actually

arrive at 30,000. But although the method of experiment is available for each

particular  natural  number,  it  is  not  available  for  proving  the  general

proposition  that all  such  numbers  can  be  reached  in  this  way, i.e.  by

proceeding from 0 step by step from each number to its successor. Is there

any other way by which this can be proved?

  Let us consider the question the other way round. What are the numbers

that can be reached, given the terms "0" and  "successor"? Is there any way

by which we can define the whole class of such numbers? We reach 1, as the

successor of 0; 2, as the successor of 1; 3, as the successor of 2; and so on. It

is this "and so on" that we wish to replace by something less vague and

indefinite.  We  might  be  tempted  to  say  that  "and  so  on"  means  that  the

process of proceeding to the successor may be repeated any finite number of

times; but the problem upon which we are engaged is the problem of defining

"finite number," and therefore we must not use this notion in our definition.

Our definition must not assume that we know what a finite number is.

  The  key  to  our  problem  lies  in mathematical  induction.  It  will  be

remembered  that,  in  Chapter  I.,  this  was  the  fifth  of  the  five  primitive

propositions which we laid down about the natural numbers. It stated that any

property which belongs to 0, and to the successor of any number which has

the property, belongs to all the natural numbers. This was then presented as a

principle, but we shall now adopt it as a definition. It is not difficult to see

that the terms obeying it are the same as the numbers that can be reachedfrom 0 by successive steps from next to next, but as the point is important we

will set forth the matter in some detail.

  We shall do well to begin with some definitions, which will be useful in

other connections also.

  A  property  is  said  to  be  "hereditary"  in  the  natural-number  series  if,

whenever it belongs to a number , it also belongs to , the successor of .

Similarly a class is said to be "hereditary" if, whenever is a member of the

class, so is . It is easy to see, though we are not yet supposed to know, that to

say a property is hereditary is equivalent to saying that it belongs to all the

natural numbers not less than some one of them, e.g. it must belong to all that

are not less than 100, or all that are less than 1000, or it may be that it

belongs to all that are not less than 0, i.e. to all without exception.

  A property is said to be "inductive" when it is a hereditary  property which

belongs to 0. Similarly a class is "inductive" when it is a hereditary class of

which 0 is a member.

  Given a hereditary class of which 0 is a member, it follows that 1 is a

member  of  it,  because  a  hereditary  class  contains  the  successors  of  its

members, and 1 is the successor of 0. Similarly, given a hereditary class of

which 1 is a member, it follows that 2 is a member of it; and so on. Thus we

can prove by a step-by-step procedure that any assigned natural number, say

30,000, is a member of every inductive class.

  We will define the "posterity" of a given natural number with respect to

the relation "immediate predecessor" (which is the converse of "successor")

as all those terms that belong to every hereditary class to which the given

number belongs. It is again easy to see that the posterity of a natural number

consists of itself and all greater natural numbers; but this also we do not yet

officially know.

  By the above definitions, the posterity of 0 will consist of those terms

which belong to every inductive class.

  It is now not difficult to make it obvious that the posterity of 0 is the same

set as those terms that can be reached from 0 by successive steps from next to

next. For, in the first place, 0 belongs to both these sets (in the sense in which

we have defined our terms); in the second place, if belongs to both sets, so

does . It is to be observed that we are dealing here with the kind of matter that

does not admit of precise proof, namely, the comparison of a relatively vague

idea with a relatively precise one. The notion of "those terms that can bereached from 0 by successive steps from next to next" is vague, though it

seems as if it conveyed a definite meaning; on the other hand, "the posterity

of 0" is precise and explicit just where the other idea is hazy. It may be taken

as giving what we meant to mean when we spoke of the terms that can be

reached from 0 by successive steps.

  We now lay down the following definition:—

        The	"natural	numbers"	are	the	posterity	of	0	with	respect	to	the		relation

"immediate	predecessor" (which is the converse of "successor").

  We have thus arrived at a definition of one of Peano's three primitive ideas

in terms of the other two. As a result of this definition, two of his primitive

propositions—namely,  the  one  asserting  that  0  is  a  number  and  the  one

asserting  mathematical  induction—become  unnecessary,  since  they  result

from the definition. The one asserting that the successor of a natural number

is  a  natural  number  is  only  needed  in  the  weakened  form  "every  natural

number has a successor."

  We can, of course, easily define "0" and "successor" by means of the

definition  of  number  in  general  which  we  arrived  at  in  Chapter  II.  The

number 0 is the number of terms in a class which has no members, i.e. in the

class which is called the "null-class." By the general definition of number, the

number of terms in the null-class is the set of all classes similar to the null-

class, i.e. (as is easily proved) the set consisting of the null-class all alone, i.e.

the class whose only member is the null-class. (This is not identical with the

null-class: it has one member, namely, the null-class, whereas the null-class

itself has no members. A class which has one member is never identical with

that one member, as we shall explain when we come to the theory of classes.)

Thus we have the following purely logical definition:—

        0	is	the	class	whose	only	member	is	the	null-class.

  It remains to define "successor." Given any number , let be a class which

has members, and let be a term which is not a member of . Then the class

consisting of with added on will have members. Thus we have the following

definition:—

      The	successor	of	the	number	of	terms	in	the	class	is	the	number	of	terms

        in	the	class	consisting	of	a	together	with	,	where	is	any	term	not	belonging

to	the	class.

  Certain niceties are required to make this definition perfect, but they neednot concern us.[5] It will be remembered that we  have already given (in 

Chapter II.) a logical definition of the number of terms in a class, namely, we 

defined it as the set of all classes that are similar to the given class. 

[5]See Principia Mathematica, vol. II. * 110.

  We have thus reduced Peano's three primitive ideas to ideas of logic: we

have given definitions of them which make them definite, no longer capable

of  an  infinity  of  different  meanings,  as  they  were  when  they  were  only

determinate to the extent of obeying Peano's five axioms. We have removed

them  from  the  fundamental  apparatus  of  terms  that  must  be  merely

apprehended,  and  have  thus  increased  the  deductive  articulation  of

mathematics.

  As regards the five primitive propositions, we have already succeeded in

making two of them demonstrable by our definition of "natural number."

How stands it with the remaining three? It is very easy to prove that 0 is not

the  successor  of  any  number,  and  that  the  successor  of  any  number  is  a

number. But there is a difficulty about the remaining primitive proposition,

namely, "no two numbers have the same successor." The difficulty does not

arise unless the total number of individuals in the universe is finite; for given

two numbers and , neither of which is the total number of individuals in the

universe, it is easy to prove that we cannot have unless we have . But let us

suppose that the total number of individuals in the universe were (say) 10;

then there would be no class of 11 individuals, and the number 11 would be

the  null-class.  So  would  the  number  12.  Thus  we  should  have  11  =  12;

therefore  the  successor  of  10  would  be  the  same  as  the  successor  of  11,

although 10 would not be the same as 11. Thus we should have two different

numbers  with  the  same  successor.  This  failure  of  the  third  axiom  cannot

arise, however, if the number of individuals in the world is not finite. We

shall return to this topic at a later stage.[6]

[6]See Chapter XIII.

  Assuming that the number of individuals in the universe is not finite, we

have now succeeded not only in defining Peano's  three primitive ideas, but in

seeing how to prove his five primitive propositions, by means of primitive

ideas  and  propositions  belonging  to  logic.  It  follows  that  all  pure

mathematics,  in  so  far  as  it  is  deducible  from  the  theory  of  the  natural

numbers, is only a prolongation of logic. The extension of this result to those

modern branches of mathematics which are not deducible from the theory ofthe  natural  numbers  offers  no  difficulty  of  principle,  as  we  have  shown

elsewhere.[7]

[7]For geometry, in so far as it is not purely analytical, see Principles of

Mathematics, part VI.; for rational dynamics, ibid., part VII.

  The process of mathematical induction, by means of which we defined the

natural numbers, is capable of generalisation. We defined the natural numbers

as  the  "posterity"  of  0  with  respect  to  the  relation  of  a  number  to  its

immediate  successor.  If  we  call  this  relation , any number will have this

relation  to .  A  property  is  "hereditary  with  respect  to ,"  or  simply  " -

hereditary," if, whenever the property belongs to a number , it also belongs to

, i.e. to the number to which has the relation . And a number will be said to

belong  to  the  "posterity"  of with  respect  to  the  relation if has  every -

hereditary property belonging to . These definitions can all be applied to any

other relation just as well as to . Thus if is any relation whatever, we can lay

down the following definitions:[8]—

[8]These definitions, and the generalised theory of induction, are due to

Frege, and were published so long ago as 1879 in his Begriffsschrift. In spite

of the great value of this work, I was, I believe, the first person who ever read

it—more than twenty years after its publication.

  A property is called " -hereditary" when, if it belongs to a term , and has

the relation to , then it belongs to .

  A class is -hereditary when its defining property is -hereditary.

  A term is said to be an " -ancestor" of the term if has every -hereditary

property that has, provided is a term which has the relation to something or to

which something has the relation . (This is only to exclude trivial cases.)  

  The " -posterity" of is all the terms of which is an -ancestor.

  We have framed the above definitions so that if a term is the ancestor of

anything it is its own ancestor and belongs to its own posterity. This is merely

for convenience.

  It will be observed that if we take for the relation "parent," "ancestor" and

"posterity"  will  have  the  usual  meanings,  except  that  a  person  will  be

included among his own ancestors and posterity. It is, of course, obvious at

once that "ancestor" must be capable of definition in terms of "parent," but

until Frege developed his generalised theory of induction, no one could have

defined "ancestor" precisely in terms of "parent." A brief consideration of this

point will serve to show the importance of the theory. A person confrontedfor the first time with the problem of defining "ancestor" in terms of "parent"

would naturally say that is an ancestor of if, between and , there are a certain

number of people, , , ..., of whom is a child of , each is a parent of the next,

until the last, who is a parent of . But this definition is not adequate unless we

add that the number of intermediate terms is to be finite. Take, for example,

such a series as the following:—




  Here we have first a series of negative fractions with no end, and then a

series of positive fractions with no beginning. Shall we say that, in this series,

is  an  ancestor  of ?  It  will  be  so  according  to  the  beginner's  definition

suggested above, but it will not be so according to any definition which will

give the kind of idea that we wish to define. For this purpose, it is essential

that the number of intermediaries should be finite. But, as we saw, "finite" is

to be defined by means of mathematical induction, and it is simpler to define

the ancestral relation generally at once than to define it first only for the case

of the relation of to , and then extend it to other cases. Here, as constantly

elsewhere, generality from the first, though it may  require more thought at

the start, will be found in the long run to economise thought and increase

logical power.

  The  use  of  mathematical  induction  in  demonstrations  was,  in  the  past,

something of a mystery. There seemed no reasonable doubt that it was a valid

method of proof, but no one quite knew why it was valid. Some believed it to

be really a case of induction, in the sense in which that word is used in logic.
        [9]
Poincaré considered it to be a principle of the utmost importance, by means

of  which  an  infinite  number  of  syllogisms  could  be  condensed  into  one

argument.  We  now  know  that  all  such  views  are  mistaken,  and  that

mathematical  induction  is  a  definition,  not  a  principle.  There  are  some

numbers to which it can be applied, and there are others (as we shall see in

Chapter VIII.) to which it cannot be applied. We define the "natural numbers"

as those to which proofs by mathematical induction can be applied, i.e. as

those that possess all inductive properties. It follows that such proofs can be

applied to the natural numbers, not in virtue of any mysterious intuition or

axiom or principle, but as a purely verbal proposition. If "quadrupeds" are

defined as animals having four legs, it will follow that animals that have fourlegs  are  quadrupeds;  and  the  case  of  numbers  that  obey  mathematical

induction is exactly similar.

  [9]Science and Method, chap. IV.

  We shall use the phrase "inductive numbers" to mean the same set as we

have  hitherto  spoken  of  as  the  "natural  numbers."  The  phrase  "inductive

numbers" is preferable as affording a reminder that the definition of this set

of numbers is obtained from mathematical induction.

  Mathematical  induction  affords,  more  than  anything  else,  the  essential

characteristic  by  which  the  finite  is  distinguished  from  the  infinite.  The

principle of mathematical induction might be stated popularly in some such

form as "what can be inferred from next to next can be inferred from first to

last." This is true when the number of intermediate steps between first and

last is finite, not otherwise. Anyone who has ever  watched  a  goods  train

beginning to move will have noticed how the impulse is communicated with

a jerk from each truck to the next, until at last even the hindmost truck is in

motion. When the train is very long, it is a very long time before the last

truck  moves.  If  the  train  were  infinitely  long,  there  would  be  an  infinite

succession of jerks, and the time would never come when the whole train

would be in motion. Nevertheless, if there were a series of trucks no longer 

than the series of inductive numbers (which, as we shall see, is an instance of 

the smallest of infinites), every truck would begin to move sooner or later if 

the engine persevered, though there would always be other trucks further 

back which had not yet begun to move. This image will help to elucidate the 

argument from next to next, and its connection with finitude. When we come 

to infinite numbers, where arguments from mathematical induction will be no 

longer valid, the properties of such numbers will help to make clear, by 

contrast, the almost unconscious use that is made of mathematical induction 

where finite numbers are concerned.                                      CHAPTER IV 


                      THE DEFINITION OF ORDER

  WE have now carried our analysis of the series of natural numbers to the point where we have
obtained logical definitions of the members of this series, of the whole class of its members, and of
the relation of a number to its immediate successor. We must now consider the serial character of the
natural numbers in the order 0, 1, 2, 3,.... We ordinarily think of the numbers as in this order, and it is
an essential part of the work of analysing our data to seek a definition of "order" or "series" in logical
terms.

  The  notion  of  order  is  one  which  has  enormous  importance  in

mathematics. Not only the integers, but also rational fractions and all real

numbers have an order of magnitude, and this is essential to most of their

mathematical  properties.  The  order  of  points  on  a  line  is  essential  to

geometry; so is the slightly more complicated order of lines through a point

in  a  plane,  or  of  planes  through  a  line.  Dimensions,  in  geometry,  are  a

development of order. The conception of a limit, which underlies all higher

mathematics, is a serial conception. There are parts of mathematics which do

not depend upon the notion of order, but they are very few in comparison

with the parts in which this notion is involved.

  In seeking a definition of order, the first thing to realise is that no set of

terms has just one order to the exclusion of others. A set of terms has all the

orders of which it is capable. Sometimes one order is so much more familiar

and natural to our  thoughts that we are inclined to regard it as the order of

that  set  of  terms;  but  this  is  a  mistake.  The  natural  numbers—or  the

"inductive" numbers, as we shall also call them—occur to us most readily in

order  of  magnitude;  but  they  are  capable  of  an  infinite  number  of  other

arrangements. We might, for example, consider first all the odd numbers and

then all the even numbers; or first 1, then all the even numbers, then all the

odd multiples of 3, then all the multiples of 5 but not of 2 or 3, then all the

multiples of 7 but not of 2 or 3 or 5, and so on through the whole series of

primes. When we say that we "arrange" the numbers in these various orders,

that is an inaccurate expression: what we really do is to turn our attention to

certain  relations  between  the  natural  numbers,  which  themselves  generate

such-and-such  an  arrangement.  We  can  no  more  "arrange"  the  natural

numbers than we can the starry heavens; but just as we may notice among the

fixed stars either their order of brightness or their distribution in the sky, so

there  are  various  relations  among  numbers  which  may  be  observed,  andwhich  give  rise  to  various  different  orders  among  numbers,  all  equally

legitimate. And what is true of numbers is equally true of points on a line or

of the moments of time: one order is more familiar, but others are equally

valid. We might, for example, take first, on a line, all the points that have

integral  co-ordinates,  then  all  those  that  have  non-integral  rational  co-

ordinates, then all those that have algebraic non-rational co-ordinates, and so

on, through any set of complications we please. The resulting order will be

one which the points of the line certainly have, whether we choose to notice it

or not; the only thing that is arbitrary about the various orders of a set of

terms is our attention, for the terms themselves have always all the orders of

which they are capable.

  One important result of this consideration is that we must not look for the

definition of order in the nature of the set of terms to be ordered, since one set

of terms has many orders. The order lies, not in the class of terms, but in a

relation among  the members of the class, in respect of which some appear as

earlier and some as later. The fact that a class may have many orders is due to

the fact that there can be many relations holding among the members of one

single class. What properties must a relation have in order to give rise to an

order?

  The essential characteristics of a relation which is to give rise to order may

be discovered by considering that in respect of such a relation we must be

able to say, of any two terms in the class which is to be ordered, that one

"precedes" and the other "follows." Now, in order that we may be able to use

these words in the way in which we should naturally understand them, we

require that the ordering relation should have three properties:—

  (1) If precedes , must not also precede . This is an obvious characteristic of

the kind of relations that lead to series. If is less than , is not also less than . If

is earlier in time than , is not also earlier than . If is to the left of , is not to the

left of . On the other hand, relations which do not give rise to series often do

not have this property. If is a brother or sister of , is a brother or sister of . If

is of the same height as , is of the same height as . If is of a different height

from , is of a different height from . In all these cases, when the relation holds

between and , it also holds between and . But with serial relations such a

thing  cannot  happen.  A  relation  having  this  first  property  is  called

asymmetrical.

  (2) If precedes and precedes , must precede . This may be illustrated by thesame instances as before: less, earlier, left of. But as instances of relations

which do not have this property only two of our previous three instances will

serve. If is brother or sister of , and of , may not be brother or sister of , since

and may be the same person. The same applies to difference of height, but

not to sameness of height, which has our second property but not our first.

The relation "father," on the other hand, has our first property but not  our

second. A relation having our second property is called transitive.

  (3) Given any two terms of the class which is to be ordered, there must be

one which precedes and the other which follows. For example, of any two

integers, or fractions, or real numbers, one is smaller and the other greater;

but of any two complex numbers this is not true. Of any two moments in

time,  one  must  be  earlier  than  the  other;  but  of  events,  which  may  be

simultaneous, this cannot be said. Of two points on a line, one must be to the

left of the other. A relation having this third property is called connected.

  When a relation possesses these three properties, it is of the sort to give

rise to an order among the terms between which it holds; and wherever an

order  exists,  some  relation  having  these  three  properties  can  be  found

generating it.

  Before illustrating this thesis, we will introduce a few definitions.

  (1) A relation is said to be an aliorelative,[10] or to be contained in or imply

diversity, if no term has this relation to itself. Thus, for example, "greater,"

"different  in  size,"  "brother,"  "husband,"  "father"  are  aliorelatives;  but

"equal," "born of the same parents," "dear friend" are not.

[10]This term is due to C. S. Peirce.

  (2) The square of a relation is that relation which holds between two terms

and when there is an intermediate term such that the given relation holds

between and and between and . Thus "paternal grandfather" is the square of

"father," "greater by 2" is the square of "greater by 1," and so on.

  (3) The domain  of  a  relation  consists  of  all  those  terms  that  have  the

relation to something or other, and the converse domain consists of all those

terms to which something or other has the relation. These words have been

already defined, but are recalled here for the sake of the following definition:

—

  (4) The field of a relation consists of its domain and converse domain 

together.  

  (5) One relation is said to contain or be implied by another if it holdswhenever the other holds.

  It will be seen that an asymmetrical relation is the same thing as a relation

whose  square  is  an  aliorelative.  It  often  happens  that  a  relation  is  an

aliorelative without being asymmetrical, though an asymmetrical relation is

always  an  aliorelative.  For  example,  "spouse"  is  an  aliorelative,  but  is

symmetrical, since if is the spouse of , is the spouse of . But among transitive

relations, all aliorelatives are asymmetrical as well as vice versa.

  From the definitions it will be seen that a transitive relation is one which is

implied  by  its  square,  or,  as  we  also  say,  "contains"  its  square.  Thus

"ancestor"  is  transitive,  because  an  ancestor's  ancestor  is  an  ancestor;  but

"father" is not transitive, because a father's father is not a father. A transitive

aliorelative is one which contains its square and is contained in diversity; or,

what comes to the same thing, one whose square implies both it and diversity

—because, when a relation is transitive, asymmetry is equivalent to being an

aliorelative.

  A relation is connected when, given any two different terms of its field,

the relation holds between the first and the second or between the second and

the first (not excluding the possibility that both may happen, though both

cannot happen if the relation is asymmetrical).

  It will be seen that the relation "ancestor," for example, is an aliorelative

and transitive, but not connected; it is because it is not connected that it does

not suffice to arrange the human race in a series.

  The  relation  "less  than  or  equal  to,"  among  numbers,  is  transitive  and

connected, but not asymmetrical or an aliorelative.

  The  relation  "greater  or  less"  among  numbers  is  an  aliorelative  and  is

connected, but is not transitive, for if is greater or less than , and is greater or

less than , it may happen that and are the same number.

  Thus the three properties of being (1) an aliorelative, (2) transitive,  and

(3) connected, are mutually independent, since a relation may have any two

without having the third.

  We now lay down the following definition:—

  A relation is serial when it is an aliorelative, transitive, and connected; or,

what is equivalent, when it is asymmetrical, transitive, and connected.

  A series is the same thing as a serial relation.

  It might have been thought that a series should be the field of a serial

relation, not the serial relation itself. But this would be an error. For example,  are six different series which all have the same field. If the field were the

series, there could only be one series with a given field. What distinguishes

the above six series is simply the different ordering relations in the six cases.

Given the ordering relation, the field and the order are both determinate. Thus

the ordering relation may be taken to be the series, but the field cannot be so

taken.

  Given any serial relation, say , we shall say that, in respect of this relation,

"precedes" if has the relation to , which we shall write "" for short. The three
 

characteristics which must have in order to be serial are:

  (1) We must never have , i.e. no term must precede itself.

  (2) must imply , i.e. if precedes and precedes , must precede .

  (3) If and are two different terms in the field of , we shall have or , i.e.

one of the two must precede the other.
  The reader can easily convince himself that, where these three properties are found in an ordering
relation, the characteristics we expect of series will also be found, and vice versa. We are therefore
justified in taking the above as a definition of order  or series. And it will be observed that the
definition is effected in purely logical terms.

  Although  a  transitive  asymmetrical  connected  relation  always  exists

wherever there is a series, it is not always the relation which would most

naturally be regarded as generating the series. The natural-number series may

serve as an illustration. The relation we assumed in considering the natural

numbers was the relation of immediate succession, i.e. the relation between

consecutive  integers.  This  relation  is  asymmetrical,  but  not  transitive  or

connected. We can, however, derive from it, by the method of mathematical

induction,  the  "ancestral"  relation  which  we  considered  in  the  preceding

chapter.  This  relation  will  be  the  same  as  "less  than  or  equal  to"  among

inductive integers. For purposes of generating the series of natural numbers,

we want the relation "less than," excluding "equal to." This is the relation of

to when is an ancestor of but not identical with , or (what comes to the same

thing) when the successor of is an ancestor of in the sense in which a number

is its own ancestor. That is to say, we shall lay down the following definition:

—

  An  inductive  number is  said  to  be less  than  another  number when

possesses every hereditary property possessed by the successor of .  It is easy to see, and not difficult to prove, that the relation "less than," so

defined,  is  asymmetrical,  transitive,  and  connected,  and  has  the  inductive

numbers for its field. Thus by means of this relation the inductive numbers

acquire an order in the sense in which we defined the term "order," and this

order is the so-called "natural" order, or order of magnitude.

  The generation of series by means of relations more or less resembling

that of to is very common. The series of the Kings of England, for example,

is generated by relations of each to his successor. This is probably the easiest

way, where it is applicable, of conceiving the generation of a series. In this

method we pass on from each term to the next, as long as there  is a next, or

back to the one before, as long as there is one before. This method always

requires the generalised form of mathematical induction in order to enable us

to define "earlier" and "later" in a series so generated. On the analogy of

"proper fractions," let us give the name "proper posterity of with respect to "

to the class of those terms that belong to the -posterity of some term to which

has the relation , in the sense which we gave before to "posterity," which

includes a term in its own posterity. Reverting to the fundamental definitions,

we find that the "proper posterity" may be defined as follows:—

  The "proper posterity" of with respect to consists of all terms that possess

every -hereditary property possessed by every term to which has the relation .

  It  is  to  be  observed  that  this  definition  has  to  be  so  framed  as  to  be

applicable not only when there is only one term to which has the relation , but

also in cases (as e.g. that of father and child) where there may be many terms

to which has the relation . We define further:

  A term is a "proper ancestor" of with respect to if belongs to the proper

posterity of with respect to .

  We shall speak for short of " -posterity" and " -ancestors" when these

terms seem more convenient.

  Reverting  now  to  the  generation  of  series  by  the  relation between

consecutive terms, we see that, if this method is to be possible, the relation

"proper -ancestor" must be an aliorelative, transitive, and connected. Under

what circumstances will this occur? It will always be transitive: no matter

what sort of relation may be, " -ancestor" and "proper -ancestor" are always

both transitive. But it is only under certain circumstances that it will be an

aliorelative or connected. Consider, for example, the relation to one's left-

hand neighbour at a round dinner-table at which there are twelve people. Ifwe call this relation , the proper -posterity of a person consists of all who can

be  reached  by  going  round  the  table  from  right  to  left.  This  includes

everybody at the table, including the person himself, since  twelve steps bring

us back to our starting-point. Thus in such a case, though the relation "proper

-ancestor" is connected, and though itself is an aliorelative, we do not get a

series because "proper -ancestor" is not an aliorelative. It is for this reason

that we cannot say that one person comes before another with respect to the

relation "right of" or to its ancestral derivative.

  The above was an instance in which the ancestral relation was connected

but not contained in diversity. An instance where it is contained in diversity

but not connected is derived from the ordinary sense of the word "ancestor."

If is a proper ancestor of , and cannot be the same person; but it is not true

that of any two persons one must be an ancestor of the other.

  The question of the circumstances under which series can be generated by

ancestral  relations  derived  from  relations  of  consecutiveness  is  often

important.  Some  of  the  most  important  cases  are  the  following:  Let be a

many-one relation, and let us confine our attention to the posterity of some

term . When so confined, the relation "proper -ancestor" must be connected;

therefore all that remains to ensure its being serial is that it shall be contained

in  diversity.  This  is  a  generalisation  of  the  instance  of  the  dinner-table.

Another  generalisation  consists  in  taking to  be  a  one-one  relation,  and

including  the  ancestry  of as  well  as  the  posterity.  Here  again,  the  one

condition required to secure the generation of a series is that the relation

"proper -ancestor" shall be contained in diversity.

  The generation of order by means of relations of consecutiveness, though

important in its own sphere, is less general than the method which uses a

transitive relation to define the order. It often happens in a series that there

are an infinite number of intermediate terms between any two that may be

selected, however near together these may be. Take, for instance, fractions in

order  of  magnitude.  Between  any  two  fractions  there  are  others—for

example, the arithmetic mean of the two. Consequently there is no such thing

as a pair of consecutive fractions. If we depended  upon consecutiveness for

defining order, we should not be able to define the order of magnitude among

fractions. But in fact the relations of greater and less among fractions do not

demand generation from relations of consecutiveness, and the relations of

greater and less among fractions have the three characteristics which we needfor defining serial relations. In all such cases the order must be defined by

means of a transitive relation, since only such a relation is able to leap over

an infinite number of intermediate terms. The method of consecutiveness,

like that of counting for discovering the number of a collection, is appropriate

to the finite; it may even be extended to certain infinite series, namely, those

in which, though the total number of terms is infinite, the number of terms

between any two is always finite; but it must not be regarded as general. Not

only so, but care must be taken to eradicate from the imagination all habits of

thought  resulting  from  supposing  it  general.  If  this  is  not  done,  series  in

which there are no consecutive terms will remain difficult and puzzling. And

such series are of vital importance for the understanding of continuity, space,

time, and motion.

  There are many ways in which series may be generated, but all depend

upon  the  finding  or  construction  of  an  asymmetrical  transitive  connected

relation. Some of these ways have considerable importance. We may take as

illustrative the generation of series by means of a three-term relation which

we may call "between." This method is very useful in geometry, and may

serve as an introduction to relations having more than two terms; it is best

introduced in connection with elementary geometry.

  Given any three points on a straight line in ordinary space, there must be

one of them which is between the other two. This will not be the case with the

points on a circle or any other closed curve, because, given any three points

on a circle, we can travel from any one to any other without passing through

the third. In fact, the notion "between" is characteristic of open series—or

series in the strict sense—as opposed to what may be called  "cyclic" series,

where, as with people at the dinner-table, a sufficient journey brings us back

to  our  starting-point.  This  notion  of  "between"  may  be  chosen  as  the

fundamental notion of ordinary geometry; but for the present we will only

consider its application to a single straight line and to the ordering of the

points on a straight line.[11] Taking any two points , , the line consists of three

parts (besides and themselves):

[11]Cf. Rivista di Matematica, IV. pp. 55 ff.; Principles of Mathematics, p.

  394 (§ 375).

  (1) Points between and .

  (2) Points such that is between and .

  (3) Points such that is between and .  Thus the line can be defined in terms of the relation "between."

  In order that this relation "between" may arrange the points of the line in

an  order  from  left  to  right,  we  need  certain  assumptions,  namely,  the

following:—

  (1) If anything is between and , and are not identical.

  (2) Anything between and is also between and .

  (3) Anything between and is not identical with (nor, consequently, with ,

in virtue of (2)).

  (4) If is between and , anything between and is also between and .

  (5) If is between and , and is between and , then is between and .

  (6) If and are between and , then either and are identical, or is between

and , or is between and .

  (7) If is between and and also between and , then either and are identical,

or is between and , or is between and .

  These seven properties are obviously verified in the case of points on a

straight line in ordinary space. Any three-term relation which verifies them

gives rise to series, as may be seen from the following definitions. For the

sake of definiteness, let us assume  that is to the left of . Then the points of

the line are (1) those between which and , lies—these we will call to the left

of ; (2) itself; (3) those between and ; (4) itself; (5) those between which and

lies —these we will call to the right of . We may now define generally that of

two points , , on the line , we shall say that is "to the left of" in any of the

following cases:—

  (1) When and are both to the left of , and is between and ;

  (2) When is to the left of , and is or or between and or to the right of ;

  (3) When is , and is between and or is or is to the right of ;

  (4) When and are both between and , and is between and ;

  (5) When is between and , and is or to the right of ;

  (6) When is and is to the right of ;

  (7) When and are both to the right of and is between and .

  It will be found that, from the seven properties which we have assigned to

the relation "between," it can be deduced that the relation "to the left of," as

above defined, is a serial relation as we defined that term. It is important to

notice  that  nothing  in  the  definitions  or  the  argument  depends  upon  our

meaning  by  "between"  the  actual  relation  of  that  name  which  occurs  in

empirical  space:  any  three-term  relation  having  the  above  seven  purelyformal properties will serve the purpose of the argument equally well.

  Cyclic order, such as that of the points on a circle, cannot be generated by

means of three-term relations of "between." We need a relation of four terms,

which may be called "separation of couples." The point may be illustrated by

considering a journey round the world. One may go from England to New

Zealand  by  way  of  Suez  or  by  way  of  San  Francisco;  we cannot  say

definitely  that  either  of  these  two  places  is  "between"  England  and  New

Zealand. But if a man chooses that route to go round the world, whichever

way round he goes, his times in England and New Zealand are separated

from each other by his times in Suez and San Francisco, and conversely.

Generalising, if we take any four points on a circle, we can separate them into

two couples, say and and and , such that, in order to get from to one must

pass through either or , and in order to get from to one must pass through

either or . Under these circumstances we say that the couple are "separated"

by the couple . Out of this relation a cyclic order can be generated, in a way

resembling that in which we generated an open order from "between," but

somewhat more complicated.[12]

[12]Cf. Principles of Mathematics, p. 205 (§ 194), and references there

given.

  The purpose of the latter half of this chapter has been to suggest the 

subject which one may call "generation of serial relations." When such 

relations have been defined, the generation of them from other relations 

possessing only some of the properties required for series becomes very 

important, especially in the philosophy of geometry and physics. But we 

cannot, within the limits of the present volume, do more than make the reader 

aware that such a subject exists.                                      CHAPTER V 


                          KINDS OF RELATIONS

  A great part of the philosophy of mathematics is concerned with relations, and many different
kinds of relations have different kinds of uses. It often happens that a property which belongs to all
relations is only important as regards relations of certain sorts; in these cases the reader will not see
the bearing of the proposition asserting such a property unless he has in mind the sorts of relations for
which it is useful. For reasons of this description, as well as from the intrinsic interest of the subject, it
is well to have in our minds a rough list of the more mathematically serviceable varieties of relations.

  We  dealt  in  the  preceding  chapter  with  a  supremely  important  class,

namely, serial relations. Each of the three properties which we combined in

defining series—namely, asymmetry, transitiveness, and connexity—has its

own importance. We will begin by saying something on each of these three.

  Asymmetry, i.e. the property of being incompatible with the converse, is a

characteristic of the very greatest interest and importance. In order to develop

its functions, we will consider various examples. The relation husband  is

asymmetrical, and so is the relation wife; i.e. if is husband of , cannot be

husband of , and similarly in the case of wife. On the other hand, the relation

"spouse" is symmetrical: if is spouse of , then is spouse of . Suppose now we

are given the relation spouse, and we wish to derive the relation husband.

Husband is the same as male spouse or spouse of a female; thus the relation

husband can  be derived from spouse either by limiting the domain to males

or by limiting the converse to females. We see from this instance that, when a

symmetrical relation is given, it is sometimes possible, without the help of

any further relation, to separate it into two asymmetrical relations. But the

cases where this is possible are rare and exceptional: they are cases where

there are two mutually exclusive classes, say and , such that whenever the

relation holds between two terms, one of the terms is a member of and the

other is a member of —as, in the case of spouse, one term of the relation

belongs to the class of males and one to the class of females. In such a case,

the relation with its domain confined to will be asymmetrical, and so will the

relation with its domain confined to . But such cases are not of the sort that

occur when we are dealing with series of more than two terms; for in a series,

all terms, except the first and last (if these exist), belong both to the domain

and to the converse domain of the generating relation, so that a relation like

husband, where the domain and converse domain do not overlap, is excluded.

  The question how to construct relations having some useful property bymeans  of  operations  upon  relations  which  only  have  rudiments  of  the

property is one of considerable importance. Transitiveness and connexity are

easily constructed in many cases where the originally given relation does not

possess them: for example, if is any relation whatever, the ancestral relation

derived from by  generalised  induction  is  transitive;  and  if is  a  many-one

relation, the ancestral relation will be connected if confined to the posterity of

a given term. But asymmetry is a much more difficult property to secure by

construction. The method by which we derived husband from spouse is, as

we have seen, not available in the most important cases, such as greater,

before, to the right of, where domain and converse domain overlap. In all

these  cases,  we  can  of  course  obtain  a  symmetrical  relation  by  adding

together the given relation and its converse, but we cannot pass back from

this symmetrical relation to the original asymmetrical relation except by the

help of some asymmetrical  relation. Take, for example, the relation greater:

the  relation greater  or  less—i.e. unequal—is  symmetrical,  but  there  is

nothing  in  this  relation  to  show  that  it  is  the  sum  of  two  asymmetrical

relations. Take such a relation as "differing in shape." This is not the sum of

an asymmetrical relation and its converse, since shapes do not form a single

series;  but  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  it  differs  from  "differing  in

magnitude" if we did not already know that magnitudes have relations of

greater and less. This illustrates the fundamental character of asymmetry as a

property of relations.

  From  the  point  of  view  of  the  classification  of  relations,  being

asymmetrical  is  a  much  more  important  characteristic  than  implying

diversity. Asymmetrical relations imply diversity, but the converse is not the

case. "Unequal," for example, implies diversity, but is symmetrical. Broadly

speaking, we may say that, if we wished as far as possible to dispense with

relational propositions and replace them by such as ascribed predicates to

subjects,  we  could  succeed  in  this  so  long  as  we  confined  ourselves  to

symmetrical relations: those that do not imply diversity, if they are transitive,

may be regarded as asserting a common predicate, while those that do imply

diversity may be regarded as asserting incompatible predicates. For example,

consider the relation of similarity between classes, by means of which we

defined numbers. This relation is symmetrical and transitive and does not

imply diversity. It would be possible, though less simple than the procedure

we  adopted,  to  regard  the  number  of  a  collection  as  a  predicate  of  thecollection: then two similar classes will be two that have the same numerical

predicate,  while  two  that  are  not  similar  will  be  two  that  have  different

numerical predicates. Such a method of replacing relations by predicates is

formally possible (though often very inconvenient) so long as the relations

concerned are symmetrical; but it is formally impossible when the relations

are asymmetrical, because both sameness and difference of predicates are

symmetrical.  Asymmetrical  relations  are,  we may  say,  the  most

characteristically  relational  of  relations,  and  the  most  important  to  the

philosopher who wishes to study the ultimate logical nature of relations.

  Another class of relations that is of the greatest use is the class of one-

many relations, i.e. relations which at most one term can have to a given

term. Such are father, mother, husband (except in Tibet), square of, sine of,

and so on. But parent, square root, and so on, are not one-many. It is possible,

formally, to replace all relations by one-many relations by means of a device.

Take (say) the relation less among the inductive numbers. Given any number

greater than 1, there will not be only one number having the relation less to ,

but we can form the whole class of numbers that are less than . This is one

class, and its relation to is not shared by any other class. We may call the

class of numbers that are less than the "proper ancestry" of , in the sense in

which we spoke of ancestry and posterity in connection with mathematical

induction.  Then  "proper  ancestry"  is  a  one-many  relation  (one-many  will

always be used so as to include one-one), since each number determines a

single class of numbers as constituting its proper ancestry. Thus the relation

less than can be replaced by being a member of the proper ancestry of. In this

way  a  one-many  relation  in  which  the  one  is  a  class,  together  with

membership of this class, can always formally replace a relation which is not

one-many. Peano, who for some reason always instinctively conceives of a

relation as one-many, deals in this way with those that are naturally not so.

Reduction to one-many relations by this method, however, though possible as

a matter of form, does not represent a technical simplification, and there is

every reason to think that it does not represent a philosophical analysis, if

only  because  classes  must  be  regarded  as  "logical  fictions."  We  shall

therefore continue to regard one-many relations as a special kind of relations.

  One-many relations are involved in all phrases of the form "the so-and-so

of  such-and-such."  "The  King  of  England,"  "the  wife  of  Socrates,"  "the

father of John Stuart Mill," and so on, all describe some person by means of aone-many  relation  to  a  given  term.  A  person  cannot  have  more  than  one

father, therefore "the father of John Stuart Mill" described some one person,

even if we did not know whom. There is much to say on the subject of

descriptions, but for the present it is relations that we are concerned with, and

descriptions are only relevant as exemplifying the uses of one-many relations.

It should be observed that all mathematical functions result from one-many

relations: the logarithm of , the cosine of , etc., are, like the father of , terms

described by means of a one-many relation (logarithm, cosine, etc.) to a given

term ( ). The notion of function need not be confined to numbers, or to the

uses to which mathematicians have accustomed us; it can be extended to all

cases of one-many relations, and "the father of " is just as legitimately a

function of which is the argument as is "the logarithm of ." Functions in this

sense are descriptive functions. As we shall see later, there are functions of a

still  more  general  and  more  fundamental  sort,  namely, propositional

functions; but for the present we shall confine our attention to descriptive

functions, i.e. "the term having the relation to ," or, for short, "the of ," where

is any one-many relation.

  It will be observed that if "the of " is to describe a definite term, must be a

term to which something has the relation , and there must not be more than

one  term  having  the  relation to ,  since  "the,"  correctly  used,  must  imply

uniqueness. Thus we may speak of "the father of " if is any human being

except Adam and Eve; but we cannot speak of "the father of " if is a table or a

chair or anything else that does not have a father. We shall say that the of

"exists" when there is just one term, and no more, having the relation to .

Thus if is a one-many relation, the of exists whenever belongs to the converse

domain of ,  and  not  otherwise.  Regarding  "the of " as a function in the 

mathematical  sense, we say that  is the "argument" of the function, and if is

the term which has the relation to , i.e. if is the of , then is the "value" of the

function for the argument . If is a one-many relation, the range of possible

arguments to the function is the converse domain of , and the range of values

is the domain. Thus the range of possible arguments to the function "the

father of " is all who have fathers, i.e. the converse domain of the relation

father, while the range of possible values for the function is all fathers, i.e.

the domain of the relation.

  Many  of  the  most  important  notions  in  the  logic  of  relations  are

descriptive functions, for example: converse, domain, converse domain, field.Other examples will occur as we proceed.

  Among one-many relations, one-one relations are a specially important

class.  We  have  already  had  occasion  to  speak  of  one-one  relations  in

connection with the definition of number, but it is necessary to be familiar

with  them,  and  not  merely  to  know  their  formal  definition.  Their  formal

definition  may  be  derived  from  that  of  one-many  relations:  they  may  be

defined  as  one-many  relations  which  are  also  the  converses  of  one-many

relations, i.e. as relations which are both one-many and many-one. One-many

relations may be defined as relations such that, if has the relation in question

to , there is no other term ' which also has the relation to . Or, again, they may

be defined as follows: Given two terms and ', the terms to which has the

given relation and those to which ' has it have no member in common. Or,

again, they may be defined as relations such that the relative product of one

of them and its converse implies identity, where the "relative product" of two

relations and is  that  relation  which  holds  between and when  there  is  an

intermediate term , such that has the relation to and has the relation to . Thus,

for example, if is the relation of father to son, the relative product of and its

converse will be the relation which holds between and a man when there is a

person , such that is the father of and is the son of . It is obvious that and must

be  the same person. If, on the other hand, we take the relation of parent and

child, which is not one-many, we can no longer argue that, if is a parent of

and is a child of , and must be the same person, because one may be the

father of and the other the mother. This illustrates that it is characteristic of

one-many relations when the relative product of a relation and its converse

implies identity. In the case of one-one relations this happens, and also the

relative product of the converse and the relation implies identity. Given a

relation , it is convenient, if has the relation to , to think of as being reached

from by an " -step" or an " -vector." In the same case will be reached from by

a  "backward -step."  Thus  we  may  state  the  characteristic  of  one-many

relations with which we have been dealing by saying that an -step followed

by a backward -step must bring us back to our starting-point. With other

relations, this is by no means the case; for example, if is the relation of child

to  parent,  the  relative  product  of and  its  converse  is  the  relation  "self  or

brother  or  sister,"  and  if is  the  relation  of  grandchild  to  grandparent,  the

relative  product  of and  its  converse  is  "self  or  brother  or  sister  or  first

cousin." It will be observed that the relative product of two relations is not ingeneral commutative, i.e. the relative product of and is not in general the

same relation as the relative product of and . E.g. the relative product of

parent and brother is uncle, but the relative product of brother and parent is

parent.

  One-one relations give a correlation of two classes, term for term, so that

each term in either class has its correlate in the other. Such correlations are

simplest to grasp when the two classes have no members in common, like the

class of husbands and the class of wives; for in that case we know at once

whether a term is to be considered as one from which the correlating relation

goes, or as one to which it goes. It is convenient to use the word referent for

the term from which the relation goes, and the term relatum for the term to

which it goes. Thus if and are husband and wife, then, with respect to the 

relation  "husband," is referent and relatum, but with respect to the relation

"wife," is referent and relatum. We say that a relation and its converse have

opposite  "senses";  thus  the  "sense"  of  a  relation  that  goes  from to is the

opposite of that of the corresponding relation from to . The fact that a relation

has a "sense" is fundamental, and is part of the reason why order can be

generated  by  suitable  relations.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  class  of  all

possible  referents  to  a  given  relation  is  its  domain,  and  the  class  of  all

possible relata is its converse domain.

  But it very often happens that the domain and converse domain of a one-

one relation overlap. Take, for example, the first ten integers (excluding 0),

and add 1 to each; thus instead of the first ten integers we now have the

integers




  These are the same as those we had before, except that 1 has been cut off

at the beginning and 11 has been joined on at the end. There are still ten

integers: they are correlated with the previous ten by the relation of to , which

is a one-one relation. Or, again, instead of adding 1 to each of our original ten

integers, we could have doubled each of them, thus obtaining the integers




  Here we still have five of our previous set of integers, namely, 2, 4, 6, 8,

10. The correlating relation in this case is the relation of a number to itsdouble, which is again a one-one relation. Or we might have replaced each

number by its square, thus obtaining the set




  On this occasion only three of our original set are left, namely, 1, 4, 9.

Such processes of correlation may be varied endlessly.

  The most interesting case of the above kind is the case where our one-one

relation has a converse domain which is part, but  not  the  whole,  of  the

domain. If, instead of confining the domain to the first ten integers, we had

considered the whole of the inductive numbers, the above instances would

have illustrated this case. We may place the numbers concerned in two rows,

putting the correlate directly under the number whose correlate it is. Thus

when the correlator is the relation of to , we have the two rows:

  When the correlator is the relation of a number to its double, we have the

two rows:

  When the correlator is the relation of a number to its square, the rows are:

  In all these cases, all inductive numbers occur in the top row, and only

some in the bottom row.

  Cases of this sort, where the converse domain is a "proper part" of the

domain (i.e. a part not the whole), will occupy us again when we come to

deal with infinity. For the present, we wish only to note that they exist and

demand consideration.

  Another class of correlations which are often important is the class called

"permutations,"  where  the  domain  and  converse  domain  are  identical.

Consider, for example, the six possible arrangements of three letters:


  Each of these can be obtained from any one of the others by means of a

correlation. Take, for example, the first and last, and . Here is correlated with

, with itself, and with . It is obvious that the combination of two permutations

is again a permutation, i.e. the permutations of a given class form what is

called a "group."

  These various kinds of correlations have importance in various 

connections, some for one purpose, some for another. The general notion of 

one-one correlations has boundless importance in the philosophy of 

mathematics, as we have partly seen already, but shall see much more fully as 

we proceed. One of its uses will occupy us in our next chapter.                                      CHAPTER VI 


                      SIMILARITY OF RELATIONS

  WE saw in Chapter II. that two classes have the same number of terms when they are "similar,"
i.e. when there is a one-one relation whose domain is the one class and whose converse domain is the
other. In such a case we say that there is a "one-one correlation" between the two classes.

  In  the  present  chapter  we  have  to  define  a  relation  between  relations,

which will play the same part for them that similarity of classes plays for

classes. We will call this relation "similarity of relations," or "likeness" when

it seems desirable to use a different word from that which we use for classes.

How is likeness to be defined?

  We shall employ still the notion of correlation: we shall assume that the

domain of the one relation can be correlated with the domain of the other, and

the converse domain with the converse domain; but that is not enough for the

sort of resemblance which we desire to have between our two relations. What

we desire is that, whenever either relation holds between two terms, the other

relation shall hold between the correlates of these two terms. The easiest

example of the sort of thing we desire is a map. When one place is north of

another, the place on the map corresponding to the one is above the place on

the map corresponding to the other; when one place is west of another, the

place on the map corresponding to the one is to the left of the place on the

map  corresponding  to  the  other;  and  so  on.  The  structure  of  the  map

corresponds with that of  the country of which it is a map. The space-relations

in the map have "likeness" to the space-relations in the country mapped. It is

this kind of connection between relations that we wish to define.

  We may, in the first place, profitably introduce a certain restriction. We

will confine ourselves, in defining likeness, to such relations as have "fields,"

i.e. to such as permit of the formation of a single class out of the domain and

the converse domain. This is not always the case. Take, for example, the

relation "domain," i.e. the relation which the domain of a relation has to the

relation. This relation has all classes for its domain, since every class is the

domain of some relation; and it has all relations for its converse domain,

since every relation has a domain. But classes and relations cannot be added

together to form a new single class, because they are of different logical

"types." We do not need to enter upon the difficult doctrine of types, but it is

well to know when we are abstaining from entering upon it. We may say,without entering upon the grounds for the assertion, that a relation only has a

"field" when it is what we call "homogeneous," i.e. when its domain and

converse  domain  are  of  the  same  logical  type;  and  as  a  rough-and-ready

indication of what we mean by a "type," we may say that individuals, classes

of  individuals,  relations  between  individuals,  relations  between  classes,

relations of classes to individuals, and so on, are different types. Now the

notion  of  likeness  is  not  very  useful  as  applied  to  relations  that  are  not

homogeneous; we shall, therefore, in defining likeness, simplify our problem

by speaking of the "field" of one of the relations concerned. This somewhat

limits the generality of our definition, but the limitation is not of any practical

importance. And having been stated, it need no longer be remembered. We

may define two relations and as "similar," or as having "likeness," when there

is  a  one-one  relation whose  domain  is  the  field  of and  whose  converse

domain is the field of , and which is such that, if one term has the relation to 

another, the correlate of the one has the relation to the correlate of the other,
 

and vice versa.
  fig1 A figure will make this clearer. Let and be two terms having the relation . Then there are to
be two terms , , such that has the relation to , has the relation to , and has the relation to . If this
happens with every pair of terms such as and , and if the converse happens with every pair of terms
such as and , it is clear that for every instance in which the relation holds there is a corresponding
instance in which the relation holds, and vice versa; and this is what we desire to secure by our
definition. We can eliminate some redundancies in the above sketch of a definition, by observing that,
when the above conditions are realised, the relation is the same as the relative product of and and the
converse of , i.e. the -step from to may be replaced by the succession of the -step from to , the -step
from to , and the backward -step from to . Thus we may set up the following definitions:—

  A relation is said to be a "correlator" or an "ordinal correlator" of two

relations and if is one-one, has the field of for its converse domain, and is

such that is the relative product of and and the converse of .

  Two relations and are said to be "similar," or to have "likeness," when

there is at least one correlator of and .

  These definitions will be found to yield what we above decided to be

necessary.

  It  will  be  found  that,  when  two  relations  are  similar,  they  share  all

properties which do not depend upon the actual terms in their fields. For

instance, if one implies diversity, so does the other; if one is transitive, so is

the other; if one is connected, so is the other. Hence if one is serial, so is the

other. Again, if one is one-many or one-one, the other is one-many  or  one-

one;  and  so  on,  through  all  the  general  properties  of  relations.  Evenstatements involving the actual terms of the field of a relation, though they

may not be true as they stand when applied to a similar relation, will always

be capable of translation into statements that are analogous. We are led by

such considerations to a problem which has, in mathematical philosophy, an

importance by no means adequately recognised hitherto. Our problem may be

stated as follows:—

  Given some statement in a language of which we know the grammar and

the syntax, but not the vocabulary, what are the possible meanings of such a

statement, and what are the meanings of the unknown words that would make

it true?

  The reason that this question is important is that it represents, much more

nearly than might be supposed, the state of our knowledge of nature. We

know  that  certain  scientific  propositions—which,  in  the  most  advanced

sciences, are expressed in mathematical symbols—are more or less true of the

world, but we are very much at sea as to the interpretation to be put upon the

terms which occur in these propositions. We know much more (to use, for a

moment, an old-fashioned pair of terms) about the form of nature than about

the matter. Accordingly, what we really know when we enunciate a law of

nature is only that there is probably some interpretation of our terms which

will make the law approximately true. Thus great importance attaches to the

question: What are the possible meanings of a law expressed in terms of

which we do not know the substantive meaning, but only the grammar and

syntax? And this question is the one suggested above.

  For the present we will ignore the general question, which will occupy us

again  at  a  later  stage;  the  subject  of  likeness  itself  must  first  be  further

investigated.

  Owing to the fact that, when two relations are similar, their properties are

the same except when they depend upon the fields being composed of just the

terms of which they are composed, it is desirable to have a nomenclature

which collects  together all the relations that are similar to a given relation.

Just as we called the set of those classes that are similar to a given class the

"number" of that class, so we may call the set of all those relations that are

similar to a given relation the "number" of that relation. But in order to avoid

confusion with the numbers appropriate to classes, we will speak, in this case,

of a "relation-number." Thus we have the following definitions:—

  The "relation-number" of a given relation is the class of all those relationsthat are similar to the given relation.

    "Relation-numbers" are the set of all those classes of relations that are

relation-numbers of various relations; or, what comes to the same thing, a

relation number is a class of relations consisting of all those relations that are

similar to one member of the class.

  When it is necessary to speak of the numbers of classes in a way which

makes it impossible to confuse them with relation-numbers, we shall call

them "cardinal numbers." Thus cardinal numbers are the numbers appropriate

to classes. These include the ordinary integers of daily life, and also certain

infinite numbers, of which we shall speak later. When we speak of "numbers"

without qualification, we are to be understood as meaning cardinal numbers.

The definition of a cardinal number, it will be remembered, is as follows:—

  The "cardinal number" of a given class is the set of all those classes that

are similar to the given class.

  The most obvious application of relation-numbers is to series. Two series

may be regarded as equally long when they have the same relation-number.

Two finite series will have the same relation-number when their fields have

the same cardinal number of terms, and only then—i.e. a series of (say) 15

terms will have the same relation-number as any other series of fifteen terms,

but will not have the same relation-number as a series of 14 or 16 terms, nor,

of course, the same relation-number as a relation which is not serial. Thus, in

the quite special case of finite series, there is parallelism between cardinal

and  relation-numbers.  The  relation-numbers  applicable  to  series  may be  

called "serial numbers" (what are commonly called "ordinal numbers" are a

sub-class of these); thus a finite serial number is determinate when we know

the cardinal number of terms in the field of a series having the serial number

in question. If is a finite cardinal number, the relation-number of a series

which has terms  is  called  the  "ordinal"  number .  (There  are  also  infinite

ordinal numbers, but of them we shall speak in a later chapter.) When the

cardinal  number  of  terms  in  the  field  of  a  series  is  infinite,  the  relation-

number of the series is not determined merely by the cardinal number, indeed

an infinite number of relation-numbers exist for one infinite cardinal number,

as we shall see when we come to consider infinite series. When a series is

infinite, what we may call its "length," i.e. its relation-number, may vary

without change in the cardinal number; but when a series is finite, this cannot

happen.  We can define addition and multiplication for relation-numbers as well as

for  cardinal  numbers,  and  a  whole  arithmetic  of  relation-numbers  can  be

developed.  The  manner  in  which  this  is  to  be  done  is  easily  seen  by

considering the case of series. Suppose, for example, that we wish to define

the sum of two non-overlapping series in such a way that the relation-number

of  the  sum  shall  be  capable  of  being  defined  as  the  sum  of  the  relation-

numbers of the two series. In the first place, it is clear that there is an order

involved as between the two series: one of them must be placed before the

other. Thus if and are the generating relations of the two series, in the series

which is their sum with put before , every member of the field of will precede

every member of the field of . Thus the serial relation which is to be defined

as the sum of and is not " or " simply, but " or or the relation of any member

of the field of to any member of the field of ." Assuming that and do not

overlap, this relation is serial, but " or " is not serial, being not connected,

since it does not hold between a member of the field of and a member of the

field of . Thus the sum of and , as above defined, is what we need in order  to 

define the sum of two relation-numbers. Similar modifications are needed for 

products and powers. The resulting arithmetic does not obey the commutative 

law: the sum or product which they are taken. But it obeys the associative 

law, one form of the distributive law, and two of the formal laws for powers, 

not only as applied to serial  numbers,  but  as  applied  to  relation-numbers

generally.  Relation-arithmetic,  in  fact,  though  recent,  is  a  thoroughly

respectable branch of mathematics.

  It must not be supposed, merely because series afford the most obvious

application of the idea of likeness, that there are no other applications that are

important.  We  have  already  mentioned  maps,  and  we  might  extend  our

thoughts  from  this  illustration  to  geometry  generally.  If  the  system  of

relations by which a geometry is applied to a certain set of terms can be

brought fully into relations of likeness with a system applying to another set

of  terms,  then  the  geometry  of  the  two  sets  is  indistinguishable  from  the

mathematical point of view, i.e. all the propositions are the same, except for

the fact that they are applied in one case to one set of terms and in the other to

another. We may illustrate this by the relations of the sort that may be called

"between," which we considered in Chapter IV. We there saw that, provided

a three-term relation has certain formal logical properties, it will give rise to

series, and may be called a "between-relation." Given any two points, we canuse the between-relation to define the straight line determined by those two

points; it consists of and together with all points , such that the between-

relation holds between the three points , , in some order or other. It has been

shown by O. Veblen that we may regard our whole space as the field of a

three-term between-relation, and define our geometry by the properties we

assign to our between-relation.[13] Now likeness is just as easily  definable

between three-term relations as between two-term relations. If and ' are two

between-relations, so that "" means " is between and with respect to ," we
 

shall call a correlator of and ' if it has the field of ' for its converse domain,

and is such that the relation holds between three terms when ' holds between

their -correlates, and only then. And we shall say that is like ' when there is at

least one correlator of with '. The reader can easily convince himself that, if is

like ' in this sense, there can be no difference between the geometry generated

by and that generated by '.

[13]This does not apply to elliptic space, but only to spaces in which the

straight line is an open series. Modern Mathematics, edited by J. W. A.

Young, pp. 3-51 (monograph by O. Veblen on "The Foundations of

Geometry").

  It follows from this that the mathematician need not concern himself with

the particular being or intrinsic nature of his points, lines, and planes, even

when he is speculating as an applied mathematician. We may say that there is

empirical evidence of the approximate truth of such parts of geometry as are

not matters of definition. But there is no empirical evidence as to what a

"point" is to be. It has to be something that as nearly as possible satisfies our

axioms, but it does not have to be "very small" or "without parts." Whether or

not it is those things is a matter of indifference, so long as it satisfies the

axioms. If we can, out of empirical material, construct a logical structure, no

matter  how  complicated,  which  will  satisfy  our  geometrical  axioms,  that

structure may legitimately be called a "point." We must not say that there is

nothing else that could legitimately be called a "point"; we must only say:

"This object we have constructed is sufficient for the geometer; it may be one

of many objects, any of which would be sufficient, but that is no concern of

ours, since this object is enough to vindicate the empirical truth of geometry,

in so far as geometry is not a matter of definition." This is only an illustration

of the general principle that what matters in mathematics, and to a very great

extent in physical science, is not the intrinsic nature of our terms, but thelogical nature of their interrelations.

  We may say, of two similar relations, that they have the same  "structure."

For mathematical purposes (though not for those of pure philosophy) the only

thing of importance about a relation is the cases in which it holds, not its

intrinsic nature. Just as a class may be defined by various different but co-

extensive concepts—e.g. "man" and "featherless biped,"—so two relations

which are conceptually different may hold in the same set of instances. An

"instance" in which a relation holds is to be conceived as a couple of terms,

with an order, so that one of the terms comes first and the other second; the

couple is to be, of course, such that its first term has the relation in question

to its second. Take (say) the relation "father": we can define what we may

call the "extension" of this relation as the class of all ordered couples which

are such that is the father of . From the mathematical point of view, the only

thing of importance about the relation "father" is that it defines this set of

ordered couples. Speaking generally, we say:

  The "extension" of a relation is the class of those ordered couples which

are such that has the relation in question to .

  We can now go a step further in the process of abstraction, and consider

what we mean by "structure." Given any relation, we can, if it is a sufficiently

simple one, construct a map of it. For the sake of definiteness, let us take a

relation of which the extension is the following couples: , , , , , , , where , , , ,

are five terms, no matter what.
  fig2 We may make a "map" of this relation by taking five points on a plane and connecting them
by arrows, as in the accompanying figure. What is revealed by the map is what we call the "structure"
of the relation.

  It is clear that the "structure" of the relation does not depend upon the

particular  terms  that  make  up  the  field  of  the  relation.  The  field  may  be

changed without changing the structure, and the structure may be changed

without changing the field—for  example, if we were to add the couple in the

above illustration we should alter the structure but not the field. Two relations

have the same "structure," we shall say, when the same map will do for both

—or, what comes to the same thing, when either can be a map for the other

(since every relation can be its own map). And that, as a moment's reflection

shows, is the very same thing as what we have called "likeness." That is to

say, two relations have the same structure when they have likeness, i.e. when

they have the same relation-number. Thus what we defined as the "relation-number"  is  the  very  same  thing  as  is  obscurely  intended  by  the  word

"structure"—a word which, important as it is, is never (so far as we know)

defined in precise terms by those who use it.

  There has been a great deal of speculation in traditional philosophy which

might have been avoided if the importance of structure, and the difficulty of

getting behind it, had been realised. For example, it is often said that space

and  time  are  subjective,  but  they  have  objective  counterparts;  or  that

phenomena are subjective, but are caused by things in themselves, which

must  have  differences inter  se  corresponding  with  the  differences  in  the

phenomena to which they give rise. Where such hypotheses are made, it is

generally  supposed  that  we  can  know  very  little  about  the  objective

counterparts. In actual fact, however, if the hypotheses as stated were correct,

the objective counterparts would form a world having the same structure as

the phenomenal world, and allowing us to infer from phenomena the truth of

all propositions that can be stated in abstract terms and are known to be true

of phenomena. If the phenomenal world has three dimensions, so must the

world behind phenomena; if the phenomenal world is Euclidean, so must the

other  be;  and  so  on.  In  short,  every  proposition  having  a  communicable

significance must be true of both worlds or of neither: the only difference

must lie in just that essence of individuality which always eludes words and

baffles description, but which, for that very reason, is irrelevant to science.

Now  the  only  purpose  that philosophers  have  in  view  in  condemning

phenomena is in order to persuade themselves and others that the real world

is very different from the world of appearance. We can all sympathise with

their  wish  to  prove  such  a  very  desirable  proposition,  but  we  cannot

congratulate them on their success. It is true that many of them do not assert

objective  counterparts  to  phenomena,  and  these  escape  from  the  above

argument. Those who do assert counterparts are, as a rule, very reticent on

the subject, probably because they feel instinctively that, if pursued, it will

bring  about  too  much  of  a rapprochement between the real and the 

phenomenal world. If they were to pursue the topic, they could hardly avoid 

the conclusions which we have been suggesting. In such ways, as well as in 

many others, the notion of structure or relation-number is important.                                      CHAPTER VII 


        RATIONAL, REAL, AND COMPLEX NUMBERS

  WE have now seen how to define cardinal numbers, and also relation-numbers, of which what are
commonly called ordinal numbers are a particular species. It will be found that each of these kinds of
number may be infinite just as well as finite. But neither is capable, as it stands, of the more familiar
extensions of the idea of number, namely, the extensions to negative, fractional, irrational, and
complex numbers. In the present chapter we shall briefly supply logical definitions of these various
extensions.

  One of the mistakes that have delayed the discovery of correct definitions

in this region is the common idea that each extension of number included the

previous sorts as special cases. It was thought that, in dealing with positive

and  negative  integers,  the  positive  integers  might  be  identified  with  the

original  signless  integers.  Again  it  was  thought  that  a  fraction  whose

denominator  is  1  may  be  identified  with  the  natural  number  which  is  its

numerator. And the irrational numbers, such as the square root of 2, were

supposed to find their place among rational fractions, as being greater than

some of them and less than the others, so that rational and irrational numbers

could be taken together as one class, called "real numbers." And when the

idea of number was further extended so as to include "complex" numbers, i.e.

numbers involving the square root of -1, it was thought that real numbers

could be regarded as those among complex numbers in which the imaginary

part (i.e. the part  which was a multiple of the square root of -1) was zero. All

these suppositions were erroneous, and must be discarded, as we shall find, if

correct definitions are to be given.

  Let  us  begin  with positive  and  negative  integers.  It  is  obvious  on  a

moment's consideration that +1 and -1 must both be relations, and in fact

must be each other's converses. The obvious and sufficient definition is that

+1 is the relation of to , and -1 is the relation of to . Generally, if is any

inductive number, will be the relation of to (for any ), and will be the relation

of to . According to this definition, is a relation which is one-one so long as is

a cardinal number (finite or infinite) and is an inductive cardinal number. But

is under no circumstances capable of being identified with , which is not a

relation, but a class of classes. Indeed, is every bit as distinct from as is.

  Fractions are more interesting than positive or negative integers. We need

fractions  for  many  purposes,  but  perhaps  most  obviously  for  purposes  of

measurement. My friend and collaborator Dr A. N. Whitehead has developeda theory of fractions specially adapted for their application to measurement,

which is set forth in Principia Mathematica.[14] But if all that is needed is to

define  objects  having  the  required  purely  mathematical  properties,  this

purpose can be achieved by a simpler method, which we shall here adopt. We

shall  define  the  fraction as  being  that  relation  which  holds  between  two

inductive numbers , when . This definition enables us to prove that is a one-

one  relation,  provided  neither or is  zero.  And  of  course is  the  converse

relation to .

[14]Vol. III. * 300 ff., especially 303.

  From  the  above  definition  it  is  clear  that  the  fraction is  that  relation

between two integers and which consists in the fact that . This relation, like

the relation , is by no means capable of being identified with the inductive

cardinal number , because a relation and a class of classes are objects  of 

utterly different kinds.[15]  It  will  be  seen  that is always the same relation,

whatever inductive number may be; it is, in short, the relation of 0 to any

other inductive cardinal. We may call this the zero of rational numbers; it is

not, of course, identical with the cardinal number 0. Conversely, the relation

is always the same, whatever inductive number may be. There is not any

inductive cardinal to correspond to . We may call it "the infinity of rationals."

It is an instance of the sort of infinite that is traditional in mathematics, and

that  is  represented  by  " ."  This  is  a  totally  different  sort  from  the  true

Cantorian infinite, which we shall consider in our next chapter. The infinity

of rationals does not demand, for its definition or use, any infinite classes or

infinite integers. It is not, in actual fact, a very important notion, and we

could dispense with it altogether if there were any object in doing so. The

Cantorian infinite, on the other hand, is of the greatest and most fundamental

importance; the understanding of it opens the way to whole new realms of

mathematics and philosophy.

[15]Of course in practice we shall continue to speak of a fraction as (say)

greater or less than 1, meaning greater or less than the ratio . So long as it is

understood that the ratio and the cardinal number 1 are different, it is not

necessary to be always pedantic in emphasising the difference.

  It will be observed that zero and infinity, alone among ratios, are not one-

one. Zero is one-many, and infinity is many-one.

  There is not any difficulty in defining greater and less among ratios (or

fractions). Given two ratios and , we shall say that is less than if is less than .There is no difficulty in proving that the relation "less than," so defined, is

serial, so that the ratios form a series in order of magnitude. In this series,

zero  is  the  smallest  term  and  infinity  is  the  largest.  If  we  omit  zero  and

infinity from our series, there is no longer any smallest or largest ratio; it is

obvious that if is any ratio other than zero and infinity, is smaller and is

larger, though neither is zero or infinity, so that is neither the smallest  nor the 

largest ratio, and therefore (when zero and infinity are omitted) there is no 

smallest or largest, since was chosen arbitrarily. In like manner we can prove
 

that  however  nearly  equal  two  fractions  may  be,  there  are  always  other

fractions between them. For, let and be two fractions, of which is the greater.

Then it is easy to see (or to prove) that will be greater than and less than .

Thus the series of ratios is one in which no two terms are consecutive, but

there are always other terms between any two. Since there are other terms

between these others, and so on ad infinitum, it is obvious that there are an

infinite number of ratios between any two, however nearly equal these two

may be.[16] A series having the property that there are always other terms

between any two, so that no two are consecutive, is called "compact." Thus

the ratios in order of magnitude form a "compact" series. Such series have

many important properties, and it is important to observe that ratios afford an

instance of a compact series generated purely logically, without any appeal to

space or time or any other empirical datum.

  [16]Strictly speaking, this statement, as well as those following to the end

of the paragraph, involves what is called the "axiom of infinity," which will

be discussed in a later chapter.

  Positive and negative ratios can be defined in a way analogous to that in

which we defined positive and negative integers. Having first defined the

sum of two ratios and as , we define as the relation of to , where is any ratio;

and is  of  course  the  converse  of .  This  is  not  the  only  possible  way  of

defining positive and negative ratios, but it is a way which, for our purpose,

has the merit of being an obvious adaptation of the way we adopted in the

case of integers.

  We come now to a more interesting extension of the idea of number, i.e.

the  extension  to  what  are  called  "real"  numbers,  which  are  the  kind  that

embrace  irrationals.  In  Chapter  I.  we  had  occasion  to  mention

"incommensurables" and their discovery  by Pythagoras. It was through them,i.e. through geometry, that irrational numbers were first thought of. A square

of which the side is one inch long will have a diagonal of which the length is

the  square  root  of  2  inches.  But,  as  the  ancients  discovered,  there  is  no

fraction of which the square is 2. This proposition is proved in the tenth book

of  Euclid,  which  is  one  of  those  books  that  schoolboys  supposed  to  be

fortunately lost in the days when Euclid was still used as a text-book. The

proof is extraordinarily simple. If possible, let be the square root of 2, so that

, i.e. .  Thus is  an  even  number,  and  therefore must  be  an  even  number,

because the square of an odd number is odd. Now if is even, must divide by

4, for if , then . Thus we shall have , where is half of . Hence , and therefore

will also be the square root of 2. But then we can repeat the argument: if ,

will also be the square root of 2, and so on, through an unending series of

numbers that are each half of its predecessor. But this is impossible; if we

divide a number by 2, and then halve the half, and so on, we must reach an

odd number after a finite number of steps. Or we may put the argument even

more simply by assuming that the we start with is in its lowest terms; in that

case, and cannot both be even; yet we have seen that, if , they must be. Thus

there cannot be any fraction whose square is 2.

  Thus no fraction will express exactly the length of the diagonal of a square

whose side is one inch long. This seems like a challenge thrown out by nature

to arithmetic. However the arithmetician may boast (as Pythagoras did) about

the power of numbers, nature seems able to baffle him by exhibiting lengths

which no numbers can estimate in terms of the unit. But the problem did not

remain in this geometrical form. As soon as algebra was invented, the same

problem arose as regards the solution of equations, though here it took on a

wider form, since it also involved complex numbers.

  It is clear that fractions can be found which approach nearer  and nearer to

having their square equal to 2. We can form an ascending series of fractions

all of which have their squares less than 2, but differing from 2 in their later

members by less than any assigned amount. That is to say, suppose I assign

some small amount in advance, say one-billionth, it will be found that all the

terms of our series after a certain one, say the tenth, have squares that differ

from 2 by less than this amount. And if I had assigned a still smaller amount,

it might have been necessary to go further along the series, but we should

have reached sooner or later a term in the series, say the twentieth, after

which all terms would have had squares differing from 2 by less than this stillsmaller amount. If we set to work to extract the square root of 2 by the usual

arithmetical rule, we shall obtain an unending decimal which, taken to so-

and-so many places, exactly fulfils the above conditions. We can equally well

form a descending series of fractions whose squares are all greater than 2, but

greater  by  continually  smaller  amounts  as  we  come  to  later  terms  of  the

series, and differing, sooner or later, by less than any assigned amount. In this

way we seem to be drawing a cordon round the square root of 2, and it may

seem difficult to believe that it can permanently escape us. Nevertheless, it is

not by this method that we shall actually reach the square root of 2.

  If we divide all ratios into two classes, according as their squares are less

than 2 or not, we find that, among those whose squares are not less than 2, all

have their squares greater than 2. There is no maximum to the ratios whose

square is less than 2, and no minimum to those whose square is greater than

2. There is no lower limit short of zero to the difference between the numbers

whose square is a little less than 2 and the numbers whose square is a little

greater than 2. We can, in short, divide all ratios into two classes such that all

the terms in one class are less than all in the other, there is no maximum to

the  one  class,  and  there  is  no  minimum  to  the  other.  Between  these  two

classes, where ought to be, there is nothing. Thus our  cordon,  though  we

have drawn it as tight as possible, has been drawn in the wrong place, and has

not caught .

  The above method of dividing all the terms of a series into two classes, of

which the one wholly precedes the other, was brought into prominence by

Dedekind,[17] and is therefore called a "Dedekind cut." With respect to what

happens at the point of section, there are four possibilities: (1) there may be a

maximum to the lower section and a minimum to the upper section, (2) there

may be a maximum to the one and no minimum to the other, (3) there may be

no maximum to the one, but a minimum to the other, (4) there may be neither

a maximum to the one nor a minimum to the other. Of these four cases, the

first is illustrated by any series in which there are consecutive terms: in the

series of integers, for instance, a lower section must end with some number

and  the  upper  section  must  then  begin  with .  The  second  case  will  be

illustrated in the series of ratios if we take as our lower section all ratios up to

and including 1, and in our upper section all ratios greater than 1. The third

case is illustrated if we take for our lower section all ratios less than 1, and

for our upper section all ratios from 1 upward (including 1 itself). The fourthcase, as we have seen, is illustrated if we put in our lower section all ratios

whose square is less than 2, and in our upper section all ratios whose square

is greater than 2.

[17]Stetigkeit und irrationale Zahlen, 2nd edition, Brunswick, 1892.

  We may neglect the first of our four cases, since it only arises in series

where there are consecutive terms. In the second of our four cases, we say

that the maximum of the lower section is the lower limit of the upper section,

or of any set of terms chosen out of the upper section in such a way that no

term of the upper section is before all of them. In the third of our four cases,

we say that the minimum of the upper section is the upper limit of the lower

section, or of any set of terms chosen out of the lower section in such a way

that no term of the lower section is after all of them. In the fourth case, we

say that  there is a "gap": neither the upper section nor the lower has a limit or

a last term. In this case, we may also say that we have an "irrational section,"

since sections of the series of ratios have "gaps" when they correspond to

irrationals.

  What delayed the true theory of irrationals was a mistaken belief that there

must be "limits" of series of ratios. The notion of "limit" is of the utmost

importance, and before proceeding further it will be well to define it.

  A term is said to be an "upper limit" of a class with respect to a relation if

(1) has no maximum in , (2) every member of which belongs to the field of

precedes , (3) every member of the field of which precedes precedes some

member of . (By "precedes" we mean "has the relation to.")

  This presupposes the following definition of a "maximum":—

  A term is said to be a "maximum" of a class with respect to a relation if is

a member of and of the field of and does not have the relation to any other

member of .

  These definitions do not demand that the terms to which they are applied

should  be  quantitative.  For  example,  given  a  series  of  moments  of  time

arranged by earlier and later, their "maximum" (if any) will be the last of the

moments; but if they are arranged by later and earlier, their "maximum" (if

any) will be the first of the moments.

  The "minimum" of a class with respect to is its maximum with respect to

the converse of ; and the "lower limit" with respect to is the upper limit with

respect to the converse of .

  The notions of limit and maximum do not essentially demand that therelation in respect to which they are defined should be serial, but they have

few  important  applications  except  to  cases  when  the  relation  is  serial  or

quasi-serial. A notion which is often important is the notion "upper limit or

maximum," to which we may give the name "upper boundary." Thus the

"upper boundary" of a set of terms chosen out of a series is their last member

if they have one, but, if not, it is the first term after all of them, if there is

such a term. If there is neither  a maximum nor a limit, there is no upper

boundary. The "lower boundary" is the lower limit or minimum.

  Reverting to the four kinds of Dedekind section, we see that in the case of

the first three kinds each section has a boundary (upper or lower as the case

may be), while in the fourth kind neither has a boundary. It is also clear that,

whenever the lower section has an upper boundary, the upper section has a

lower  boundary.  In  the  second  and  third  cases,  the  two  boundaries  are

identical; in the first, they are consecutive terms of the series.

  A  series  is  called  "Dedekindian"  when  every  section  has  a  boundary,

upper or lower as the case may be.

  We  have  seen  that  the  series  of  ratios  in  order  of  magnitude  is  not

Dedekindian.

  From the habit of being influenced by spatial imagination, people have

supposed that series must have limits in cases where it seems odd if they do

not. Thus, perceiving that there was no rational limit to the ratios whose

square is less than 2, they allowed themselves to "postulate" an irrational

limit, which was to fill the Dedekind gap. Dedekind, in the above-mentioned

work, set up the axiom that the gap must always be filled, i.e. that every

section must have a boundary. It is for this reason that series where his axiom

is  verified  are  called  "Dedekindian."  But  there  are  an  infinite  number  of

series for which it is not verified.

  The method of "postulating" what we want has many advantages; they are

the same as the advantages of theft over honest toil. Let us leave them to

others and proceed with our honest toil.

  It is clear that an irrational Dedekind cut in some way "represents" an

irrational. In order to make use of this, which to begin with is no more than a

vague feeling, we must find some way of eliciting from it a precise definition;

and in order to do this, we must disabuse our minds of the notion that an

irrational must be the limit of a set of ratios. Just as ratios whose denominator

is 1 are not identical with integers, so those rational  numbers which can begreater or less than irrationals, or can have irrationals as their limits, must not

be identified with ratios. We have to define a new kind of numbers called

"real numbers," of which some will be rational and some irrational. Those

that are rational "correspond" to ratios, in the same kind of way in which the

ratio corresponds to the integer ; but they are not the same as ratios. In order

to decide what they are to be, let us observe that an irrational is represented

by an irrational cut, and a cut is represented by its lower section. Let us

confine ourselves to cuts in which the lower section has no maximum; in this

case we will call the lower section a "segment." Then those segments that

correspond to ratios are those that consist of all ratios less than the ratio they

correspond to, which is their boundary; while those that represent irrationals

are those that have no boundary. Segments, both those that have boundaries

and those that do not, are such that, of any two pertaining to one series, one

must be part of the other; hence they can all be arranged in a series by the

relation of whole and part. A series in which there are Dedekind gaps, i.e. in

which  there  are  segments  that  have  no  boundary,  will  give  rise  to  more

segments than it has terms, since each term will define a segment having that

term for boundary, and then the segments without boundaries will be extra.

  We are now in a position to define a real number and an irrational number.

  A "real number" is a segment of the series of ratios in order of magnitude.

  An "irrational number" is a segment of the series of ratios which has no

boundary.

  A "rational real number" is a segment of the series of ratios which has a

boundary.

  Thus a rational real number consists of all ratios less than a certain ratio, 

and it is the rational real number corresponding to that ratio. The real number 

1, for instance, is the class of proper fractions.  

  In the cases in which we naturally supposed that an irrational must be the

limit of a set of ratios, the truth is that it is the limit of the corresponding set

of rational real numbers in the series of segments ordered by whole and part.

For example, is the upper limit of all those segments of the series of ratios

that correspond to ratios whose square is less than 2. More simply still, is the

segment consisting of all those ratios whose square is less than 2.

  It is easy to prove that the series of segments of any series is Dedekindian.

For, given any set of segments, their boundary will be their logical sum, i.e.

the class of all those terms that belong to at least one segment of the set.[18][18]For a fuller treatment of the subject of segments and Dedekindian

relations, see Principia Mathematica, vol. II. * 210-214. For a fuller

treatment of real numbers, see ibid., vol. III. * 310 ff., and Principles of

Mathematics, chaps. XXXIII. and XXXIV.

  The above definition of real numbers is an example of "construction" as

against "postulation," of which we had another example in the definition of

cardinal numbers. The great advantage of this method is that it requires no

new assumptions, but enables us to proceed deductively from the original

apparatus of logic.

  There  is  no  difficulty  in  defining  addition  and  multiplication  for  real

numbers as above defined. Given two real numbers and , each being a class

of ratios, take any member of and any member of and add them together

according to the rule for the addition of ratios. Form the class of all such

sums obtainable by varying the selected members of and . This gives a new

class of ratios, and it is easy to prove that this new class is a segment of the

series of ratios. We define it as the sum of and . We may state the definition

more shortly as follows:—

  The arithmetical sum of two real numbers is the class of the arithmetical 

sums of a member of the one and a member of the other chosen in all 

possible ways.  

  We can define the arithmetical product of two real numbers in exactly the

same way, by multiplying a member of the one by a member of the other in

all possible ways. The class of ratios thus generated is defined as the product

of the two real numbers. (In all such definitions, the series of ratios is to be

defined as excluding 0 and infinity.)

  There is no difficulty in extending our definitions to positive and negative

real numbers and their addition and multiplication.

  It remains to give the definition of complex numbers.

  Complex numbers, though capable of a geometrical interpretation, are not

demanded by geometry in the same imperative way in which irrationals are

demanded. A "complex" number means a number involving the square root

of a negative number, whether integral, fractional, or real. Since the square of

a negative number is positive, a number whose square is to be negative has to

be a new sort of number. Using the letter for the square root of , any number

involving the square root of a negative number can be expressed in the form ,

where and are real. The part is called the "imaginary" part of this number,being the "real" part. (The reason for the phrase "real numbers" is that they

are contrasted with such as are "imaginary.") Complex numbers have been

for a long time habitually used by mathematicians, in spite of the absence of

any precise definition. It has been simply assumed that they would obey the

usual arithmetical rules, and on this assumption their employment has been

found profitable. They are required less for geometry than for algebra and

analysis.  We  desire,  for  example,  to  be  able  to  say  that  every  quadratic

equation has two roots, and every cubic equation has three, and so on. But if

we are confined to real numbers, such an equation as has no roots, and such

an  equation  as has  only  one.  Every  generalisation  of  number  has  first

presented itself as needed for some simple problem: negative numbers were

needed in order that subtraction might be always possible, since otherwise

would be meaningless if were less than ; fractions were needed  in order that 

division might be always possible; and complex numbers are needed in order

that extraction of roots and solution of equations may be always possible. But

extensions of number are not created by the mere need for them: they are

created by the definition, and it is to the definition of complex numbers that

we must now turn our attention.

  A complex number may be regarded and defined as simply an ordered

couple of real numbers. Here, as elsewhere, many definitions are possible.

All  that  is  necessary  is  that  the  definitions  adopted  shall  lead  to  certain

properties. In the case of complex numbers, if they are defined as ordered

couples of real numbers, we secure at once some of the properties required,

namely, that two real numbers are required to determine a complex number,

and that among these we can distinguish a first and a second, and that two

complex numbers are only identical when the first real number involved in

the  one  is  equal  to  the  first  involved  in  the  other,  and  the  second  to  the

second.  What  is  needed  further  can  be  secured  by  defining  the  rules  of

addition and multiplication. We are to have

  Thus we shall define that, given two ordered couples of real numbers, and

, their sum is to be the couple , and their product is to be the couple . By these

definitions we shall secure that our ordered couples shall have the properties

we desire. For example, take the product of the two couples and . This will,

by the above rule, be the couple . Thus the square of the couple will be the

couple . Now those couples in which the second term is 0 are those which,

according to the usual nomenclature, have their imaginary part zero; in thenotation , they are , which it is natural to write simply . Just as it is natural

(but erroneous) to identify ratios whose denominator is unity with integers, so

it is natural (but erroneous)  to identify complex numbers whose imaginary

part is zero with real numbers. Although this is an error in theory, it is a

convenience in practice; " " may be replaced simply by " " and "" by ","
  

provided we remember that the " " is not really a real number, but a special

case of a complex number. And when is 1, "" may of course be replaced by "
 

." Thus the couple is represented by , and the couple is represented by -1.

Now our rules of multiplication make the square of equal to , i.e. the square

of is -1. This is what we desired to secure. Thus our definitions serve all

necessary purposes.

  It is easy to give a geometrical interpretation of complex numbers in the

geometry  of  the  plane.  This  subject  was  agreeably  expounded  by  W.  K.

Clifford in his Common Sense of the Exact Sciences, a book of great merit,

but  written  before  the  importance  of  purely  logical  definitions  had  been

realised.

  Complex  numbers  of  a  higher  order,  though  much  less  useful  and

important than those what we have been defining, have certain uses that are

not without importance in geometry, as may be seen, for example, in Dr

Whitehead's Universal Algebra. The definition of complex numbers of order

is obtained by an obvious extension of the definition we have given. We

define a complex number of order as a one-many relation whose domain

consists of certain real numbers and whose converse domain consists of the

integers from 1 to .[19] This is what would ordinarily be indicated by the

notation ,  where  the  suffixes  denote  correlation  with  the  integers  used  as

suffixes, and the correlation is one-many, not necessarily one-one, because

and may  be  equal  when and are  not  equal.  The  above  definition,  with  a

suitable  rule  of  multiplication,  will  serve  all  purposes  for  which  complex

numbers of higher orders are needed.

[19]Cf. Principles of Mathematics, § 360, p. 379.

  We have now completed our review of those extensions of number which 

do not involve infinity. The application of number to infinite collections must 

be our next topic.                                    CHAPTER VIII 


                  INFINITE CARDINAL NUMBERS

  THE definition of cardinal numbers which we gave in Chapter II. was applied in Chapter III. to
finite numbers, i.e. to the ordinary natural numbers. To these we gave the name "inductive numbers,"
because we found that they are to be defined as numbers which obey mathematical induction starting
from 0. But we have not yet considered collections which do not have an inductive number of terms,
nor have we inquired whether such collections can be said to have a number at all. This is an ancient
problem, which has been solved in our own day, chiefly by Georg Cantor. In the present chapter we
shall attempt to explain the theory of transfinite or infinite cardinal numbers as it results from a
combination of his discoveries with those of Frege on the logical theory of numbers.

  It cannot be said to be certain that there are in fact any infinite collections

in the world. The assumption that there are is what we call the "axiom of

infinity." Although various ways suggest themselves by which we might hope

to prove this axiom, there is reason to fear that they are all fallacious, and that

there is no conclusive logical reason for believing it to be true. At the same

time, there is certainly no logical reason against infinite collections, and we

are therefore justified, in logic, in investigating the hypothesis that there are

such  collections.  The  practical  form  of  this  hypothesis,  for  our  present

purposes, is the assumption that, if is any inductive number, is not equal to .

Various subtleties arise in identifying this form of our assumption with  the

form that asserts the existence of infinite collections; but we will leave these

out of account until, in a later chapter, we come to consider the axiom of

infinity on its own account. For the present we shall merely assume that, if is

an inductive number, is not equal to . This is involved in Peano's assumption

that no two inductive numbers have the same successor; for, if , then and

have the same successor, namely . Thus we are assuming nothing that was

not involved in Peano's primitive propositions.

  Let us now consider the collection of the inductive numbers themselves.

This is a perfectly well-defined class. In the first place, a cardinal number is a

set  of  classes  which  are  all  similar  to  each  other  and  are  not  similar  to

anything except each other. We then define as the "inductive numbers" those

among  cardinals  which  belong  to  the  posterity  of  0  with  respect  to  the

relation of to , i.e. those which possess every property possessed by 0 and by

the successors of possessors, meaning by the "successor" of the number .

Thus the class of "inductive numbers" is perfectly definite. By our general

definition of cardinal numbers, the number of terms in the class of inductivenumbers is to be defined as "all those classes that are similar to the class of

inductive numbers"—i.e. this set of classes is the number of the inductive

numbers according to our definitions.

  Now it is easy to see that this number is not one of the inductive numbers.

If is any inductive number, the number of numbers from 0 to (both included)

is ; therefore the total number of inductive numbers is greater than , no matter

which of the inductive numbers may be. If we arrange the inductive numbers

in a series in order of magnitude, this series has no last term; but if is an

inductive number, every series whose field has terms has a last term, as it is

easy to prove. Such differences might be multiplied ad lib. Thus the number

of  inductive  numbers  is  a  new  number,  different  from  all  of  them,  not

possessing  all  inductive  properties.  It  may  happen  that  0  has  a certain  

property, and that if has it so has , and yet that this new number does not have

it. The difficulties that so long delayed the theory of infinite numbers were

largely due to the fact that some, at least, of the inductive properties were

wrongly judged to be such as must belong to all numbers; indeed it was

thought that they could not be denied without contradiction. The first step in

understanding infinite numbers consists in realising the mistakenness of this

view.

  The  most  noteworthy  and  astonishing  difference  between  an  inductive

number and this new number is that this new number is unchanged by adding

1  or  subtracting  1  or  doubling  or  halving  or  any  of  a  number  of  other

operations  which  we  think  of  as  necessarily  making  a  number  larger  or

smaller. The fact of being not altered by the addition of 1 is used by Cantor

for  the  definition  of  what  he  calls  "transfinite"  cardinal  numbers;  but  for

various reasons, some of which will appear as we proceed, it is better to

define an infinite cardinal number as one which does not possess all inductive

properties, i.e. simply as one which is not an inductive number. Nevertheless,

the property of being unchanged by the addition of 1 is a very important one,

and we must dwell on it for a time.

  To say that a class has a number which is not altered by the addition of 1

is the same thing as to say that, if we take a term which does not belong to the

class, we can find a one-one relation whose domain is the class and whose

converse domain is obtained by adding to the class. For in that case, the class

is similar to the sum of itself and the term , i.e. to a class having one extra

term; so that it has the same number as a class with one extra term, so that ifis this number, . In this case, we shall also have , i.e. there will be one-one

relations  whose  domains  consist  of  the  whole  class  and  whose  converse

domains consist of just one term short of the whole class. It can be shown

that the cases in which this happens are the same as the apparently more

general cases in which some part (short of the whole) can be put into one-one

relation with the whole. When this can be done,  the correlator by which it is

done may be said to "reflect" the whole class into a part of itself; for this

reason, such classes will be called "reflexive." Thus:

  A "reflexive" class is one which is similar to a proper part of itself. (A

"proper part" is a part short of the whole.)

  A "reflexive" cardinal number is the cardinal number of a reflexive class.

  We have now to consider this property of reflexiveness.

  One of the most striking instances of a "reflexion" is Royce's illustration

of the map: he imagines it decided to make a map of England upon a part of

the  surface  of  England.  A  map,  if  it  is  accurate,  has  a  perfect  one-one

correspondence with its original; thus our map, which is part, is in one-one

relation with the whole, and must contain the same number of points as the

whole, which must therefore be a reflexive number. Royce is interested in the

fact that the map, if it is correct, must contain a map of the map, which must

in turn contain a map of the map of the map, and so on ad infinitum. This

point is interesting, but need not occupy us at this moment. In fact, we shall

do well to pass from picturesque illustrations to such as are more completely

definite, and for this purpose we cannot do better than consider the number-

series itself.

  The relation of to , confined to inductive numbers, is one-one, has the

whole  of  the  inductive  numbers  for  its  domain,  and  all  except  0  for  its

converse domain. Thus the whole class of inductive numbers is similar to

what  the  same  class  becomes  when  we  omit  0.  Consequently  it  is  a

"reflexive" class according to the definition, and the number of its terms is a

"reflexive" number. Again, the relation of to , confined to inductive numbers,

is one-one, has the whole of the inductive numbers for its domain, and the

even  inductive  numbers  alone  for  its  converse  domain.  Hence  the  total

number of inductive numbers is the same as the number of even inductive

numbers. This property was used by Leibniz (and many others) as a proof

that infinite numbers are impossible; it was thought self-contradictory that  

"the part should be equal to the whole." But this is one of those phrases thatdepend  for  their  plausibility  upon  an  unperceived  vagueness:  the  word

"equal" has many meanings, but if it is taken to mean what we have called

"similar," there is no contradiction, since an infinite collection can perfectly

well have parts similar to itself. Those who regard this as impossible have,

unconsciously as a rule, attributed to numbers in general properties which can

only be proved by mathematical induction, and which only their familiarity

makes us regard, mistakenly, as true beyond the region of the finite.

  Whenever we can "reflect" a class into a part of itself, the same relation

will necessarily reflect that part into a smaller part, and so on ad infinitum.

For example, we can reflect, as we have just seen, all the inductive numbers

into the even numbers; we can, by the same relation (that of to ) reflect the

even numbers into the multiples of 4, these into the multiples of 8, and so on.

This  is  an  abstract  analogue  to  Royce's  problem  of  the  map.  The  even

numbers are a "map" of all the inductive numbers; the multiples of 4 are a

map of the map; the multiples of 8 are a map of the map of the map; and so

on. If we had applied the same process to the relation of to , our "map" would

have consisted of all the inductive numbers except 0; the map of the map

would have consisted of all from 2 onward, the map of the map of the map of

all from 3 onward; and so on. The chief use of such illustrations is in order to

become  familiar  with  the  idea  of  reflexive  classes,  so  that  apparently

paradoxical  arithmetical  propositions  can  be  readily  translated  into  the

language of reflexions and classes, in which the air of paradox is much less.

  It will be useful to give a definition of the number which is that of the

inductive cardinals. For this purpose we will first define the kind of series 

exemplified by the inductive cardinals in order of magnitude. The kind of 

series which is called a "progression" has already been considered in Chapter 

I. It is a series which can be generated by a relation of consecutiveness:  

every member of the series is to have a successor, but there is to be just one 

which has no predecessor, and every member of the series is to be in the 

posterity of this term with respect to the relation "immediate predecessor." 

These characteristics may be summed up in the following definition:[20]—

[20]Cf. Principia Mathematica, vol. II. * 123.

  A  "progession"  is  a  one-one  relation  such  that  there  is  just  one  term

belonging to the domain but not to the converse domain, and the domain is

identical with the posterity of this one term.

  It  is  easy  to  see  that  a  progression,  so  defined,  satisfies  Peano's  fiveaxioms. The term belonging to the domain but not to the converse domain

will be what he calls "0"; the term to which a term has the one-one relation

will be the "successor" of the term; and the domain of the one-one relation

will be what he calls "number." Taking his five axioms in turn, we have the

following translations:—

  (1) "0 is a number" becomes: "The member of the domain which is not a

member  of  the  converse  domain  is  a  member  of  the  domain."  This  is

equivalent  to  the  existence  of  such  a  member,  which  is  given  in  our

definition. We will call this member "the first term."

  (2) "The successor of any number is a number" becomes: "The term to

which a given member of the domain has the relation in question is again a

member of the domain." This is proved as follows: By the definition, every

member of the domain is a member of the posterity of the first term; hence

the successor of a member of the domain must be a member of the posterity

of the first term (because the posterity of a term always contains its own

successors, by the general definition of posterity), and therefore a member of

the domain, because by the definition the posterity of the first term is the

same as the domain.

  (3) "No two numbers have the same successor." This is only to say that the

relation is one-many, which it is by definition (being one-one).  

  (4) "0 is not the successor of any number" becomes: "The first term is not

a member of the converse domain," which is again an immediate result of the

definition.

  (5) This is mathematical induction, and becomes: "Every member of the

domain belongs to the posterity of the first term," which was part of our

definition.

  Thus  progressions  as  we  have  defined  them  have  the  five  formal

properties from which Peano deduces arithmetic. It is easy to show that two

progessions are "similar" in the sense defined for similarity of relations in

Chapter VI. We can, of course, derive a relation which is serial from the one-

one  relation  by  which  we  define  a  progression:  the  method  used  is  that

explained in Chapter IV., and the relation is that of a term to a member of its

proper posterity with respect to the original one-one relation.

  Two  transitive  asymmetrical  relations  which  generate  progressions  are

similar, for the same reasons for which the corresponding one-one relations

are similar. The class of all such transitive generators of progressions is a"serial  number"  in  the  sense  of  Chapter  VI.;  it  is  in  fact  the  smallest  of

infinite serial numbers, the number to which Cantor has given the name , by

which he has made it famous.

  But we are concerned, for the moment, with cardinal numbers. Since two

progressions  are  similar  relations,  it  follows  that  their  domains  (or  their

fields, which are the same as their domains) are similar classes. The domains

of progressions form a cardinal number, since every class which is similar to

the domain of a progression is easily shown to be itself the domain of a

progression.  This  cardinal  number  is  the  smallest  of  the  infinite  cardinal

numbers; it is the one to which Cantor has appropriated the Hebrew Aleph

with the suffix 0, to distinguish it from larger infinite cardinals, which have

other suffixes. Thus the name of the smallest of infinite cardinals is .

  To say that a class has terms is the same thing as to say that it is a member

of , and this is the same thing as to say  that the members of the class can be 

arranged in a progression. It is obvious that any progression remains a 

progression if we omit a finite number of terms from it, or every other term, 

or all except every tenth term or every hundredth term. These methods of 

thinning out a progression do not make it cease to be a progression, and 

therefore do not diminish the number of its terms, which remains .  In  fact,

any  selection  from  a  progression  is  a  progression  if  it  has  no  last  term,

however sparsely it may be distributed. Take (say) inductive numbers of the

form , or . Such numbers grow very rare in the higher parts of the number

series, and yet there are just as many of them as there are inductive numbers

altogether, namely, .

  Conversely, we can add terms to the inductive numbers without increasing

their number. Take, for example, ratios. One might be inclined to think that

there must be many more ratios than integers, since ratios whose denominator

is  1  correspond  to  the  integers,  and  seem  to  be  only  an  infinitesimal

proportion of ratios. But in actual fact the number of ratios (or fractions) is

exactly the same as the number of inductive numbers, namely, . This is easily

seen  by  arranging  ratios  in  a  series  on  the  following  plan:  If  the  sum  of

numerator and denominator in one is less than in the other, put the one before

the other; if the sum is equal in the two, put first the one with the smaller

numerator. This gives us the series


  This series is a progression, and all ratios occur in it sooner or later. Hencewe can arrange all ratios in a progression, and their number is therefore .

  It is not the case, however, that all infinite collections have terms. The

number of real numbers, for example, is greater than ; it is, in fact, , and it is

not hard to prove that is greater than even when is infinite. The easiest way of

proving this is to prove, first, that if a class has members, it contains sub-

classes—in  other  words,  that  there  are ways  of  selecting  some  of  its

members  (including  the  extreme  cases  where  we  select  all  or  none);  and

secondly, that the number of sub-classes contained in a class is always greater

than the number of members of the class. Of these two propositions, the first

is familiar in the case of finite numbers, and is not hard to extend to infinite

numbers. The proof of the second is so simple and so instructive that we shall

give it:

  In the first place, it is clear that the number of sub-classes of a given class

(say ) is at least as great as the number of members, since each member

constitutes a sub-class, and we thus have a correlation of all the members

with some of the sub-classes. Hence it follows that, if the number of sub-

classes is not equal to the number of members, it must be greater. Now it is

easy to prove that the number is not equal, by showing that, given any one-

one relation whose domain is the members and whose converse domain is

contained among the set of sub-classes, there must be at least one sub-class

not belonging to the converse domain. The proof is as follows:[21] When a

one-one correlation is established between all the members of and some of

the sub-classes, it may happen that a given member is correlated with a sub-

class of which it is a member; or, again, it may happen that is correlated with

a sub-class of which it is not a member. Let us form the whole class, say, of

those members which are correlated with sub-classes of which they are not

members. This is a sub-class of , and it is not correlated with any member of .

For, taking first the members of , each of them is (by the definition of )

correlated with some sub-class of which it is not a member, and is therefore

not correlated with . Taking next the terms which are not members of , each

of them (by the definition of ) is correlated with some sub-class of which it is

a member, and therefore again is not correlated with . Thus no member of is

correlated with . Since was any one-one correlation of all members  with

some sub-classes, it follows that there is no correlation of all members with

all sub-classes. It does not matter to the proof if has no members: all that

happens in that case is that the sub-class which is shown to be omitted is thenull-class. Hence in any case the number of sub-classes is not equal to the

number of members, and therefore, by what was said earlier, it is greater.

Combining this with the proposition that, if is the number of members, is the

number of sub-classes, we have the theorem that is always greater than , even

when is infinite.

[21]This proof is taken from Cantor, with some simplifications: see

Jahresbericht der deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung, I. (1892), p. 77.

  It follows from this proposition that there is no maximum to the infinite

cardinal numbers. However great an infinite number may be, will be still

greater. The arithmetic of infinite numbers is somewhat surprising until one

becomes accustomed to it. We have, for example,


  (This follows from the case of the ratios, for, since a ratio is determined by

a pair of inductive numbers, it is easy to see that the number of ratios is the

square of the number of inductive numbers, i.e. it is ; but we saw that it is

also .)

  But


  In fact, as we shall see later, is a very important number, namely, the

number of terms in a series which has "continuity" in the sense in which this

word is used by Cantor. Assuming space and time to be continuous in this

sense (as we commonly do in analytical geometry and kinematics), this will

be the number of points in space or of instants in time; it will also be the

number  of  points  in  any  finite  portion  of  space, whether  line,  area,  or

volume.  After , is  the  most  important  and  interesting  of  infinite  cardinal

numbers.

  Although  addition  and  multiplication  are  always  possible  with  infinite

cardinals, subtraction and division no longer give definite results, and cannot

therefore be employed as they are employed in elementary arithmetic. Take

subtraction to begin with: so long as the number subtracted is finite, all goes

well; if the other number is reflexive, it remains unchanged. Thus , if is finite;

so far, subtraction gives a perfectly definite result. But it is otherwise when

we subtract from itself; we may then get any result, from 0 up to . This is

easily  seen  by  examples.  From  the  inductive,  numbers,  take  away  the

following collections of terms:—

  (1) All the inductive numbers—remainder, zero.  (2)  All  the  inductive  numbers  from onwards—remainder,  the  numbers

from 0 to , numbering terms in all.

  (3) All the odd numbers—remainder, all the even numbers, numbering

terms.

  All these are different ways of subtracting from , and all give different

results.

  As  regards  division,  very  similar  results  follow  from  the  fact  that is

unchanged when multiplied by 2 or 3 or any finite number or by . It follows

that divided by may have any value from 1 up to .

  From  the  ambiguity  of  subtraction  and  division  it  results  that  negative

numbers  and  ratios  cannot  be  extended  to  infinite  numbers.  Addition,

multiplication, and exponentiation proceed quite satisfactorily, but the inverse

operations—subtraction, division, and extraction of roots—are ambiguous,

and  the  notions  that  depend  upon  them  fail  when  infinite  numbers  are

concerned.

  The  characteristic  by  which  we  defined  finitude  was  mathematical

induction, i.e. we defined a number as finite when it obeys mathematical

induction starting from 0, and a class as finite when its number is finite. This

definition yields the sort of result that a definition ought to yield, namely, that

the finite  numbers are those that occur in the ordinary number-series 0, 1, 2,

3, ... But in the present chapter, the infinite numbers we have discussed have

not merely been non-inductive: they have also been reflexive. Cantor used

reflexiveness as the definition of the infinite, and believes that it is equivalent

to non-inductiveness; that is to say, he believes that every class and every

cardinal  is  either  inductive  or  reflexive.  This  may  be  true,  and  may  very

possibly be capable of proof; but the proofs hitherto offered by Cantor and

others (including the present author in former days) are fallacious, for reasons

which  will  be  explained  when  we  come  to  consider  the  "multiplicative

axiom." At present, it is not known whether there are classes and cardinals

which are neither reflexive nor inductive. If were such a cardinal, we should

not have , but would not be one of the "natural numbers," and would be

lacking in some of the inductive properties. All known infinite classes and

cardinals are reflexive; but for the present it is well to preserve an open mind

as to whether there are instances, hitherto unknown, of classes and cardinals

which are neither reflexive nor inductive. Meanwhile, we adopt the following

definitions:—  A finite class or cardinal is one which is inductive.

  An infinite class or cardinal is one which is not inductive. All reflexive 

classes and cardinals are infinite; but it is not known at present whether all 

infinite classes and cardinals are reflexive. We shall return to this subject in 

Chapter XII.                                      CHAPTER IX 


                  INFINITE SERIES AND ORDINALS

  AN "infinite series" may be defined as a series of which the field is an infinite class. We have
already had occasion to consider one kind of infinite series, namely, progressions. In this chapter we
shall consider the subject more generally.

  The most noteworthy characteristic of an infinite series is that its serial

number can be altered by merely re-arranging its terms. In this respect there

is a certain oppositeness between cardinal and serial numbers. It is possible to

keep the cardinal number of a reflexive class unchanged in spite of adding

terms to it; on the other hand, it is possible to change the serial number of a

series without adding or taking away any terms, by mere re-arrangement. At

the same time, in the case of any infinite series it is also possible, as with

cardinals, to add terms without altering the serial number: everything depends

upon the way in which they are added.

  In order to make matters clear, it will be best to begin with examples. Let

us first consider various different kinds of series which can be made out of

the inductive numbers arranged on various plans. We start with the series




  which, as we have already seen, represents the smallest of infinite serial

numbers, the sort that Cantor calls . Let us proceed to thin out this series by

repeatedly performing the  operation of removing to the end the first even

number that occurs. We thus obtain in succession the various series:


  and so on. If we imagine this process carried on as long as possible, we

finally reach the series




  in which we have first all the odd numbers and then all the even numbers.

  The serial numbers of these various series are . Each of these numbers is

"greater" than any of its predecessors, in the following sense:—

  One serial number is said to be "greater" than another if any series having

the first number contains a part having the second number, but no series

having the second number contains a part having the first number.

  If we compare the two series  we see that the first is similar to the part of the second which omits the last

term, namely, the number 2, but the second is not similar to any part of the

first. (This is obvious, but is easily demonstrated.) Thus the second series has

a  greater  serial  number  than  the  first,  according  to  the  definition—i.e. is

greater than . But if we add a term at the beginning of a progression instead

of the end, we still have a progression. Thus . Thus is not equal to . This is

characteristic  of  relation-arithmetic  generally:  if and are  two  relation-

numbers, the general rule is that is not equal to . The case of finite ordinals, in

which there is equality, is quite exceptional.

  The  series  we  finally  reached  just  now  consisted  of  first  all  the  odd

numbers  and  then  all  the  even  numbers,  and  its serial  number  is .  This

number  is  greater  than or ,  where is  finite.  It  is  to  be  observed  that,  in

accordance with the general definition of order, each of these arrangements of

integers is to be regarded as resulting from some definite relation. E.g. the

one which merely removes 2 to the end will be defined by the following

relation: " and are finite integers, and either is 2 and is not 2, or neither is 2

and is less than ." The one which puts first all the odd numbers and then all

the even ones will be defined by: " and are finite integers, and either is odd

and is even or is less than and both are odd or both are even." We shall not

trouble, as a rule, to give these formulæ in future; but the fact that they could

be given is essential.

  The  number  which  we  have  called ,  namely,  the  number  of  a  series

consisting  of  two  progressions,  is  sometimes  called .  Multiplication,  like

addition,  depends  upon  the  order  of  the  factors:  a  progression  of  couples

gives a series such as




  which is itself a progression; but a couple of progressions gives a series

which  is  twice  as  long  as  a  progression.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to

distinguish between and . Usage is variable; we shall use for a couple of

progressions and for a progression of couples, and this decision of course

governs our general interpretation of "" when and are relation-numbers: ""
  

will have to stand for a suitably constructed sum of a relations each having

terms.

  We can proceed indefinitely with the process of thinning out the inductivenumbers.  For  example,  we  can  place  first  the  odd  numbers,  then  their

doubles, then the doubles of these, and so on. We thus obtain the series

  of which the number is , since it is a progression of progressions. Any one

of the progressions in this new series can of course be  thinned  out  as  we

thinned out our original progression. We can proceed to , , ... , and so on;

however far we have gone, we can always go further.

  The series of all the ordinals that can be obtained in this way, i.e. all that

can be obtained by thinning out a progression, is itself longer than any series

that can be obtained by re-arranging the terms of a progression. (This is not

difficult to prove.) The cardinal number of the class of such ordinals can be

shown to be greater than ; it is the number which Cantor calls . The ordinal

number of the series of all ordinals that can be made out of an , taken in order

of magnitude, is called . Thus a series whose ordinal number is has a field

whose cardinal number is .

  We can proceed from and to and by a process exactly analogous to that by

which we advanced from and to and . And there is nothing to prevent us from

advancing indefinitely in this way to new cardinals and new ordinals. It is not

known whether is equal to any of the cardinals in the series of Alephs. It is

not even known whether it is comparable with them in magnitude; for aught

we know, it may be neither equal to nor greater nor less than any one of the

Alephs. This question is connected with the multiplicative axiom, of which

we shall treat later.

  All the series we have been considering so far in this chapter have been

what  is  called  "well-ordered."  A  well-ordered  series  is  one  which  has  a

beginning, and has consecutive terms, and has a term next after any selection 

of its terms, provided there are any terms after the selection. This excludes, 

on the one hand, compact series, in which there are terms between any two, 

and on the other hand series which have no beginning, or in which there are 

subordinate parts having no beginning. The series of negative integers in 

order of magnitude, having no beginning, but ending with -1, is not well-

ordered; but taken in the reverse order, beginning with -1, it is well-ordered, 

being in fact a progression. The definition is:  

  A "well-ordered" series is one in which every sub-class (except, of course,

the null-class) has a first term.

  An "ordinal" number means the relation-number of a well-ordered series.

It is thus a species of serial number.  Among well-ordered series, a generalised form of mathematical induction

applies. A property may be said to be "transfinitely hereditary" if, when it

belongs to a certain selection of the terms in a series, it belongs to their

immediate  successor  provided  they  have  one.  In  a  well-ordered  series,  a

transfinitely  hereditary  property  belonging  to  the  first  term  of  the  series

belongs  to  the  whole  series.  This  makes  it  possible  to  prove  many

propositions concerning well-ordered series which are not true of all series.

  It is easy to arrange the inductive numbers in series which are not well-

ordered, and even to arrange them in compact series. For example, we can

adopt  the  following  plan:  consider  the  decimals  from  .1  (inclusive)  to  1

(exclusive), arranged in order of magnitude. These form a compact series;

between any two there are always an infinite number of others. Now omit the

dot at the beginning of each, and we have a compact series consisting of all

finite integers except such as divide by 10. If we wish to include those that

divide by 10, there is no difficulty; instead of starting with .1, we will include

all decimals less than 1, but when we remove the dot, we will transfer to the

right any 0's that occur at the beginning of our decimal. Omitting these, and

returning to the ones that have no 0's at the beginning, we can state the rule

for the arrangement of our integers as follows: Of two integers that do not

begin with the same digit, the one that begins with the smaller digit comes

first. Of two that do begin with the same digit, but differ at the second digit,

the one with the smaller second digit comes first, but first of all the one with

no second digit; and so on. Generally, if two integers agree as regards the

first digits, but not as regards the , that one comes first which has either no

digit or a smaller one than the other. This rule of arrangement,  as the reader

can easily convince himself, gives rise to a compact series containing all the

integers  not  divisible  by  10;  and,  as  we  saw,  there  is  no  difficulty  about

including those that are divisible by 10. It follows from this example that it is

possible to construct compact series having terms. In fact, we have already

seen that there are ratios, and ratios in order of magnitude form a compact

series; thus we have here another example. We shall resume this topic in the

next chapter.

  Of the usual formal laws of addition, multiplication, and exponentiation,

all  are  obeyed  by  transfinite  cardinals,  but  only  some  are  obeyed  by

transfinite ordinals, and those that are obeyed by them are obeyed by all

relation-numbers. By the "usual formal laws" we mean the following:—  I. The commutative law:




  II. The associative law:


  III. The distributive law:


  When  the  commutative  law  does  not  hold,  the  above  form  of  the

distributive law must be distinguished from


  As we shall see immediately, one form may be true and the other false.

  IV. The laws of exponentiation:


  All these laws hold for cardinals, whether finite or infinite, and for finite

ordinals.  But  when  we  come  to  infinite  ordinals,  or  indeed  to  relation-

numbers in general, some hold and some do not. The commutative law does

not hold; the associative law does hold; the distributive law (adopting the 

convention  we have adopted above as regards the order of the factors in a

product) holds in the form


  but not in the form


  the exponential laws


  still hold, but not the law


  which  is  obviously  connected  with  the  commutative  law  for

multiplication.

  The definitions of multiplication and exponentiation that are assumed in

the above propositions are somewhat complicated. The reader who wishes to

know what they are and how the above laws are proved must consult the

second volume of Principia Mathematica, * 172-176.

  Ordinal transfinite arithmetic was developed by Cantor at an earlier stage

than  cardinal  transfinite  arithmetic,  because  it  has  various  technical

mathematical uses which led him to it. But from the point of view of the

philosophy of mathematics it is less important and less fundamental than the

theory of transfinite cardinals. Cardinals are essentially simpler than ordinals,and it is a curious historical accident that they first appeared as an abstraction

from the latter, and only gradually came to be studied on their own account.

This does not apply to Frege's work, in which cardinals, finite and transfinite,

were treated in complete independence of ordinals; but it was Cantor's work

that  made  the  world  aware  of  the  subject,  while  Frege's  remained  almost

unknown, probably in the main on account of the difficulty of his symbolism.

And mathematicians, like other people, have more difficulty in understanding

and using notions which are comparatively "simple" in the logical sense than

in manipulating more complex notions which are  more akin to their ordinary 

practice. For these reasons, it was only gradually that the true importance of 

cardinals in mathematical philosophy was recognised. The importance of 

ordinals, though by no means small, is distinctly less than that of cardinals, 

and is very largely merged in that of the more general conception of relation-

numbers.                                      CHAPTER X 


                        LIMITS AND CONTINUITY

  THE conception of a "limit" is one of which the importance in mathematics has been found
continually greater than had been thought. The whole of the differential and integral calculus, indeed
practically everything in higher mathematics, depends upon limits. Formerly, it was supposed that
infinitesimals were involved in the foundations of these subjects, but Weierstrass showed that this is
an error: wherever infinitesimals were thought to occur, what really occurs is a set of finite quantities
having zero for their lower limit. It used to be thought that "limit" was an essentially quantitative
notion, namely, the notion of a quantity to which others approached nearer and nearer, so that among
those others there would be some differing by less than any assigned quantity. But in fact the notion of
"limit" is a purely ordinal notion, not involving quantity at all (except by accident when the series
concerned happens to be quantitative). A given point on a line may be the limit of a set of points on
the line, without its being necessary to bring in co-ordinates or measurement or anything quantitative.
The cardinal number is the limit (in the order of magnitude) of the cardinal numbers 1, 2, 3, ... , ...,
although the numerical difference between and a finite cardinal is constant and infinite: from a
quantitative point of view, finite numbers get no nearer to as they grow larger. What makes the limit
of the finite numbers is the fact that, in the series, it comes immediately after them, which is an
ordinal fact, not a quantitative fact.  

  There are various forms of the notion of "limit," of increasing complexity.

The simplest and most fundamental form, from which the rest are derived,

has been already defined, but we will here repeat the definitions which lead to

it, in a general form in which they do not demand that the relation concerned

shall be serial. The definitions are as follows:—

  The "minima" of a class with respect to a relation are those members of

and the field of (if any) to which no member of has the relation .

  The "maxima" with respect to are the minima with respect to the converse

of .

  The "sequents" of a class with respect to a relation are the minima of the

"successors" of , and the "successors" of are those members of the field of to

which every member of the common part of and the field of has the relation .

  The  "precedents"  with  respect  to are  the  sequents  with  respect  to  the

converse of .

  The "upper limits" of with respect to are the sequents provided has no

maximum; but if has a maximum, it has no upper limits.

  The "lower limits" with respect to are the upper limits with respect to the

converse of .

  Whenever has connexity, a class can have at most one maximum, one

minimum,  one  sequent,  etc.  Thus,  in  the  cases  we  are  concerned  with  in

practice, we can speak of "the limit" (if any).  When is a serial relation, we can greatly simplify the above definition of a

limit. We can, in that case, define first the "boundary" of a class , i.e. its

limits  or  maximum,  and  then  proceed  to  distinguish  the  case  where  the

boundary is the limit from the case where it is a maximum. For this purpose it

is best to use the notion of "segment."

  We will speak of the "segment of defined by a class " as all those terms

that have the relation to some one or more of the members of . This will be a

segment in the sense defined  in Chapter VII.; indeed, every segment in the

sense there defined is the segment defined by some class . If is serial, the

segment defined by consists of all the terms that precede some term or other

of .  If has  a  maximum,  the  segment  will  be  all  the  predecessors  of  the

maximum. But if has no maximum, every member of precedes some other

member of , and the whole of is therefore included in the segment defined by

. Take, for example, the class consisting of the fractions




  i.e. of all fractions of the form for different finite values of . This series of

fractions has no maximum, and it is clear that the segment which it defines

(in the whole series of fractions in order of magnitude) is the class of all

proper  fractions.  Or,  again,  consider  the  prime  numbers,  considered  as  a

selection from the cardinals (finite and infinite) in order of magnitude. In this

case the segment defined consists of all finite integers.

  Assuming that is serial, the "boundary" of a class will be the term (if it

exists) whose predecessors are the segment defined by .

  A "maximum" of is a boundary which is a member of .

  An "upper limit" of is a boundary which is not a member of .

  If a class has no boundary, it has neither maximum nor limit. This is the

case of an "irrational" Dedekind cut, or of what is called a "gap."

  Thus the "upper limit" of a set of terms with respect to a series is that term

(if it exists) which comes after all the 's, but is such that every earlier term

comes before some of the 's.

  We may define all the "upper limiting-points" of a set of terms as all those

that are the upper limits of sets of terms chosen out of . We shall, of course,

have to distinguish upper limiting-points from lower limiting-points. If we

consider, for example, the series of ordinal numbers:  the upper limiting-points of the field of this series are those that have no

immediate predecessors, i.e.




  The upper limiting-points of the field of this new series will be




  On the other hand, the series of ordinals—and indeed every well-ordered

series—has no lower limiting-points, because there are no terms except the

last that have no immediate successors. But if we consider such a series as the

series of ratios, every member of this series is both an upper and a lower

limiting-point  for  suitably  chosen  sets.  If  we  consider  the  series  of  real

numbers, and select out of it the rational real numbers, this set (the rationals)

will  have  all  the  real  numbers  as  upper  and  lower  limiting-points.  The

limiting-points of a set are called its "first derivative," and the limiting-points

of the first derivative are called the second derivative, and so on.

  With regard to limits, we may distinguish various grades of what may be

called "continuity" in a series. The word "continuity" had been used for a

long time, but had remained without any precise definition until the time of

Dedekind and Cantor. Each of these two men gave a precise significance to

the term, but Cantor's definition is narrower than Dedekind's: a series which

has Cantorian continuity must have Dedekindian continuity, but the converse

does not hold.

  The first definition that would naturally occur to a man seeking a precise

meaning for the continuity of series would be to define it as consisting in

what we have called "compactness," i.e. in the fact that between any two

terms  of  the  series  there  are  others.  But  this  would  be  an  inadequate

definition, because of the existence of "gaps" in series such as the series of

ratios. We saw in Chapter VII. that there are innumerable ways in which the

series of ratios can be divided into two parts, of which one wholly precedes

the other, and of which the first has no last term,  while the second has no

first term. Such a state of affairs seems contrary to the vague feeling we have

as to what should characterise "continuity," and, what is more, it shows that

the  series  of  ratios  is  not  the  sort  of  series  that  is  needed  for  many

mathematical purposes. Take geometry, for example: we wish to be able tosay  that  when  two  straight  lines  cross  each  other  they  have  a  point  in

common, but if the series of points on a line were similar to the series of

ratios, the two lines might cross in a "gap" and have no point in common.

This  is  a  crude  example,  but  many  others  might  be  given  to  show  that

compactness is inadequate as a mathematical definition of continuity.

  It  was  the  needs  of  geometry,  as  much  as  anything,  that  led  to  the

definition  of  "Dedekindian"  continuity.  It  will  be  remembered  that  we

defined  a  series  as  Dedekindian  when  every  sub-class  of  the  field  has  a

boundary. (It is sufficient to assume that there is always an upper boundary,

or that there is always a lower boundary. If one of these is assumed, the other

can be deduced.) That is to say, a series is Dedekindian when there are no

gaps. The absence of gaps may arise either through terms having successors,

or through the existence of limits in the absence of maxima. Thus a finite

series or a well-ordered series is Dedekindian, and so is the series of real

numbers. The former sort of Dedekindian series is excluded by assuming that

our series is compact; in that case our series must have a property which may,

for  many  purposes,  be  fittingly  called  continuity.  Thus  we  are  led  to  the

definition:

  A  series  has  "Dedekindian  continuity"  when  it  is  Dedekindian  and

compact.

  But  this  definition  is  still  too  wide  for  many  purposes.  Suppose,  for

example, that we desire to be able to assign such properties to geometrical

space as shall make it certain that every point can be specified by means of

co-ordinates  which  are  real  numbers:  this  is  not  insured  by  Dedekindian

continuity  alone.  We  want  to  be  sure  that  every  point  which  cannot  be

specified  by rational  co-ordinates  can  be  specified  as  the  limit  of  a

progression of points  whose co-ordinates are rational, and this is a further

property which our definition does not enable us to deduce.

  We are thus led to a closer investigation of series with respect to limits.

This investigation was made by Cantor and formed the basis of his definition

of  continuity,  although,  in  its  simplest  form,  this  definition  somewhat

conceals the considerations which have given rise to it. We shall, therefore,

first travel through some of Cantor's conceptions in this subject before giving

his definition of continuity.

  Cantor defines a series as "perfect" when all its points are limiting-points

and all its limiting-points belong to it. But this definition does not expressquite accurately what he means. There is no correction required so far as

concerns the property that all its points are to be limiting-points; this is a

property belonging to compact series, and to no others if all points are to be

upper limiting- or all lower limiting-points. But if it is only assumed that they

are limiting-points one way, without specifying which, there will be other

series  that  will  have  the  property  in  question—for  example,  the  series  of

decimals in which a decimal ending in a recurring 9 is distinguished from the

corresponding terminating decimal and placed immediately before it. Such a

series  is  very  nearly  compact,  but  has  exceptional  terms  which  are

consecutive, and of which the first has no immediate predecessor, while the

second has no immediate successor. Apart from such series, the series in

which  every  point  is  a  limiting-point  are  compact  series;  and  this  holds

without  qualification  if  it  is  specified  that  every  point  is  to  be  an  upper

limiting-point (or that every point is to be a lower limiting-point).

  Although  Cantor  does  not  explicitly  consider  the  matter,  we  must

distinguish different kinds of limiting-points according to the nature of the

smallest sub-series by which they can be defined. Cantor assumes that they

are to be defined by progressions, or by regressions (which are the converses

of  progressions).  When  every  member  of  our  series  is  the  limit  of  a

progression  or  regression,  Cantor  calls  our  series  "condensed  in  itself"

(insichdicht).  

  We  come  now  to  the  second  property  by  which  perfection  was  to  be

defined,  namely,  the  property  which  Cantor  calls  that  of  being  "closed"

(abgeschlossen). This, as we saw, was first defined as consisting in the fact

that all the limiting-points of a series belong to it. But this only has any

effective significance if our series is given as contained in some other larger

series (as is the case, e.g., with a selection of real numbers), and limiting-

points  are  taken  in  relation  to  the  larger  series.  Otherwise,  if  a  series  is

considered simply on its own account, it cannot fail to contain its limiting-

points. What Cantor means is not exactly what he says; indeed, on other

occasions he says something rather different, which is what he means. What

he really means is that every subordinate series which is of the sort that might

be expected to have a limit does have a limit within the given series; i.e.

every  subordinate  series  which  has  no  maximum  has  a  limit, i.e.  every

subordinate series has a boundary. But Cantor does not state this for every

subordinate series, but only for progressions and regressions. (It is not clearhow far he recognises that this is a limitation.) Thus, finally, we find that the

definition we want is the following:—

  A series is said to be "closed" (abgeschlossen) when every progression or

regression contained in the series has a limit in the series.

  We then have the further definition:—

  A series is "perfect" when it is condensed in itself and closed, i.e. when

every term is the limit of a progression or regression, and every progression

or regression contained in the series has a limit in the series.

  In seeking a definition of continuity, what Cantor has in mind is the search

for a definition which shall apply to the series of real numbers and to any

series similar to that, but to no others. For this purpose we have to add a

further  property.  Among  the  real  numbers  some  are  rational,  some  are

irrational; although the number of irrationals is greater than the number of

rationals,  yet  there  are  rationals  between  any  two  real  numbers, however  

little the two may differ. The number of rationals, as we saw, is . This gives a

further property which suffices to characterise continuity completely, namely,

the property of containing a class of members in such a way that some of this

class occur between any two terms of our series, however near together. This

property, added to perfection, suffices to define a class of series which are all

similar and are in fact a serial number. This class Cantor defines as that of

continuous series.

  We may slightly simplify his definition. To begin with, we say:

  A "median class" of a series is a sub-class of the field such that members

of it are to be found between any two terms of the series.

  Thus the rationals are a median class in the series of real numbers. It is

obvious that there cannot be median classes except in compact series.

  We then find that Cantor's definition is equivalent to the following:—

  A  series  is  "continuous"  when  (1)  it  is  Dedekindian,  (2)  it  contains  a

median class having terms.

  To avoid confusion, we shall speak of this kind as "Cantorian continuity."

It will be seen that it implies Dedekindian continuity, but the converse is not

the case. All series having Cantorian continuity are similar, but not all series

having Dedekindian continuity.

  The notions of limit and continuity which we have been defining must not

be confounded with the notions of the limit of a function for approaches to a

given argument, or the continuity of a function in the neighbourhood of agiven argument. These are different notions, very important, but derivative

from the above and more complicated. The continuity of motion (if motion is

continuous) is an instance of the continuity of a function; on the other hand,

the continuity of space and time (if they are continuous) is an instance of the

continuity of series, or (to speak more cautiously) of a kind of continuity

which  can,  by  sufficient mathematical  manipulation,  be  reduced  to  the

continuity  of  series.  In  view  of  the  fundamental  importance  of  motion  in

applied mathematics, as well as for other reasons, it will be well to deal

briefly with the notions of limits and continuity as applied to functions; but

this subject will be best reserved for a separate chapter.

  The definitions of continuity which we have been considering, namely,

those of Dedekind and Cantor, do not correspond very closely to the vague

idea which is associated with the word in the mind of the man in the street or

the philosopher. They conceive continuity rather as absence of separateness,

the sort of general obliteration of distinctions which characterises a thick fog.

A  fog  gives  an  impression  of  vastness  without  definite  multiplicity  or

division. It is this sort of thing that a metaphysician means by "continuity,"

declaring it, very truly, to be characteristic of his mental life and of that of

children and animals.

  The  general  idea  vaguely  indicated  by  the  word  "continuity"  when  so

employed, or by the word "flux," is one which is certainly quite different

from that which we have been defining. Take, for example, the series of real

numbers. Each is what it is, quite definitely and uncompromisingly; it does

not pass over by imperceptible degrees into another; it is a hard, separate unit,

and its distance from every other unit is finite, though it can be made less

than  any  given  finite  amount  assigned  in  advance.  The  question  of  the

relation between the kind of continuity existing among the real numbers and

the kind exhibited, e.g. by what we see at a given time, is a difficult and

intricate one. It is not to be maintained that the two kinds are simply identical,

but it may, I think, be very well maintained that the mathematical conception

which we have been considering in this chapter gives the abstract logical

scheme to which it must be possible to bring empirical material by suitable

manipulation, if that material is to be called "continuous" in any precisely

definable sense. It would be quite impossible  to justify this thesis within the

limits  of  the  present  volume.  The  reader  who  is  interested  may  read  an

attempt to justify it as regards time in particular by the present author in theMonist for 1914-5, as well as in parts of Our Knowledge of the External

World. With these indications, we must leave this problem, interesting as it

is, in order to return to topics more closely connected with mathematics.                                      CHAPTER XI 


          LIMITS AND CONTINUITY OF FUNCTIONS

  IN this chapter we shall be concerned with the definition of the limit of a function (if any) as the
argument approaches a given value, and also with the definition of what is meant by a "continuous
function." Both of these ideas are somewhat technical, and would hardly demand treatment in a mere
introduction to mathematical philosophy but for the fact that, especially through the so-called
infinitesimal calculus, wrong views upon our present topics have become so firmly embedded in the
minds of professional philosophers that a prolonged and considerable effort is required for their
uprooting. It has been thought ever since the time of Leibniz that the differential and integral calculus
required infinitesimal quantities. Mathematicians (especially Weierstrass) proved that this is an error;
but errors incorporated, e.g. in what Hegel has to say about mathematics, die hard, and philosophers
have tended to ignore the work of such men as Weierstrass.

  Limits and continuity of functions, in works on ordinary mathematics, are

defined in terms involving number. This is not essential, as Dr Whitehead has

shown.[22] We will, however, begin with the definitions in the text-books, and

proceed afterwards to show how these definitions can be generalised so as to

apply  to  series  in  general,  and  not  only  to  such  as  are  numerical  or

numerically measurable.

  [22]See Principia Mathematica, vol. II. * 230-234.

  Let us consider any ordinary mathematical function , where   and are both

real numbers, and is one-valued—i.e. when is given, there is only one value

that can have. We call the "argument," and the "value for the argument ."

When a function is what we call "continuous," the rough idea for which we

are seeking a precise definition is that small differences in shall correspond to

small differences in , and if we make the differences in small enough, we can

make the differences in fall below any assigned amount. We do not want, if a

function is to be continuous, that there shall be sudden jumps, so that, for

some value of , any change, however small, will make a change in which

exceeds  some  assigned  finite  amount.  The  ordinary  simple  functions  of

mathematics have this property: it belongs, for example, to , , ... , , and so on.

But it is not at all difficult to define discontinuous functions. Take, as a non-

mathematical example, "the place of birth of the youngest person living at

time ." This is a function of ; its value is constant from the time of one

person's  birth  to  the  time  of  the  next  birth,  and  then  the  value  changes

suddenly  from  one  birthplace  to  the  other.  An  analogous  mathematical

example would be "the integer next below ," where is a real number. This

function  remains  constant  from  one  integer  to  the  next,  and  then  gives  asudden jump. The actual fact is that, though continuous functions are more

familiar,  they  are  the  exceptions:  there  are  infinitely  more  discontinuous

functions than continuous ones.

  Many functions are discontinuous for one or several values of the variable,

but continuous for all other values. Take as an example . The function passes

through all values from -1 to 1 every time that passes from to , or from to , or

generally from to , where is any integer. Now if we consider when is very

small, we see that as diminishes grows faster and faster, so that it passes more

and more quickly through the cycle of values from one multiple of to another

as becomes smaller and smaller. Consequently passes more and more quickly

from -1  to 1 and back again, as grows smaller. In fact, if we take any interval

containing 0, say the interval from to where is some very small number, will

go through an infinite number of oscillations in this interval, and we cannot

diminish the oscillations by making the interval smaller. Thus round about

the  argument  0  the  function  is  discontinuous.  It  is  easy  to  manufacture

functions  which  are  discontinuous  in  several  places,  or  in places,  or

everywhere. Examples will be found in any book on the theory of functions

of a real variable.

  Proceeding now to seek a precise definition of what is meant by saying

that a function is continuous for a given argument, when argument and value

are both real numbers, let us first define a "neighbourhood" of a number as all

the numbers from to , where is some number which, in important cases, will

be very small. It is clear that continuity at a given point has to do with what

happens in any neighbourhood of that point, however small.

  What we desire is this: If is the argument for which we wish our function

to be continuous, let us first define a neighbourhood ( say) containing the

value which the function has for the argument ; we desire that, if we take a

sufficiently  small  neighbourhood  containing ,  all  values  for  arguments

throughout this neighbourhood shall be contained in the neighbourhood , no

matter how small we may have made . That is to say, if we decree that our

function is not to differ from by more than some very tiny amount, we can

always find a stretch of real numbers, having in the middle of it, such that

throughout this stretch will not differ from by more than the prescribed tiny

amount. And this is to remain true whatever tiny amount we may select.

Hence we are led to the following definition:—

  The function is  said  to  be  "continuous"  for  the  argument if,  for  everypositive number , different from 0, but as small as we please, there exists a

positive number , different from 0, such that, for all values of which are 

numerically  less[23] than , the difference is numerically less than .

[23]A number is said to be "numerically less" than when it lies between and

.

  In  this  definition, first  defines  a  neighbourhood  of ,  namely,  the

neighbourhood from to . The definition then proceeds to say that we can (by

means of define a neighbourhood, namely, that from to , such that, for all

arguments within this neighbourhood, the value of the function lies within the

neighbourhood horn to . If this can be done, however may be chosen, the

function is "continuous" for the argument .

  So far we have not defined the "limit" of a function for a given argument.

If  we  had  done  so,  we  could  have  defined  the  continuity  of  a  function

differently: a function is continuous at a point where its value is the same as

the limit of its value for approaches either from above or from below. But it

is  only  the  exceptionally  "tame"  function  that  has  a  definite  limit  as  the

argument  approaches  a  given  point.  The  general  rule  is  that  a  function

oscillates, and that, given any neighbourhood of a given argument, however

small,  a  whole  stretch  of  values  will  occur  for  arguments  within  this

neighbourhood. As this is the general rule, let us consider it first.

  Let us consider what may happen as the argument approaches some value

from below. That is to say, we wish to consider what happens for arguments

contained in the interval from to , where is some number which, in important

cases, will be very small.

  The values of the function for arguments from to ( excluded) will be a set

of real numbers which will define a certain section of the set of real numbers,

namely, the section consisting of those numbers that are not greater than all

the values for arguments from to . Given any number in this section, there are

values at least as great as this number for arguments between and , i.e. for 

arguments that fall very little short  of  (if is  very  small).  Let  us  take  all

possible 's and all possible corresponding sections. The common part of all

these sections we will call the "ultimate section" as the argument approaches .

To say that a number belongs to the ultimate section is to say that, however

small we may make , there are arguments between and for which the value of

the function is not less than .

  We may apply exactly the same process to upper sections, i.e. to sectionsthat go from some point up to the top, instead of from the bottom up to some

point. Here we take those numbers that are not less than all the values for

arguments from to ; this defines an upper section which will vary as varies.

Taking the common part of all such sections for all possible 's, we obtain the

"ultimate upper section." To say that a number belongs to the ultimate upper

section is to say that, however small we make , there are arguments between

and for which the value of the function is not greater than .

  If a term belongs both to the ultimate section and to the ultimate upper

section, we shall say that it belongs to the "ultimate oscillation." We may

illustrate the matter by considering once more the function as approaches the

value 0. We shall assume, in order to fit in with the above definitions, that

this value is approached from below.

  Let us begin with the "ultimate section." Between and 0, whatever may be,

the function will assume the value 1 for certain arguments, but will never

assume  any  greater  value.  Hence  the  ultimate  section  consists  of  all  real

numbers, positive and negative, up to and including 1; i.e. it consists of all

negative numbers together with 0, together with the positive numbers up to

and including 1.

  Similarly  the  "ultimate  upper  section"  consists  of  all  positive  numbers

together with 0, together with the negative numbers down to and including

-1.

  Thus the "ultimate oscillation" consists of all real numbers from -1 to 1, 

both included.  

  We may say generally that the "ultimate oscillation" of a function as the

argument approaches from below consists of all those numbers which are

such that, however near we come to , we shall still find values as great as and

values as small as .

  The  ultimate  oscillation  may  contain  no  terms,  or  one  term,  or  many

terms. In the first two cases the function has a definite limit for approaches

from below. If the ultimate oscillation has one term, this is fairly obvious. It

is equally true if it has none; for it is not difficult to prove that, if the ultimate

oscillation is null, the boundary of the ultimate section is the same as that of

the ultimate upper section, and may be defined as the limit of the function for

approaches from below. But if the ultimate oscillation has many terms, there

is no definite limit to the function for approaches from below. In this case we

can take the lower and upper boundaries of the ultimate oscillation (i.e. thelower boundary of the ultimate upper section and the upper boundary of the

ultimate section) as the lower and upper limits of its "ultimate" values for

approaches from below. Similarly we obtain lower and upper limits of the

"ultimate" values for approaches from above. Thus we have, in the general

case, four limits to a function for approaches to a given argument. The limit

for a given argument only exists when all these four are equal, and is then

their common value. If it is also the value for the argument , the function is

continuous for this argument. This may be taken as defining continuity: it is

equivalent to our former definition.

  We can define the limit of a function for a given argument (if it exists)

without passing through the ultimate oscillation and the four limits of the

general  case.  The  definition  proceeds,  in  that  case,  just  as  the  earlier

definition  of  continuity  proceeded.  Let  us  define  the  limit  for  approaches

from below. If there is to be a definite limit for approaches to from below, it

is necessary and sufficient that, given any small number , two values for

arguments sufficiently near to (but both less than ) will differ  by less than  ;

i.e.  if is  sufficiently  small,  and  our  arguments  both  lie  between and (

excluded), then the difference between the values for these arguments will be

less than . This is to hold for any , however small; in that case the function

has a limit for approaches from below. Similarly we define the case when

there is a limit for approaches from above. These two limits, even when both

exist, need not be identical; and if they are identical, they still need not be

identical with the value for the argument . It is only in this last case that we

call the function continuous for the argument .

  A  function  is  called  "continuous"  (without  qualification)  when  it  is

continuous for every argument.

  Another slightly different method of reaching the definition of continuity

is the following:—

  Let us say that a function "ultimately converges into a class " if there is

some real number such that, for this argument and all arguments greater than

this, the value of the function is a member of the class . Similarly we shall

say that a function "converges into as the argument approaches from below"

if there is some argument less than such that throughout the interval from

(included) to (excluded) the function has values which are members of . We

may now say that a function is continuous for the argument , for which it has

the value , if it satisfies four conditions, namely:—  (1)  Given  any  real  number  less  than ,  the  function  converges  into  the

successors of this number as the argument approaches from below;

  (2) Given any real number greater than , the function converges into the

predecessors of this number as the argument approaches from below;

  (3) and (4) Similar conditions for approaches to from above.

  The advantages of this form of definition is that it analyses the conditions 

of continuity into four, derived from considering arguments and values 

respectively greater or less than the argument and value for which continuity 

is to be defined.  

  We may now generalise our definitions so as to apply to series which are

not numerical or known to be numerically measurable. The case of motion is

a convenient one to bear in mind. There is a story by H. G. Wells which will

illustrate,  from  the  case  of  motion,  the  difference  between  the  limit  of  a

function for a given argument and its value for the same argument. The hero

of the story, who possessed, without his knowledge, the power of realising

his wishes, was being attacked by a policeman, but on ejaculating "Go to

——"  he  found  that  the  policeman  disappeared.  If was  the  policeman's

position  at  time ,  and the  moment  of  the  ejaculation,  the  limit  of  the

policeman's positions as approached to from below would be in contact with

the hero, whereas the value for the argument was —. But such occurrences

are supposed to be rare in the real world, and it is assumed, though without

adequate evidence, that all motions are continuous, i.e. that, given any body,

if is its position at time , is a continuous function of . It is the meaning of

"continuity" involved in such statements which we now wish to define as

simply as possible.

  The definitions given for the case of functions where argument and value

are real numbers can readily be adapted for more general use.

  Let and be two relations, which it is well to imagine serial, though it is not

necessary  to  our  definitions  that  they  should  be  so.  Let be  a  one-many

relation whose domain is contained in the field of , while its converse domain

is contained in the field of . Then is (in a generalised sense) a function, whose

arguments belong to the field of , while its values belong to the field of .

Suppose, for example, that we are dealing with a particle moving on a line:

let be the time-series, the series of points on our line from left to right, the

relation of the position of our particle on the line at time to the time , so that

"the of "  is  its  position  at  time .  This  illustration  may  be  borne  in  mindthroughout our definitions.

  We shall say that the function is continuous for the argument if, given any 

interval  on the -series containing the value of the function for the argument ,

there is an interval on the -series containing not as an end-point and such that,

throughout this interval, the function has values which are members of . (We

mean by an "interval" all the terms between any two; i.e. if and are two

members of the field of , and has the relation to , we shall mean by the " -

interval to " all terms such that has the relation to and has the relation to —

together, when so stated, with or themselves.)

  We can easily define the "ultimate section" and the "ultimate oscillation."

To define the "ultimate section" for approaches to the argument from below,

take any argument which precedes (i.e. has the relation to ), take the values of

the function for all arguments up to and including , and form the section of

defined by these values, i.e. those members of the -series which are earlier

than or identical with some of these values. Form all such sections for all 's

that precede , and take their common part; this will be the ultimate section.

The  ultimate  upper  section  and  the  ultimate  oscillation  are  then  defined

exactly as in the previous case.

  The  adaptation  of  the  definition  of  convergence  and  the  resulting

alternative definition of continuity offers no difficulty of any kind.

  We  say  that  a  function is  "ultimately -convergent  into "  if  there  is  a

member of the converse domain of and the field of such that the value of the

function for the argument and for any argument to which has the relation is a

member of . We say that "-converges into as the argument approaches a
 

given argument " if there is a term having the relation to and belonging to the

converse domain of and such that the value of the function for any argument

in the -interval from (inclusive) to (exclusive) belongs to .

  Of the four conditions that a function must fulfil in order to be continuous

for the argument , the first is, putting for the value for the argument :  

  Given any term having the relation to , -converges into the successors of

(with respect to ) as the argument approaches from below.

  The second condition is obtained by replacing by its converse; the third

and  fourth  are  obtained  from  the  first  and  second  by  replacing by  its

converse.

  There  is  thus  nothing,  in  the  notions  of  the  limit  of  a  function  or  thecontinuity  of  a  function,  that  essentially  involves  number.  Both  can  be

defined generally, and many propositions about them can be proved for any

two series (one being the argument-series and the other the value-series). It

will be seen that the definitions do not involve infinitesimals. They involve

infinite classes of intervals, growing smaller without any limit short of zero,

but they do not involve any intervals that are not finite. This is analogous to

the fact that if a line an inch long be halved, then halved again, and so on

indefinitely, we never reach infinitesimals in this way: after bisections, the

length of our bit is of an inch; and this is finite whatever finite number may

be.  The  process  of  successive  bisection  does  not  lead  to  divisions  whose

ordinal number is infinite, since it is essentially a one-by-one process. Thus 

infinitesimals are not to be reached in this way. Confusions on such topics 

have had much to do with the difficulties which have been found in the 

discussion of infinity and continuity.                                      CHAPTER XII 


    SELECTIONS AND THE MULTIPLICATIVE AXIOM

  IN this chapter we have to consider an axiom which can be enunciated, but not proved, in terms of
logic, and which is convenient, though not indispensable, in certain portions of mathematics. It is
convenient, in the sense that many interesting propositions, which it seems natural to suppose true,
cannot be proved without its help; but it is not indispensable, because even without those propositions
the subjects in which they occur still exist, though in a somewhat mutilated form.

  Before  enunciating  the  multiplicative  axiom,  we  must  first  explain  the

theory of selections, and the definition of multiplication when the number of

factors may be infinite.

  In defining the arithmetical operations, the only correct procedure is to

construct an actual class (or relation, in the case of relation-numbers) having

the required number of terms. This sometimes demands a certain amount of

ingenuity, but it is essential in order to prove the existence of the number

defined. Take, as the simplest example, the case of addition. Suppose we are

given a cardinal number , and a class which has terms. How shall we define ?

For this purpose we must have two classes having terms, and they must not

overlap. We can construct such classes from in various ways, of which the

following is perhaps the simplest: Form first all the ordered couples whose

first term is a class consisting of a single member of , and whose second term 

is the null-class; then, secondly, form all the ordered couples whose first term 

is  the null-class and whose second term is a class consisting of a single 

member of  . These two classes of couples have no member in common, and

the logical sum of the two classes will have terms. Exactly analogously we

can define , given that is the number of some class and is the number of some

class .

  Such definitions, as a rule, are merely a question of a suitable technical

device. But in the case of multiplication, where the number of factors may be

infinite, important problems arise out of the definition.

  Multiplication when the number of factors is finite offers no difficulty.

Given two classes and , of which the first has terms and the second terms, we

can define as the number of ordered couples that can be formed by choosing

the first term out of and the second out of . It will be seen that this definition

does not require that and should not overlap; it even remains adequate when

and are identical. For example, let be the class whose members are , , . Then

the class which is used to define the product is the class of couples:  This definition remains applicable when or or both are infinite, and it can

be extended step by step to three or four or any finite number of factors. No

difficulty arises as regards this definition, except that it cannot be extended to

an infinite number of factors.

  The problem of multiplication when the number of factors may be infinite

arises in this way: Suppose we have a class consisting of classes; suppose the

number of terms in each of these classes is given. How shall we define the

product of all these numbers? If we can frame our definition generally, it will

be applicable whether is finite or infinite. It is to be observed that the problem

is to be able to deal with the case when is infinite, not with the case when its 

members are. If   is  not  infinite,  the  method  defined  above  is  just  as

applicable when its members are infinite as when they are finite. It is the case

when is infinite, even though its members may be finite, that we have to find

a way of dealing with.

  The following method of defining multiplication generally is due to Dr

Whitehead. It is explained and treated at length in Principia Mathematica,

vol. I. * 80 ff., and vol. II. * 114.

  Let us suppose to begin with that is a class of classes no two of which

overlap—say the constituencies in a country where there is no plural voting,

each constituency being considered as a class of voters. Let us now set to

work  to  choose  one  term  out  of  each  class  to  be  its representative,  as

constituencies do when they elect members of Parliament, assuming that by

law each constituency has to elect a man who is a voter in that constituency.

We thus arrive at a class of representatives, who make up our Parliament, one

being selected out of each constituency. How many different possible ways

of choosing a Parliament are there? Each constituency can select any one of

its voters, and therefore if there are voters in a constituency, it can make

choices. The choices of the different constituencies are independent; thus it is

obvious that, when the total number of constituencies is finite, the number of

possible  Parliaments  is  obtained  by  multiplying  together  the  numbers  of

voters  in  the  various  constituencies.  When  we  do  not  know  whether  the

number of constituencies is finite or infinite, we may take the number of

possible Parliaments as defining the product of the numbers of the separate

constituencies. This is the method by which infinite products are defined. We

must now drop our illustration, and proceed to exact statements.

  Let be a class of classes, and let us assume to begin with that no twomembers of overlap, i.e. that if and are two different members of , then no

member  of  the  one  is  a  member  of  the  other.  We  shall  call  a  class  a

"selection" from when it consists of just one term from each member of ; i.e.

is a "selection" from if every member of belongs to some member  of , and if

be any member of , and have exactly one term in common. The class of all

"selections" from we shall call the "multiplicative class" of . The number of

terms in the multiplicative class of , i.e. the number of possible selections

from , is defined as the product of the numbers of the members of . This

definition is equally applicable whether is finite or infinite.

  Before we can be wholly satisfied with these definitions, we must remove

the  restriction  that  no  two  members  of are  to  overlap.  For  this  purpose,

instead of defining first a class called a "selection," we will define first a

relation which we will call a "selector." A relation will be called a "selector"

from if, from every member of , it picks out one term as the representative of

that member, i.e. if, given any member of , there is just one term which is a

member of and has the relation to ; and this is to be all that does. The formal

definition is:

  A "selector" from a class of classes is a one-many relation, having for its

converse domain, and such that, if has the relation to , then is a member of .

  If is a selector from , and is a member of , and is the term which has the

relation to , we call the "representative" of in respect of the relation .

  A "selection" from will now be defined as the domain of a selector; and

the multiplicative class, as before, will be the class of selections.

  But  when  the  members  of overlap,  there  may  be  more  selectors  than

selections, since a term which belongs to two classes and may be selected

once to represent and once to represent , giving rise to different selectors in

the  two  cases,  but  to  the  same  selection.  For  purposes  of  defining

multiplication, it is the selectors we require rather than the selections. Thus

we define:

  "The product of the numbers of the members of a class of classes " is the

number of selectors from .

  We can define exponentiation by an adaptation of the above  plan.  We

might, of course, define as the number of selectors from classes, each of

which has terms. But there are objections to this definition, derived from the

fact  that  the  multiplicative  axiom  (of  which  we  shall  speak  shortly)  is

unnecessarily  involved  if  it  is  adopted.  We  adopt  instead  the  followingconstruction:—

  Let be a class having terms, and a class having terms.

  Let be a member of , and form the class of all ordered couples that have

for their second term and a member of for their first term. There will be such

couples for a given , since any member of may be chosen for the first term,

and has members. If we now form all the classes of this sort that result from

varying , we obtain altogether classes, since may be any member of , and has

members. These classes are each of them a class of couples, namely, all the

couples that can be formed of a variable member of and a fixed member of .

We  define as  the  number  of  selectors  from  the  class  consisting  of  these

classes. Or we may equally well define as the number of selections, for, since

our classes of couples are mutually exclusive, the number of selectors is the

same as the number of selections. A selection from our class of classes will

be a set of ordered couples, of which there will be exactly one having any

given member of for its second term, and the first term may be any member

of . Thus is defined by the selectors from a certain set of classes each having

terms, but the set is one having a certain structure and a more manageable

composition  than  is  the  case  in  general.  The  relevance  of  this  to  the

multiplicative axiom will appear shortly.

  What  applies  to  exponentiation  applies  also  to  the  product  of  two

cardinals. We might define "" as the sum of the numbers of classes each
 

having terms, but we prefer to define it as the number of ordered couples to

be formed consisting of a member of followed by a member of , where has

terms and has terms. This definition, also, is designed to evade the necessity 

of assuming the multiplicative axiom.  

  With our definitions, we can prove the usual formal laws of multiplication

and exponentiation. But there is one thing we cannot prove: we cannot prove

that a product is only zero when one of its factors is zero. We can prove this

when the number of factors is finite, but not when it is infinite. In other

words, we cannot prove that, given a class of classes none of which is null,

there  must  be  selectors  from  them;  or  that,  given  a  class  of  mutually

exclusive classes, there must be at least one class consisting of one term out

of each of the given classes. These things cannot be proved; and although, at

first  sight,  they  seem  obviously  true,  yet  reflection  brings  gradually

increasing doubt, until at last we become content to register the assumptionand its consequences, as we register the axiom of parallels, without assuming

that we can know whether it is true or false. The assumption, loosely worded,

is that selectors and selections exist when we should expect them. There are

many  equivalent  ways  of  stating  it  precisely.  We  may  begin  with  the

following:—

  "Given any class of mutually exclusive classes, of which none is null,

there is at least one class which has exactly one term in common with each of

the given classes."

  This proposition we will call the "multiplicative axiom."[24] We will first

give various equivalent forms of the proposition, and then consider certain

ways in which its truth or falsehood is of interest to mathematics.

  [24]Principia Mathematica, vol. I. * 88. Also vol. III. * 257-258.

  The multiplicative axiom is equivalent to the proposition that a product is

only zero when at least one of its factors is zero; i.e. that, if any number of

cardinal numbers be multiplied together, the result cannot be 0 unless one of

the numbers concerned is 0.

  The multiplicative axiom is equivalent to the proposition that, if be any

relation, and any class contained in the converse domain of , then there is at

least one one-many relation implying and having for its converse domain.

  The multiplicative axiom is equivalent to the assumption that if be any

class, and all the sub-classes of with the exception  of  the  null-class,  then

there is at least one selector from . This is the form in which the axiom was

first brought to the notice of the learned world by Zermelo, in his "Beweis,

dass jede Menge wohlgeordnet werden kann."[25] Zermelo regards the axiom

as an unquestionable truth. It must be confessed that, until he made it explicit,

mathematicians had used it without a qualm; but it would seem that they had

done so unconsciously. And the credit due to Zermelo for having made it

explicit is entirely independent of the question whether it is true or false.

  [25]Mathematische Annalen, vol. LIX. pp. 514-6. In this form we shall

speak of it as Zermelo's axiom.

  The  multiplicative  axiom  has  been  shown  by  Zermelo,  in  the  above-

mentioned proof, to be equivalent to the proposition that every class can be

well-ordered, i.e. can be arranged in a series in which every sub-class has a

first term (except, of course, the null-class). The full proof of this proposition

is difficult, but it is not difficult to see the general principle upon which it

proceeds. It uses the form which we call "Zermelo's axiom," i.e. it assumesthat, given any class , there is at least one one-many relation whose converse

domain consists of all existent sub-classes of and which is such that, if has

the  relation to ,  then is  a  member  of .  Such  a  relation  picks  out  a

"representative" from each sub-class; of course, it will often happen that two

sub-classes have the same representative. What Zermelo does, in effect, is to

count off the members of , one by one, by means of and transfinite induction.

We put first the representative of ; call it . Then take the representative of the

class consisting of all of except ; call it . It must be different from , because

every representative is a member of its class, and is shut out from this class.

Proceed similarly to take away , and let be the representative of what is left.

In this way we first obtain a progression , , ... , ..., assuming that is not finite.

We then take away the whole progression; let be the representative of what is

left  of .  In  this  way  we  can  go  on  until  nothing  is  left.  The  successive

representatives will form a  well-ordered series containing all the members of

. (The above is, of course, only a hint of the general lines of the proof.) This

proposition is called "Zermelo's theorem."

  The multiplicative axiom is also equivalent to the assumption that of any

two cardinals which are not equal, one must be the greater. If the axiom is

false, there will be cardinals and such that is neither less than, equal to, nor

greater than . We have seen that and possibly form an instance of such a pair.

  Many other forms of the axiom might be given, but the above are the most

important of the forms known at present. As to the truth or falsehood of the

axiom in any of its forms, nothing is known at present.

  The propositions that depend upon the axiom, without being known to be

equivalent to it, are numerous and important. Take first the connection of

addition  and  multiplication.  We  naturally  think  that  the  sum  of mutually

exclusive classes, each having terms, must have terms. When is finite, this

can  be  proved.  But  when is  infinite,  it  cannot  be  proved  without  the

multiplicative axiom, except where, owing to some special circumstance, the

existence  of  certain  selectors  can  be  proved.  The  way  the  multiplicative

axiom  enters  in  is  as  follows:  Suppose  we  have  two  sets  of mutually

exclusive classes, each having terms, and we wish to prove that the sum of

one set has as many terms as the sum of the other. In order to prove this, we

must establish a one-one relation. Now, since there are in each case classes,

there is some one-one relation between the two sets of classes; but what we

want is a one-one relation between their terms. Let us consider some one-onerelation between the classes. Then if and are the two sets of classes, and is

some member of , there will be a member of which will be the correlate of

with respect to . Now and each have terms, and are therefore similar. There

are, accordingly, one-one correlations of and . The trouble is that there are so

many. In order to obtain a one-one correlation of the sum of with the sum of ,

we have to pick out one selection from a set of classes  of correlators, one 

class of the set being all the one-one correlators of  with . If and are infinite,

we cannot in general know that such a selection exists, unless we can know

that the multiplicative axiom is true. Hence we cannot establish the usual

kind of connection between addition and multiplication.

  This fact has various curious consequences. To begin with, we know that .

It  is  commonly  inferred  from  this  that  the  sum  of classes  each  having

members must itself have members, but this inference is fallacious, since we

do not know that the number of terms in such a sum is , nor consequently that

it is . This has a bearing upon the theory of transfinite ordinals. It is easy to

prove that an ordinal which has predecessors must be one of what Cantor

calls the "second class," i.e. such that a series having this ordinal number will

have terms in its field. It is also easy to see that, if we take any progression of

ordinals of the second class, the predecessors of their limit form at most the

sum of classes each having terms. It is inferred thence—fallaciously, unless

the multiplicative axiom is true—that the predecessors of the limit are in

number, and therefore that the limit is a number of the "second class." That is

to say, it is supposed to be proved that any progression of ordinals of the

second class has a limit which is again an ordinal of the second class. This

proposition, with the corollary that (the smallest ordinal of the third class) is

not the limit of any progression, is involved in most of the recognised theory

of ordinals of the second class. In view of the way in which the multiplicative

axiom is involved, the proposition and its corollary cannot be regarded as

proved. They may be true, or they may not. All that can be said at present is

that we do not know. Thus the greater part of the theory of ordinals of the

second class must be regarded as unproved.

  Another illustration may help to make the point clearer. We know that .

Hence we might suppose that the sum of pairs must have terms. But this,

though  we  can  prove  that  it  is  sometimes  the  case,  cannot  be  proved  to

happen always  unless we assume the multiplicative axiom. This is illustrated

by the millionaire who bought a pair of socks whenever he bought a pair ofboots, and never at any other time, and who had such a passion for buying

both that at last he had pairs of boots and pairs of socks. The problem is: How

many boots had he, and how many socks? One would naturally suppose that

he had twice as many boots and twice as many socks as he had pairs of each,

and  that  therefore  he  had of  each,  since  that  number  is  not  increased  by

doubling.  But  this  is  an  instance  of  the  difficulty,  already  noted,  of

connecting the sum of classes each having terms with . Sometimes this can be

done, sometimes it cannot. In our case it can be done with the boots, but not

with the socks, except by some very artificial device. The reason for the

difference  is  this:  Among  boots  we  can  distinguish  right  and  left,  and

therefore we can make a selection of one out of each pair, namely, we can

choose  all  the  right  boots  or  all  the  left  boots;  but  with  socks  no  such

principle  of  selection  suggests  itself,  and  we  cannot  be  sure,  unless  we

assume the multiplicative axiom, that there is any class consisting of one sock

out of each pair. Hence the problem.

  We may put the matter in another way. To prove that a class has terms, it

is  necessary  and  sufficient  to  find  some  way  of  arranging  its  terms  in  a

progression. There is no difficulty in doing this with the boots. The pairs are

given as forming an , and therefore as the field of a progression. Within each

pair, take the left boot first and the right second, keeping the order of the

pairs unchanged; in this way we obtain a progression of all the boots. But

with the socks we shall have to choose arbitrarily, with each pair, which to

put  first;  and  an  infinite  number  of  arbitrary  choices  is  an  impossibility.

Unless we can find a rule for selecting, i.e. a relation which is a selector, we

do not know that a selection is even theoretically possible. Of course, in the

case of objects in space, like socks, we always can find some principle of

selection. For example, take the centres of mass of the socks: there will be

points in space such that, with any  pair, the centres of mass of the two socks

are not both at exactly the same distance from ; thus we can choose, from

each pair, that sock which has its centre of mass nearer to . But there is no

theoretical reason why a method of selection such as this should always be

possible, and the case of the socks, with a little goodwill on the part of the

reader, may serve to show how a selection might be impossible.

  It is to be observed that, if it were impossible to select one out of each pair

of  socks,  it  would  follow  that  the  socks could  not  be  arranged  in  a

progression, and therefore that there were not of them. This case illustratesthat, if is  an  infinite  number,  one  set  of pairs  may  not  contain  the  same

number of terms as another set of pairs; for, given pairs of boots, there are

certainly boots, but we cannot be sure of this in the case of the socks unless

we  assume  the  multiplicative  axiom  or  fall  back  upon  some  fortuitous

geometrical method of selection such as the above.

  Another  important  problem  involving  the  multiplicative  axiom  is  the

relation of reflexiveness to non-inductiveness. It will be remembered that in

Chapter VIII. we pointed out that a reflexive number must be non-inductive,

but that the converse (so far as is known at present) can only be proved if we

assume the multiplicative axiom. The way in which this comes about is as

follows:—

  It is easy to prove that a reflexive class is one which contains sub-classes

having terms. (The class may, of course, itself have terms.) Thus we have to

prove, if we can, that, given any non-inductive class, it is possible to choose a

progression out of its terms. Now there is no difficulty in showing that a non-

inductive class must contain more terms than any inductive class, or, what

comes to the same thing, that if is a non-inductive class and is any inductive

number, there are sub-classes of that have terms. Thus we can form sets of

finite sub-classes of : First one class having no terms, then classes having 1

term (as many as there are members of ), then classes having  2 terms, and so 

on. We thus get a progression of sets of sub-classes, each set consisting of all 

those that have a certain given finite number of terms. So far we have not 

used the multiplicative axiom, but we have only proved that the number of 

collections of sub-classes of  is a reflexive number, i.e. that, if is the number

of members of , so that is the number of sub-classes of and is the number of

collections of sub-classes, then, provided is not inductive, must be reflexive.

But this is a long way from what we set out to prove.

  In order to advance beyond this point, we must employ the multiplicative

axiom. From each set of sub-classes let us choose out one, omitting the sub-

class consisting of the null-class alone. That is to say, we select one sub-class

containing one term, , say; one containing two terms, , say; one containing

three, ,  say;  and  so  on.  (We  can  do  this  if  the  multiplicative  axiom  is

assumed; otherwise, we do not know whether we can always do it or not.)

We have now a progression , , , ... sub-classes of , instead of a progression of

collections of sub-classes; thus we are one step nearer to our goal. We now

know that, assuming the multiplicative axiom, if is a non-inductive number,must be a reflexive number.

  The  next  step  is  to  notice  that,  although  we  cannot  be  sure  that  new

members of come in at any one specified stage in the progression , , , ... we

can be sure that new members keep on coming in from time to time. Let us

illustrate. The class , which consists of one term, is a new beginning; let the

one term be . The class , consisting of two terms, may or may not contain ; if

it does, it introduces one new term; and if it does not, it must introduce two

new terms, say , . In this case it is possible that consists of , , ,  and  so

introduces no new terms, but in that case must introduce a new term. The first

classes , , , ... contain, at the very most, terms, i.e. terms; thus it would be

possible, if there were no repetitions in the first classes, to go on with only

repetitions from the class to the class. But by that time the old terms would
 

no longer be sufficiently numerous to form a next class with the right number

of members, i.e. ,  therefore  new  terms  must  come  in  at  this  point  if  not

sooner. It follows that, if we omit from our progression , , ,... all those classes

that  are  composed  entirely  of  members  that  have  occurred  in  previous

classes, we shall still have a progression. Let our new progression be called , ,

.... (We shall have and , because and must introduce new terms. We may or

may not have ,  but,  speaking  generally, will be , where is  some  number

greater than ; i.e. the 's are some of the 's.) Now these 's are such that any one

of  them,  say ,  contains  members  which  have  not  occurred  in  any  of  the

previous 's. Let be the part of which consists of new members. Thus we get a

new progression , , ,... (Again will be identical with and with ; if does not

contain the one member of , we shall have , but if does contain this one

member, will consist of the other member of ). This new progression of 's

consists of mutually exclusive classes. Hence a selection from them will be a

progression; i.e. if is the member of , is a member of , is a member of , and so

on;  then , , ,  ...  is  a  progression,  and  is  a  sub-class  of .  Assuming  the

multiplicative axiom, such a selection can be made. Thus by twice using this

axiom we can prove that, if the axiom is true, every non-inductive cardinal

must be reflexive. This could also be deduced from Zermelo's theorem, that,

if the axiom is true, every class can be well ordered; for a well-ordered series

must have either a finite or a reflexive number of terms in its field.

  There is one advantage in the above direct argument, as against deduction

from  Zermelo's  theorem,  that  the  above  argument  does  not  demand  theuniversal truth of the multiplicative axiom, but only its truth as applied to a

set of classes. It may happen that the axiom holds for classes, though not for

larger numbers of classes. For this reason it is better, when  it is possible, to

content ourselves with the more restricted assumption. The assumption made

in the above direct argument is that a product of factors is never zero unless

one of the factors is zero. We may state this assumption in the form: " is a

multipliable number," where a number is defined as "multipliable" when a

product of factors is never zero unless one of the factors is zero. We can

prove that a finite number is always multipliable, but we cannot prove that

any  infinite  number  is  so.  The  multiplicative  axiom  is  equivalent  to  the

assumption that all cardinal numbers are multipliable. But in order to identify

the reflexive with the non-inductive, or to deal with the problem of the boots

and socks, or to show that any progression of numbers of the second class is

of the second class, we only need the very much smaller assumption that is

multipliable.

  It is not improbable that there is much to be discovered in regard to the

topics  discussed  in  the  present  chapter.  Cases  may  be  found  where

propositions which seem to involve the multiplicative axiom can be proved

without it. It is conceivable that the multiplicative axiom in its general form

may be shown to be false. From this point of view, Zermelo's theorem offers

the best hope: the continuum or some still more dense series might be proved

to  be  incapable  of  having  its  terms  well  ordered,  which  would  prove  the

multiplicative axiom false, in virtue of Zermelo's theorem. But so far, no 

method of obtaining such results has been discovered, and the subject 

remains wrapped in obscurity.                                    CHAPTER XIII 


    THE AXIOM OF INFINITY AND LOGICAL TYPES

  THE axiom of infinity is an assumption which may be enunciated as follows:—

  "If be  any  inductive  cardinal  number,  there  is  at  least  one  class  of

individuals having terms."

  If  this  is  true,  it  follows,  of  course,  that  there  are  many  classes  of

individuals  having terms,  and  that  the  total  number  of  individuals  in  the

world is not an inductive number. For, by the axiom, there is at least one

class having terms, from which it follows that there are many classes of terms

and that is not the number of individuals in the world. Since is any inductive

number, it follows that the number of individuals in the world must (if our

axiom be true) exceed any inductive number. In view of what we found in the

preceding  chapter,  about  the  possibility  of  cardinals  which  are  neither

inductive nor reflexive, we cannot infer from our axiom that there are at least

individuals, unless we assume the multiplicative axiom. But we do know that

there are at least classes of classes, since the inductive cardinals are classes of

classes, and form a progression if our axiom is true. The way in which the

need for this axiom arises may be explained as follows:—One of Peano's

assumptions is that no two inductive cardinals have the same successor, i.e.

that we shall not have unless , if and are inductive cardinals. In Chapter VIII.

we had occasion to use what is virtually the same as the above assumption of

Peano's, namely, that, if is an inductive cardinal,   is not equal to . It might be

thought that this could be proved. We can prove that, if is an inductive class,

and is the number of members of , then is not equal to . This proposition is

easily proved by induction, and might be thought to imply the other. But in

fact it does not, since there might be no such class as . What it does imply is

this: If is an inductive cardinal such that there is at least one class having

members, then is not equal to . The axiom of infinity assures us (whether

truly or falsely) that there are classes having members, and thus enables us to

assert that is not equal to . But without this axiom we should be left with the

possibility that and might both be the null-class.

  Let us illustrate this possibility by an example: Suppose there were exactly

nine individuals in the world. (As to what is meant by the word "individual,"

I must ask the reader to be patient.) Then the inductive cardinals from 0 up to9 would be such as we expect, but 10 (defined as ) would be the null-class. It

will be remembered that may be defined as follows: is the collection of all

those classes which have a term such that, when is taken away, there remains

a  class  of terms.  Now  applying  this  definition,  we  see  that,  in  the  case

supposed, is a class consisting of no classes, i.e. it is the null-class. The same

will be true of , or generally of , unless is zero. Thus 10 and all subsequent

inductive cardinals will all be identical, since they will all be the null-class. In

such a case the inductive cardinals will not form a progression, nor will it be

true that no two have the same successor, for 9 and 10 will both be succeeded

by the null-class (10 being itself the null-class). It is in order to prevent such

arithmetical catastrophes that we require the axiom of infinity.

  As a matter of fact, so long as we are content with the arithmetic of finite

integers, and do not introduce either infinite integers or infinite classes or

series of finite integers or ratios, it is possible to obtain all desired results

without the axiom of infinity. That is to say, we can deal with the addition, 

multiplication,  and  exponentiation  of  finite  integers  and  of  ratios,  but  we

cannot deal with infinite integers or with irrationals. Thus the theory of the

transfinite and the theory of real numbers fails us. How these various results

come about must now be explained.

  Assuming that the number of individuals in the world is , the number of

classes of individuals will be . This is in virtue of the general proposition

mentioned in Chapter VIII. that the number of classes contained in a class

which has members is . Now is always greater than . Hence the number of

classes in the world is greater than the number of individuals. If, now, we

suppose the number of individuals to be 9, as we did just now, the number of

classes will be , i.e. 512. Thus if we take our numbers as being applied to the

counting of classes instead of to the counting of individuals, our arithmetic

will be normal until we reach 512: the first number to be null will be 513.

And if we advance to classes of classes we shall do still better: the number of

them will be , a number which is so large as to stagger imagination, since it

has about 153 digits. And if we advance to classes of classes of classes, we

shall obtain a number represented by 2 raised to a power which has about 153

digits; the number of digits in this number will be about three times . In a

time of paper shortage it is undesirable to write out this number, and if we

want larger ones we can obtain them by travelling further along the logical

hierarchy. In this way any assigned inductive cardinal can be made to find itsplace  among  numbers  which  are  not  null,  merely  by  travelling  along  the

hierarchy for a sufficient distance.[26]

[26]On this subject see Principia Mathematica, vol. II. * 120 ff. On the

corresponding problems as regards ratio, see ibid., vol. III. * 303 ff.

  As regards ratios, we have a very similar state of affairs. If a ratio is to

have the expected properties, there must be enough objects of whatever sort

is being counted to insure that the null-class does not suddenly obtrude itself.

But this can be insured, for any given ratio , without the axiom of  infinity, by 

merely travelling up the hierarchy a sufficient distance. If we cannot succeed 

by counting individuals, we can try counting classes of individuals; if we still 

do not succeed, we can try classes of classes, and so on. Ultimately, however

few individuals there may be in the world, we shall reach a stage where there

are many more than objects, whatever inductive number may be. Even if

there were no individuals at all, this would still be true, for there would then

be one class, namely, the null-class, 2 classes of classes (namely, the null-

class  of  classes  and  the  class  whose  only  member  is  the  null-class  of

individuals), 4 classes of classes of classes, 16 at the next stage, 65,536 at the

next stage, and so on. Thus no such assumption as the axiom of infinity is

required in order to reach any given ratio or any given inductive cardinal.

  It is when we wish to deal with the whole class or series of inductive

cardinals or of ratios that the axiom is required. We need the whole class of

inductive cardinals in order to establish the existence of , and the whole series

in  order  to  establish  the  existence  of  progressions:  for  these  results,  it  is

necessary that we should be able to make a single class or series in which no

inductive cardinal is null. We need the whole series of ratios in order of

magnitude in order to define real numbers as segments: this definition will

not give the desired result unless the series of ratios is compact, which it

cannot be if the total number of ratios, at the stage concerned, is finite.

  It would be natural to suppose—as I supposed myself in former days—

that, by means of constructions such as we have been considering, the axiom

of infinity could be proved. It may be said: Let us assume that the number of

individuals is , where may be 0 without spoiling our argument; then if we

form the complete set of individuals, classes, classes of classes, etc., all taken

together, the number of terms in our whole set will be  which is . Thus taking all kinds of objects together, and not  confining

ourselves to objects of any one type, we shall certainly obtain an infinite

class, and shall therefore not need the axiom of infinity. So it might be said.

  Now, before going into this argument, the first thing to observe is that

there is an air of hocus-pocus about it: something reminds one of the conjurer

who brings things out of the hat. The man who has lent his hat is quite sure

there wasn't a live rabbit in it before, but he is at a loss to say how the rabbit

got there. So the reader, if he has a robust sense of reality, will feel convinced

that  it  is  impossible  to  manufacture  an  infinite  collection  out  of  a  finite

collection of individuals, though he may be unable to say where the flaw is in

the above construction. It would be a mistake to lay too much stress on such

feelings of hocus-pocus; like other emotions, they may easily lead us astray.

But  they  afford  a prima  facie  ground  for  scrutinising  very  closely  any

argument which arouses them. And when the above argument is scrutinised it

will, in my opinion, be found to be fallacious, though the fallacy is a subtle

one and by no means easy to avoid consistently.

  The fallacy involved is the fallacy which may be called "confusion of

types." To explain the subject of "types" fully would require a whole volume;

moreover, it is the purpose of this book to avoid those parts of the subjects

which are still obscure and controversial, isolating, for the convenience of

beginners, those parts which can be accepted as embodying mathematically

ascertained truths. Now the theory of types emphatically does not belong to

the  finished  and  certain  part  of  our  subject:  much  of  this  theory  is  still

inchoate, confused, and obscure. But the need of some doctrine of types is

less  doubtful  than  the  precise  form  the  doctrine  should  take;  and  in

connection  with  the  axiom  of  infinity  it  is  particularly  easy  to  see  the

necessity of some such doctrine.

  This necessity results, for example, from the "contradiction of the greatest

cardinal." We saw in Chapter VIII. that the number of classes contained in a

given class is always greater than the  number of members of the class, and

we inferred that there is no greatest cardinal number. But if we could, as we

suggested a moment ago, add together into one class the individuals, classes

of individuals, classes of classes of individuals, etc., we should obtain a class

of which its own sub-classes would be members. The class consisting of all

objects that can be counted, of whatever sort, must, if there be such a class,

have  a  cardinal  number  which  is  the  greatest  possible.  Since  all  its  sub-classes will be members of it, there cannot be more of them than there are

members. Hence we arrive at a contradiction.

  When I first came upon this contradiction, in the year 1901, I attempted to

discover some flaw in Cantor's proof that there is no greatest cardinal, which

we gave in Chapter VIII. Applying this proof to the supposed class of all

imaginable objects, I was led to a new and simpler contradiction, namely, the

following:—

  The  comprehensive  class  we  are  considering,  which  is  to  embrace

everything, must embrace itself as one of its members. In other words, if

there is such a thing as "everything," then "everything" is something, and is a

member of the class "everything." But normally a class is not a member of

itself. Mankind, for example, is not a man. Form now the assemblage of all

classes which are not members of themselves. This is a class: is it a member

of itself or not? If it is, it is one of those classes that are not members of

themselves, i.e. it is not a member of itself. If it is not, it is not one of those

classes that are not members of themselves, i.e. it is a member of itself. Thus

of the two hypotheses—that it is, and that it is not, a member of itself—each

implies its contradictory. This is a contradiction.

  There is no difficulty in manufacturing similar contradictions ad lib. The

solution of such contradictions by the theory of types is set forth fully in

Principia Mathematica,[27] and also, more briefly, in articles by the present

author in the American Journal  of Mathematics,[28]  and  in  the Revue  de

Metaphysique et de Morale.[29] For the present an outline of the solution must

suffice.

[27]Vol. I., Introduction, chap. II., * 12 and * 20; vol. II., Prefatory

Statement

  [28]"Mathematical Logic as based on the Theory of Types," vol. XXX.,

1908, pp. 222-262.

[29]"Les paradoxes de la logique," 1906, pp. 627-650.

  The  fallacy  consists  in  the  formation  of  what  we  may  call  "impure"

classes, i.e. classes which are not pure as to "type." As we shall see in a later

chapter,  classes  are  logical  fictions,  and  a  statement  which  appears  to  be

about a class will only be significant if it is capable of translation into a form

in which no mention is made of the class. This places a limitation upon the

ways in which what are nominally, though not really, names for classes can

occur significantly: a sentence or set of symbols in which such pseudo-namesoccur  in  wrong  ways  is  not  false,  but  strictly  devoid  of  meaning.  The

supposition that a class is, or that it is not, a member of itself is meaningless

in just this way. And more generally, to suppose that one class of individuals

is a member, or is not a member, of another class of individuals will be to

suppose nonsense; and to construct symbolically any class whose members

are not all of the same grade in the logical hierarchy is to use symbols in a

way which makes them no longer symbolise anything.

  Thus if there are individuals in the world, and classes of individuals, we

cannot  form  a  new  class,  consisting  of  both  individuals  and  classes  and

having members. In this way the attempt to escape from the need for the

axiom  of  infinity  breaks  down.  I  do  not  pretend  to  have  explained  the

doctrine of types, or done more than indicate, in rough outline, why there is

need of such a doctrine. I have aimed only at saying just so much as was

required  in  order  to  show  that  we  cannot prove  the  existence  of  infinite

numbers and classes by such conjurer's methods as we have been examining.

There  remain,  however,  certain  other  possible  methods  which  must  be

considered.

  Various arguments professing to prove the existence of infinite classes are

given in the Principles of Mathematics, § 339 (p. 357).  In so far as these 

arguments assume that, if  is an inductive cardinal, is not equal to , they have

been already dealt with. There is an argument, suggested by a passage in

Plato's Parmenides, to the effect that, if there is such a number as 1, then 1

has being; but 1 is not identical with being, and therefore 1 and being are two,

and therefore there is such a number as 2, and 2 together with 1 and being

gives a class of three terms, and so on. This argument is fallacious, partly

because "being" is not a term having any definite meaning, and still more

because, if a definite meaning were invented for it, it would be found that

numbers  do  not  have  being—they  are,  in  fact,  what  are  called  "logical

fictions," as we shall see when we come to consider the definition of classes.

  The argument that the number of numbers from 0 to (both inclusive) is

depends upon the assumption that up to and including no number is equal to

its successor, which, as we have seen, will not be always true if the axiom of

infinity is false. It must be understood that the equation , which might be true

for a finite if exceeded the total number of individuals in the world, is quite

different from the same equation as applied to a reflexive number. As applied

to a reflexive number, it means that, given a class of terms, this class is"similar" to that obtained by adding another term. But as applied to a number

which is too great for the actual world, it merely means that there is no class

of individuals, and no class of individuals; it does not mean that, if we mount

the hierarchy of types sufficiently far to secure the existence of a class of

terms,  we  shall  then  find  this  class  "similar"  to  one  of terms,  for  if is

inductive  this  will  not  be  the  case,  quite  independently  of  the  truth  or

falsehood of the axiom of infinity.

  There is an argument employed by both Bolzano[30] and Dedekind[31] to

prove the existence of reflexive classes. The argument, in brief, is this: An

object is not identical with the idea of the  object, but there is (at least in the

realm of being) an idea of any object. The relation of an object to the idea of

it is one-one, and ideas are only some among objects. Hence the relation

"idea of" constitutes a reflexion of the whole class of objects into a part of

itself, namely, into that part which consists of ideas. Accordingly, the class of

objects and the class of ideas are both infinite. This argument is interesting,

not only on its own account, but because the mistakes in it (or what I judge to

be mistakes) are of a kind which it is instructive to note. The main error

consists in assuming that there is an idea of every object. It is, of course,

exceedingly difficult to decide what is meant by an "idea"; but let us assume

that we know. We are then to suppose that, starting (say) with Socrates, there

is the idea of Socrates, and so on ad inf. Now it is plain that this is not the

case  in  the  sense  that  all  these  ideas  have  actual  empirical  existence  in

people's minds. Beyond the third or fourth stage they become mythical. If the

argument is to be upheld, the "ideas" intended must be Platonic ideas laid up

in heaven, for certainly they are not on earth. But then it at once becomes

doubtful whether there are such ideas. If we are to know that there are, it

must be on the basis of some logical theory, proving that it is necessary to a

thing that there should be an idea of it. We certainly cannot obtain this result

empirically, or apply it, as Dedekind does, to "meine Gedankenwelt"—the

world of my thoughts.

  [30]Bolzano, Paradoxien des Unendlichen, 13.

  [31]Dedekind, Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen? No. 66.

  If we were concerned to examine fully the relation of idea and object, we

should have to enter upon a number of psychological and logical inquiries,

which are not relevant to our main purpose. But a few further points should

be noted. If "idea" is to be understood logically, it may be identical with theobject, or it may stand for a description (in the sense to be explained in a

subsequent chapter). In the former case the argument fails, because it was

essential to the proof of reflexiveness that object and idea should be distinct.

In the second case the argument also fails, because the relation of object and

description is not  one-one: there are innumerable correct descriptions of any

given object. Socrates (e.g.) may be described as "the master of Plato," or as

"the philosopher who drank the hemlock," or as "the husband of Xantippe." If

—to  take  up  the  remaining  hypothesis—"idea"  is  to  be  interpreted

psychologically,  it  must  be  maintained  that  there  is  not  any  one  definite

psychological entity which could be called the idea of the object: there are

innumerable beliefs and attitudes, each of which could be called an idea of

the object in the sense in which we might say "my idea of Socrates is quite

different from yours," but there is not any central entity (except Socrates

himself) to bind together various "ideas of Socrates," and thus there is not any

such one-one relation of idea and object as the argument supposes. Nor, of

course, as we have already noted, is it true psychologically that there are

ideas (in however extended a sense) of more than a tiny proportion of the

things in the world. For all these reasons, the above argument in favour of the

logical existence of reflexive classes must be rejected.

  It might be thought that, whatever may be said of logical arguments, the

empirical arguments derivable from space and time, the diversity of colours,

etc., are quite sufficient to prove the actual existence of an infinite number of

particulars. I do not believe this. We have no reason except prejudice for

believing in the infinite extent of space and time, at any rate in the sense in

which  space  and  time  are  physical  facts,  not  mathematical  fictions.  We

naturally regard space and time as continuous, or, at least, as compact; but

this again is mainly prejudice. The theory of "quanta" in physics, whether

true  or  false,  illustrates  the  fact  that  physics  can  never  afford  proof  of

continuity, though it might quite possibly afford disproof. The senses are not

sufficiently  exact  to  distinguish  between  continuous  motion  and  rapid

discrete succession, as anyone may discover in a cinema. A world in which

all motion consisted of a series of small finite jerks would be empirically

indistinguishable from one in which motion was continuous. It would take up

too much space to  defend  these  theses  adequately;  for  the  present  I  am

merely suggesting them for the reader's consideration. If they are valid, it

follows  that  there  is  no  empirical  reason  for  believing  the  number  ofparticulars in the world to be infinite, and that there never can be; also that

there is at present no empirical reason to believe the number to be finite,

though it is theoretically conceivable that some day there might be evidence

pointing, though not conclusively, in that direction.

  From the fact that the infinite is not self-contradictory, but is also not

demonstrable logically, we must conclude that nothing can be known a priori

as to whether the number of things in the world is finite or infinite. The

conclusion is, therefore, to adopt a Leibnizian phraseology, that some of the

possible worlds are finite, some infinite, and we have no means of knowing

to which of these two kinds our actual world belongs. The axiom of infinity

will be true in some possible worlds and false in others; whether it is true or

false in this world, we cannot tell.

  Throughout this chapter the synonyms "individual" and "particular" have

been  used  without  explanation.  It  would  be  impossible  to  explain  them

adequately without a longer disquisition on the theory of types than would be

appropriate to the present work, but a few words before we leave this topic

may do something to diminish the obscurity which would otherwise envelop

the meaning of these words.

  In an ordinary statement we can distinguish a verb, expressing an attribute 

or relation, from the substantives which express the subject of the attribute or 

the terms of the relation. "Cæsar lived" ascribes an attribute to Cæsar; 

"Brutus killed Cæsar" expresses a relation between Brutus and Cæsar. Using 

the word "subject" in a generalised sense, we may call both Brutus and Cæsar 

subjects of this proposition: the fact that Brutus is grammatically subject and 

Cæsar object is logically irrelevant, since the same occurrence may be 

expressed in the words "Cæsar was killed by Brutus," where Cæsar is the 

grammatical subject.  Thus in the simpler sort of proposition we shall have an

attribute or relation holding of or between one, two or more "subjects" in the

extended sense. (A relation may have more than two terms: e.g. " gives to " is

a relation of three terms.) Now it often happens that, on a closer scrutiny, the

apparent subjects are found to be not really subjects, but to be capable of

analysis;  the  only  result  of  this,  however,  is  that  new  subjects  take  their

places. It also happens that the verb may grammatically be made subject: e.g.

we may say, "Killing is a relation which holds between Brutus and Cæsar."

But  in  such  cases  the  grammar  is  misleading,  and  in  a  straightforward

statement,  following  the  rules  that  should  guide  philosophical  grammar,Brutus and Cæsar will appear as the subjects and killing as the verb.

  We are thus led to the conception of terms which, when they occur in

propositions, can only occur as subjects, and never in any other way. This is

part  of  the  old  scholastic  definition  of substance;  but  persistence  through

time, which belonged to that notion, forms no part of the notion with which

we are concerned. We shall define "proper names" as those terms which can

only occur as subjects in propositions (using "subject" in the extended sense

just explained). We shall further define "individuals" or "particulars" as the

objects that can be named by proper names. (It would be better to define them

directly,  rather  than  by  means  of  the  kind  of  symbols  by  which  they  are

symbolised; but in order to do that we should have to plunge deeper into

metaphysics than is desirable here.) It is, of course, possible that there is an

endless  regress:  that  whatever  appears  as  a  particular  is  really,  on  closer

scrutiny, a class or some kind of complex. If this be the case, the axiom of

infinity  must  of  course  be  true.  But  if  it  be  not  the  case,  it  must  be

theoretically possible for analysis to reach ultimate subjects, and it is these

that give the meaning of "particulars" or "individuals." It is to the number of

these that the axiom of infinity is assumed to apply. If it is true of them, it is 

true  of classes of them, and classes of classes of them, and so on; similarly if 

it is false of them, it is false throughout this hierarchy. Hence it is natural to 

enunciate the axiom concerning them rather than concerning any other stage 

in the hierarchy. But whether the axiom is true or false, there seems no 

known method of discovering.                                    CHAPTER XIV 


INCOMPATIBILITY AND THE THEORY OF DEDUCTION

  WE have now explored, somewhat hastily it is true, that part of the philosophy of mathematics
which does not demand a critical examination of the idea of class. In the preceding chapter, however,
we found ourselves confronted by problems which make such an examination imperative. Before we
can undertake it, we must consider certain other parts of the philosophy of mathematics, which we
have hitherto ignored. In a synthetic treatment, the parts which we shall now be concerned with come
first: they are more fundamental than anything that we have discussed hitherto. Three topics will
concern us before we reach the theory of classes, namely: (1) the theory of deduction, (2)
propositional functions, (3) descriptions. Of these, the third is not logically presupposed in the theory
of classes, but it is a simpler example of the kind of theory that is needed in dealing with classes. It is
the first topic, the theory of deduction, that will concern us in the present chapter.

  Mathematics  is  a  deductive  science:  starting  from  certain  premisses,  it

arrives,  by  a  strict  process  of  deduction,  at  the  various  theorems  which

constitute it. It is true that, in the past, mathematical deductions were often

greatly  lacking  in  rigour;  it  is  true  also  that  perfect  rigour  is  a  scarcely

attainable ideal. Nevertheless, in so far as rigour is lacking in a mathematical

proof, the proof is defective; it is no defence to urge that common sense

shows the result to be correct, for if we were to rely upon that, it would be

better to dispense with argument altogether,  rather than bring fallacy to the

rescue  of  common  sense.  No  appeal  to  common  sense,  or  "intuition,"  or

anything except strict deductive logic, ought to be needed in mathematics

after the premisses have been laid down.

  Kant, having observed that the geometers of his day could not prove their

theorems by unaided argument, but required an appeal to the figure, invented

a theory of mathematical reasoning according to which the inference is never

strictly logical, but always requires the support of what is called "intuition."

The whole trend of modern mathematics, with its increased pursuit of rigour,

has been against this Kantian theory. The things in the mathematics of Kant's

day which cannot be proved, cannot be known—for example, the axiom of

parallels. What can be known, in mathematics and by mathematical methods,

is what can be deduced from pure logic. What else is to belong to human

knowledge must be ascertained otherwise—empirically, through the senses or

through experience in some form, but not a priori. The positive grounds for

this thesis are to be found in Principia Mathematica, passim; a controversial

defence of it is given in the Principles of Mathematics. We cannot here do

more than refer the reader to those works, since the subject is too vast forhasty  treatment.  Meanwhile,  we  shall  assume  that  all  mathematics  is

deductive, and proceed to inquire as to what is involved in deduction.

  In deduction, we have one or more propositions called premisses, from

which we infer a proposition called the conclusion. For our purposes, it will

be convenient, when there are originally several premisses, to amalgamate

them into a single proposition, so as to be able to speak of the premiss as well

as of the conclusion. Thus we may regard deduction as a process by which

we pass from knowledge of a certain proposition, the premiss, to knowledge

of a certain other proposition, the conclusion. But we shall not regard such a

process as logical deduction unless it is correct, i.e. unless there is such a

relation between premiss and conclusion that we have a right to believe the 

conclusion  if we know the premiss to be true. It is this relation that is chiefly

of interest in the logical theory of deduction.

  In order to be able validly to infer the truth of a proposition, we must

know that some other proposition is true, and that there is between the two a

relation  of  the  sort  called  "implication," i.e.  that  (as  we  say)  the  premiss

"implies" the conclusion. (We shall define this relation shortly.) Or we may

know that a certain other proposition is false, and that there is a relation

between the two of the sort called "disjunction," expressed by "or ,"[32] so
 

that the knowledge that the one is false allows us to infer that the other is

true. Again, what we wish to infer may be the falsehood of some proposition,

not  its  truth.  This  may  be  inferred  from  the  truth  of  another  proposition,

provided we know that the two are "incompatible," i.e. that if one is true, the

other  is  false.  It  may  also  be  inferred  from  the  falsehood  of  another

proposition, in just the same circumstances in which the truth of the other

might have been inferred from the truth of the one; i.e. from the falsehood of

we may infer the falsehood of , when implies . All these four are cases of

inference. When our minds are fixed upon inference, it seems natural to take

"implication" as the primitive fundamental relation, since this is the relation

which must hold between and if we are to be able to infer the truth of from

the truth of . But for technical reasons this is not the best primitive idea to

choose. Before proceeding to primitive ideas and definitions, let us consider

further  the  various  functions  of  propositions  suggested  by  the  above-

mentioned relations of propositions.

[32]We shall use the letters , , , , to denote variable propositions.  The simplest of such functions is the negative, "not-." This is that function
 

of which is true when is false, and false when is true. It is convenient to speak

of the truth of a proposition, or its falsehood, as its "truth-value"[33]; i.e. truth

is the "truth-value" of a true proposition, and falsehood of a false one. Thus

not has the opposite truth-value to .  

[33]This term is due to Frege.

  We may take next disjunction, "or ." This is a function whose truth-value
 

is truth when is true and also when is true, but is falsehood when both and are

false.

  Next we may take conjunction, "and " This has truth for its truth-value
 

when and are both true; otherwise it has falsehood for its truth-value.

  Take next incompatibility, i.e. "and are not both true." This is the negation
 

of conjunction; it is also the disjunction of the negations of and , i.e. it is "not-

or not-." Its truth-value is truth when is false and likewise when is false; its
 

truth-value is falsehood when and are both true.

  Last  take implication, i.e.  "implies ,"  or  "if ,  then ."  This  is  to  be
 

understood in the widest sense that will allow us to infer the truth of if we

know the truth of . Thus we interpret it as meaning: "Unless is false, is true,"

or "either is false or is true." (The fact that "implies" is capable of other

meanings does not concern us; this is the meaning which is convenient for

us.) That is to say, "implies " is to mean "not-or ": its truth-value is to be
  

truth if is false, likewise if is true, and is to be falsehood if is true and is false.

  We  have  thus  five  functions:  negation,  disjunction,  conjunction,

incompatibility, and implication. We might have added others, for example,

joint falsehood, "not-and not-," but the above five will suffice. Negation
  

differs from the other four in being a function of one proposition, whereas the

others are functions of two. But all five agree in this, that their truth-value

depends only upon that of the propositions which are their arguments. Given

the truth or falsehood of , or of and (as the case may be), we are given the

truth or falsehood of the negation, disjunction, conjunction, incompatibility,

or implication. A function of propositions which has this property is called a

"truth-function."

  The whole meaning of a truth-function is exhausted by the statement of

the circumstances under which it is true or false. "Not-," for example, is
 simply that function of which is true when is false, and false when is true: 

there is no further  meaning to be assigned to it. The same applies to "or "
 

and the rest. It follows that two truth-functions which have the same truth-

value for all values of the argument are indistinguishable. For example, "and
 

" is the negation of "not-or not-" and vice versa; thus either of these may be
  

defined as the negation of the other. There is no further meaning in a truth-

function over and above the conditions under which it is true or false.

  It is clear that the above five truth-functions are not all independent. We

can define some of them in terms of others. There is no great difficulty in

reducing the number to two; the two chosen in Principia Mathematica are

negation  and  disjunction.  Implication  is  then  defined  as  "not-or ";
 

incompatibility  as  "not-or  not-";  conjunction  as  the  negation  of
  

incompatibility. But it has been shown by Sheffer[34] that we can be content

with one primitive idea for all five, and by Nicod[35] that this enables us to

reduce the primitive propositions required in the theory of deduction to two

non-formal principles and one formal one. For this purpose, we may take as

our one indefinable either incompatibility or joint falsehood. We will choose

the former.

[34]Trans. Am. Math. Soc., vol. XIV. pp. 481-488.

[35]Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc., vol. XIX., i., January 1917.

  Our  primitive  idea,  now,  is  a  certain  truth-function  called

"incompatibility," which we will denote by . Negation can be at once defined

as the incompatibility of a proposition with itself, i.e. "not-" is defined as "."
 
 

Disjunction is the incompatibility of not-and not-, i.e. it is . Implication is
  

the  incompatibility  of and  not-, i.e. .  Conjunction  is  the  negation  of
 

incompatibility, i.e. it is . Thus all our four other functions are defined in

terms of incompatibility.

  It is obvious that there is no limit to the manufacture of truth-functions, 

either by introducing more arguments or by repeating arguments. What we 

are concerned with is the connection of this subject with inference.  

  If we know that is true and that implies , we can proceed to assert . There

is always unavoidably something psychological about inference: inference is

a  method  by  which  we  arrive  at  new  knowledge,  and  what  is  not

psychological about it is the relation which allows us to infer correctly; but

the actual passage from the assertion of to the assertion of is a psychologicalprocess, and we must not seek to represent it in purely logical terms.

  In mathematical practice, when we infer, we have always some expression

containing variable propositions, say and , which is known, in virtue of its

form, to be true for all values of and ; we have also some other expression,

part of the former, which is also known to be true for all values of and ; and

in virtue of the principles of inference, we are able to drop this part of our

original expression, and assert what is left. This somewhat abstract account

may be made clearer by a few examples.

  Let  us  assume  that  we  know  the  five  formal  principles  of  deduction

enumerated in Principia Mathematica. (M. Nicod has reduced these to one,

but as it is a complicated proposition, we will begin with the five.) These five

propositions are as follows:—

  (1) "or " implies —i.e. if either is true or is true, then is true.
 

  (2) implies "or "—i.e.  the  disjunction  "or "  is  true  when  one  of  its
  

alternatives is true.

  (3)  "or "  implies  "or ."  This  would  not  be  required  if  we  had  a
  

theoretically  more  perfect  notation,  since  in  the  conception  of  disjunction

there is no order involved, so that "or " and "or " should be identical. But
  

since our symbols, in any convenient form, inevitably introduce an order, we

need suitable assumptions for showing that the order is irrelevant.

  (4) If either is true or "or " is true, then either is true or "or " is true. (The 
  

twist in this proposition serves to increase its deductive power.)  

  (5) If implies , then "or " implies "or ."
  

  These  are  the formal  principles  of  deduction  employed  in Principia

Mathematica. A formal principle of deduction has a double use, and it is in

order to make this clear that we have cited the above five propositions. It has

a use as the premiss of an inference, and a use as establishing the fact that the

premiss implies the conclusion. In the schema of an inference we have a

proposition , and a proposition "implies ," from which we infer . Now when
 

we are concerned with the principles of deduction, our apparatus of primitive

propositions has to yield both the and the "implies " of our inferences. That
 

is to say, our rules of deduction are to be used, not only as rules, which is

their use for establishing "implies " but also as substantive premisses, i.e. as
 

the of our schema. Suppose, for example, we wish to prove that if implies ,then if implies it follows that implies .  We  have  here  a  relation  of  three

propositions which state implications. Put

    implies , implies , and implies .
  Then we have to prove that implies that implies . Now take the fifth of our above principles,
substitute not-for , and remember that "not-or " is by definition the same as "implies ." Thus our fifth
   
principle yields:

  "If implies , then 'implies ' implies 'implies ,'" i.e. "implies that implies
   

." Call this proposition .
  But the fourth of our principles, when we substitute not-, not-, for and , and remember the
  
definition of implication, becomes:

  "If implies that implies , then implies that implies ."
  Writing in place of , in place of , and in place of , this becomes:

  "If implies that implies , then implies that implies ." Call this .

 
  Now we proved by means of our fifth principle that

    "implies that implies ," which was what we called .
 
    Thus we have here an instance of the schema of inference, since represents the of our scheme, and
represents the "implies ." Hence we arrive at , namely,
 

    "implies that implies ,"
 
    which was the proposition to be proved. In this proof, the adaptation of our fifth principle, which
yields , occurs as a substantive premiss; while the adaptation of our fourth principle, which yields , is
used to give the form of the inference. The formal and material employments of premisses in the
theory of deduction are closely intertwined, and it is not very important to keep them separated,
provided we realise that they are in theory distinct.

  The earliest method of arriving at new results from a premiss is one which

is illustrated in the above deduction, but which itself can hardly be called

deduction.  The  primitive  propositions,  whatever  they  may  be,  are  to  be

regarded as asserted for all possible values of the variable propositions , ,

which occur in them. We may therefore substitute for (say) any expression

whose value is always a proposition, e.g. not-, " implies ," and so on. By
 

means  of  such  substitutions  we  really  obtain  sets  of  special  cases  of  our

original proposition, but from a practical point of view we obtain what are

virtually new propositions. The legitimacy of substitutions of this kind has to

be insured by means of a non-formal principle of inference.[36]

[36]No such principle is enunciated in Principia Mathematica, or in M.

Nicod's article mentioned above. But this would seem to be an omission.

  We  may  now  state  the  one  formal  principle  of  inference  to  which  M.

Nicod has reduced the five given above. For this purpose we will first show

how certain truth-functions can be defined in terms of incompatibility. Wesaw already that

  means "implies ."  
 
  We now observe that

  means "implies both and ."
 
  For this expression means "is incompatible with the incompatibility of and ," i.e. "implies that
  
and are not incompatible," i.e. "implies that and are both true"—for, as we saw, the conjunction of
 
and is the negation of their incompatibility.

  Observe next that means " implies itself." This is a particular case of .

  Let us write for the negation of ; thus will mean the negation of , i.e. it will

mean the conjunction of and . It follows that


  expresses the incompatibility of with  the conjunction of and ; in other

words, it states that if and are both true, is false, i.e. and are both true; in still

simpler words, it states that and jointly imply and jointly.

  Now, put

  Then M. Nicod's sole formal principle of deduction is


  in other words, implies both and .

  He employs in addition one non-formal principle belonging to the theory

of types (which need not concern us), and one corresponding to the principle

that, given , and given that implies , we can assert . This principle is:
  "If is true, and is true, then is true."
  From this apparatus the whole theory of deduction follows, except in so far as we are concerned
with deduction from or to the existence or the universal truth of "propositional functions," which we
shall consider in the next chapter.

  There is? if I am not mistaken, a certain confusion in the  minds of some

authors  as  to  the  relation,  between  propositions,  in  virtue  of  which  an

inference is valid. In order that it may be valid to infer from , it is only

necessary that should be true and that the proposition "not-or " should be
 

true. Whenever this is the case, it is clear that must be true. But inference will

only in fact take place when the proposition "not-or " is known otherwise
 

than through knowledge of not-or knowledge of . Whenever is false, "not-or
  

" is true, but is useless for inference, which requires that should be true.

Whenever is already known to be true, "not-or " is of course also known to
 

be  true,  but  is  again  useless  for  inference,  since is  already  known,  and

therefore does not need to be inferred. In fact, inference only arises when

"not-or "  can  be  known  without  our  knowing  already  which  of  the  two
 alternatives  it  is  that  makes  the  disjunction  true.  Now,  the  circumstances

under which this occurs are those in which certain relations of form exist

between and . For example, we know that if implies the negation of , then

implies the negation of . Between " implies not- " and " implies not- " there is

a formal relation which enables us to know that the first implies the second,

without having first to know that the first is false or to know that the second

is  true.  It  is  under  such  circumstances  that  the  relation  of  implication  is

practically useful for drawing inferences.

  But this formal relation is only required in order that we may be able to

know that either the premiss is false or the conclusion is true. It is the truth of

"not-or " that is required for the validity of the inference; what is required
 

further is only required for the practical feasibility of the inference. Professor

C. I. Lewis[37] has especially studied the narrower, formal relation which we

may  call  "formal  deducibility."  He  urges  that  the  wider  relation,  that

expressed by "not-or " should not be called "implication." That is, however, 
 

a matter of words.  Provided our use of words is consistent, it matters little 

how we define them. The essential point of difference between the theory 

which I advocate and the theory advocated by Professor Lewis is this: He 

maintains that, when one proposition is "formally deducible" from another ,
 

the relation which we perceive between them is one which he calls "strict

implication," which is not the relation expressed by "not-or " but a narrower
 

relation, holding only when there are certain formal connections between and

. I maintain that, whether or not there be such a relation as he speaks of, it is

in any case one that mathematics does not need, and therefore one that, on

general grounds of economy, ought not to be admitted into our apparatus of

fundamental  notions;  that,  whenever  the  relation  of  "formal  deducibility"

holds between two propositions, it is the case that we can see that either the

first is false or the second true, and that nothing beyond this fact is necessary

to  be  admitted  into  our  premisses;  and  that,  finally,  the  reasons  of  detail

which Professor Lewis adduces against the view which I advocate can all be

met in detail, and depend for their plausibility upon a covert and unconscious

assumption of the point of view which I reject. I conclude, therefore, that

there is no need to admit as a fundamental notion any form of implication not

expressible as a truth-function.

  [37]See Mind, vol. XXI., 1912, pp. 522-531; and vol. XXIII., 1914, pp.240-247.

                                     CHAPTER XV 


                      PROPOSITIONAL FUNCTIONS

    WHEN, in the preceding chapter, we were discussing propositions, we did not attempt to give a
definition of the word "proposition." But although the word cannot be formally defined, it is necessary
to say something as to its meaning, in order to avoid the very common confusion with "propositional
functions," which are to be the topic of the present chapter.

  We mean by a "proposition" primarily a form of words which expresses

what is either true or false. I say "primarily," because I do not wish to exclude

other than verbal symbols, or even mere thoughts if they have a symbolic

character. But I think the word "proposition" should be limited to what may,

in  some  sense,  be  called  "symbols,"  and  further  to  such  symbols  as  give

expression to truth and falsehood. Thus "two and two are four" and "two and

two  are  five"  will  be  propositions,  and  so  will  "Socrates  is  a  man"  and

"Socrates is not a man." The statement: "Whatever numbers and may be, " is

a proposition; but the bare formula "" alone is not, since it asserts nothing
 

definite unless we are further told, or led to suppose, that and are to have all

possible values, or are to have such-and-such values. The former of these is

tacitly assumed, as a rule, in the enunciation of mathematical formulæ, which

thus become propositions; but if no such assumption were made, they would

be  "propositional  functions."  A  "propositional  function,"  in  fact,  is  an

expression  containing  one  or  more  undetermined constituents,  such  that,

when values are assigned to these constituents, the expression becomes a

proposition. In other words, it is a function whose values are propositions.

But this latter definition must be used with caution. A descriptive function,

e.g.  "the  hardest  proposition  in 's  mathematical  treatise,"  will  not  be  a

propositional function, although its values are propositions. But in such a

case  the  propositions  are  only  described:  in  a  propositional  function,  the

values must actually enunciate propositions.

  Examples of propositional functions are easy to give: " is human" is a

propositional function; so long as remains undetermined, it is neither true nor

false, but when a value is assigned to it becomes a true or false proposition.

Any  mathematical  equation  is  a  propositional  function.  So  long  as  the

variables  have  no  definite  value,  the  equation  is  merely  an  expression

awaiting determination in order to become a true or false proposition. If it is

an equation containing one variable, it becomes true when the variable ismade equal to a root of the equation, otherwise it becomes false; but if it is an

"identity" it will be true when the variable is any number. The equation to a

curve in a plane or to a surface in space is a propositional function, true for

values of the co-ordinates belonging to points on the curve or surface, false

for  other  values.  Expressions  of  traditional  logic  such  as  "all is "  are

propositional functions: and have to be determined as definite classes before

such expressions become true or false.

  The notion of "cases" or "instances" depends upon propositional functions.

Consider,  for  example,  the  kind  of  process  suggested  by  what  is  called

"generalisation," and let us take some very primitive example, say, "lightning

is  followed  by  thunder."  We  have  a  number  of  "instances"  of  this, i.e. a

number of propositions such as: "this is a flash of lightning and is followed

by thunder." What are these occurrences "instances" of? They are instances

of  the  propositional  function:  "If is  a  flash  of  lightning, is  followed  by

thunder."  The  process  of  generalisation  (with  whose  validity  we  are 

fortunately  not  concerned)  consists  in  passing  from  a  number  of  such

instances to the universal truth of the propositional function: "If is a flash of

lightning, is followed by thunder." It will be found that, in an analogous way,

propositional functions are always involved whenever we talk of instances or

cases or examples.

  We do not need to ask, or attempt to answer, the question: "What is a

propositional function?" A propositional function standing all alone may be

taken to be a mere schema, a mere shell, an empty receptacle for meaning,

not  something  already  significant.  We  are  concerned  with  propositional

functions, broadly speaking, in two ways: first, as involved in the notions

"true in all cases" and "true in some cases"; secondly, as involved in the

theory of classes and relations. The second of these topics we will postpone

to a later chapter; the first must occupy us now.

  When we say that something is "always true" or "true in all cases," it is

clear that the "something" involved cannot be a proposition. A proposition is

just true or false, and there is an end of the matter. There are no instances or

cases of "Socrates is a man" or "Napoleon died at St Helena." These are

propositions, and it would be meaningless to speak of their being true "in all

cases." This phrase is only applicable to propositional functions. Take, for

example,  the  sort  of  thing  that  is  often  said  when  causation  is  being

discussed. (We are net concerned with the truth or falsehood of what is said,but only with its logical analysis.) We are told that is, in every instance,

followed by . Now if there are "instances" of , must be some general concept

of which it is significant to say " is ," " is ," " is ," and so on, where , , are

particulars which are not identical one with another. This applies, e.g., to our

previous case of lightning. We say that lightning ( ) is followed by thunder (

).  But  the  separate  flashes  are  particulars,  not  identical,  but  sharing  the

common property of being lightning. The only way of expressing a  common

property generally is to say that a common property of a number of objects is

a propositional function which becomes true when any one of these objects is

taken as the value of the variable. In this case all the objects are "instances"

of  the  truth  of  the  propositional  function—for  a  propositional  function,

though it cannot itself be true or false, is true in certain instances and false in

certain others, unless it is "always true" or "always false." When, to return to

our example, we say that is in every instance followed by , we mean that,

whatever may be, if is an , it is followed by a ; that is, we are asserting that a

certain propositional function is "always true."

  Sentences  involving  such  words  as  "all,"  "every,"  "a,"  "the,"  "some"

require  propositional  functions  for  their  interpretation.  The  way  in  which

propositional functions occur can be explained by means of two of the above

words, namely, "all" and "some."

  There are, in the last analysis, only two things that can be done with a

propositional function: one is to assert that it is true in all cases, the other to

assert that it is true in at least one case, or in some cases (as we shall say,

assuming that there is to be no necessary implication of a plurality of cases).

All the other uses of propositional functions can be reduced to these two.

When we say that a propositional function is true "in all cases," or "always"

(as we shall also say, without any temporal suggestion), we mean that all its

values are true. If "" is the function, and is the right sort of object to be an
 

argument to "," then is to be true, however may have been chosen. For
 

example, "if is human, is mortal" is true whether is human or not; in fact,

every proposition of this form is true. Thus the propositional function "if is

human, is  mortal"  is  "always  true,"  or  "true  in  all  cases."  Or,  again,  the

statement  "there  are  no  unicorns"  is  the  same  as  the  statement  "the

propositional function ' is not a unicorn' is true in all cases." The assertions in

the preceding chapter about propositions, e.g. "'or ' implies 'or ,'" are really 
  assertions  that certain propositional functions are true in all cases. We do not 

assert the above principle, for example, as being true only of this or that 

particular or , but as being true of any or concerning which it can be made
 

significantly. The condition that a function is to be significant for a given

argument  is  the  same  as  the  condition  that  it  shall  have  a  value  for  that

argument, either true or false. The study of the conditions of significance

belongs to the doctrine of types, which we shall not pursue beyond the sketch

given in the preceding chapter.

  Not only the principles of deduction, but all the primitive propositions of

logic,  consist  of  assertions  that  certain  propositional  functions  are  always

true. If this were not the case, they would have to mention particular things or

concepts—Socrates, or redness, or east and west, or what not,—and clearly it

is not the province of logic to make assertions which are true concerning one

such thing or concept but not concerning another. It is part of the definition of

logic  (but  not  the  whole  of  its  definition)  that  all  its  propositions  are

completely  general, i.e.  they  all  consist  of  the  assertion  that  some

propositional function containing no constant terms is always true. We shall

return  in  our  final  chapter  to  the  discussion  of  propositional  functions

containing no constant terms. For the present we will proceed to the other

thing that is to be done with a propositional function, namely, the assertion

that it is "sometimes true," i.e. true in at least one instance.

  When we say "there are men," that means that the propositional function "

is a man" is sometimes true. When we say "some men are Greeks," that

means that the propositional function " is a man and a Greek" is sometimes

true.  When  we  say  "cannibals  still  exist  in  Africa,"  that  means  that  the

propositional function " is a cannibal now in Africa" is sometimes true, i.e. is

true for some values of . To say "there are at least individuals in the world" is

to say that the propositional function " is a class of individuals and a member

of the cardinal number " is sometimes true, or, as we may say, is true for 

certain  values of  . This form of expression is more convenient when it is

necessary to indicate which is the variable constituent which we are taking as

the  argument  to  our  propositional  function.  For  example,  the  above

propositional function, which we may shorten to " is a class of individuals,"

contains  two  variables, and .  The  axiom  of  infinity,  in  the  language  of

propositional  functions,  is:  "The  propositional  function  'if is  an  inductivenumber, it is true for some values of that is a class of individuals' is true for

all possible values of ." Here there is a subordinate function, " is a class of

individuals,"  which  is  said  to  be,  in  respect  of , sometimes  true;  and  the

assertion that this happens if is an inductive number is said to be, in respect

of , always true.

  The  statement  that  a  function is  always  true  is  the  negation  of  the

statement that not-is sometimes true, and the statement that is sometimes true
 

is the negation of the statement that not-is always true. Thus the statement
 

"all men are mortals" is the negation of the statement that the function " is an

immortal man" is sometimes true. And the statement "there are unicorns" is

the negation of the statement that the function " is not a unicorn" is always

true.[38] We say that is "never true" or "always false" if not-is always true.
 

We  can,  if  we  choose,  take  one  of  the  pair  "always,"  "sometimes"  as  a

primitive idea, and define the other by means of the one and negation. Thus if

we choose "sometimes" as our primitive idea, we can define: "'is always true'
 

is  to  mean  'it  is  false  that  not-is  sometimes  true.'"[39]  But  for  reasons
 

connected  with  the  theory  of  types  it  seems  more  correct  to  take  both

"always" and "sometimes" as primitive ideas, and define by their means the

negation of propositions in which they occur. That is to say, assuming that we

have already  defined  (or  adopted  as  a  primitive  idea)  the  negation  of

propositions  of  the  type  to  which belongs,  we  define:  "The  negation  of  '

always' is 'not-sometimes'; and the negation of 'sometimes' is 'not-always.'"
   

In like manner we can re-define disjunction and the other truth-functions, as

applied  to  propositions  containing  apparent  variables,  in  terms  of  the

definitions  and  primitive  ideas  for  propositions  containing  no  apparent

variables.  Propositions  containing  no  apparent  variables  are  called

"elementary propositions." From these we can mount up step by step, using

such methods as have just been indicated, to the theory of truth-functions as

applied  to  propositions  containing  one,  two,  three,  ...  variables,  or  any

number up to , where is any assigned finite number.

  [38]The method of deduction is given in Principia Mathematica, vol. I. * 9.

[39]For linguistic reasons, to avoid suggesting either the plural or the

singular, it is often convenient to say " is not always false" rather than "

sometimes" or " is sometimes true."

  The forms which are taken as simplest in traditional formal logic are reallyfar from being so, and all involve the assertion of all values or some values of

a compound propositional function. Take, to begin with, "all is ." We will

take it that is defined by a propositional function , and by a propositional

function . E.g., if is men, will be " is human"; if is mortals, will be "there is a

time at which dies." Then "all is " means: "'implies ' is always true." It is to
 

be observed that "all is " does not apply only to those terms that actually are

's; it says something equally about terms which are not 's. Suppose we come

across an of which we do not know whether it is an or not; still, our statement

"all is " tells us something about , namely, that if is an , then is a . And this is

every bit as true when is not an as when is an . If it were not equally true in

both cases, the reductio ad absurdum would not be a valid method; for the

essence of this method consists in using implications in cases where (as it

afterwards turns out) the hypothesis is false. We may put the matter another

way.  In  order  to  understand  "all is ,"  it  is  not  necessary  to  be  able  to

enumerate what terms are 's; provided we know what is meant by being an

and what by being a , we can understand completely what is actually affirmed  

by "all  is ," however little we may know of actual instances of either. This

shows that it is not merely the actual terms that are 's that are relevant in the

statement "all is ," but all the terms concerning which the supposition that

they are 's is significant, i.e. all the terms that are 's, together with all the

terms that are not 's—i.e. the whole of the appropriate logical "type." What

applies to statements about all applies also to statements about some. "There

are men," e.g., means that " is human" is true for some values of . Here all

values of (i.e. all values for which " is human" is significant, whether true or

false) are relevant, and not only those that in fact are human. (This becomes

obvious if we consider how we could prove such a statement to be false.)

Every assertion about "all" or "some" thus involves not only the arguments

that make a certain function true, but all that make it significant, i.e. all for

which it has a value at all, whether true or false.

  We may now proceed with our interpretation of the traditional forms of

the old-fashioned formal logic. We assume that is those terms for which is

true, and is those for which is true. (As we shall see in a later chapter, all

classes are derived in this way from propositional functions.) Then:

  "All is " means "'implies ' is always true."
 

  "Some is " means "'and ' is sometimes true."
   "No is " means "'implies not-' is always true."
  

  "Some is not " means "'and not-' is sometimes true."
  
  It will be observed that the propositional functions which are here asserted for all or some values
are not and themselves, but truth-functions of and for the same argument . The easiest way to conceive
of the sort of thing that is intended is to start not from and in general, but from and , where is some
constant. Suppose we are considering "all men are mortal": we will begin with

  "If Socrates is human, Socrates is mortal,"

 
  and then we will regard "Socrates" as replaced by a variable wherever "Socrates" occurs. The
object to be secured is that, although remains a variable, without any definite value, yet it is to have
the same value in "" as in "" when we are asserting that "implies " is always true. This requires that
   
we shall start with a function whose values are such as "implies ," rather than with two separate
 
functions and ; for if we start with two separate functions we can never secure that the , while
remaining undetermined, shall have the same value in both.

  For brevity we say "always implies " when we mean that "implies " is
  

always true. Propositions of the form "always implies " are called "formal
 

implications"; this name is given equally if there are several variables.

  The above definitions show how far removed from the simplest forms are

such propositions as "all is ," with which traditional logic begins. It is typical

of  the  lack  of  analysis  involved  that  traditional  logic  treats  "all is "  as  a

proposition of the same form as " is "—e.g., it treats "all men are mortal" as

of the same form as "Socrates is mortal." As we have just seen, the first is of

the form "always implies ," while the second is of the form "." The emphatic
  

separation of these two forms, which was effected by Peano and Frege, was a

very vital advance in symbolic logic.

  It will be seen that "all is " and "no is " do not really differ in form, except

by the substitution of not-for , and that the same applies to "some is " and
 

"some is  not ."  It  should  also  be  observed  that  the  traditional  rules  of

conversion are faulty, if we adopt the view, which is the only technically

tolerable one, that such propositions as "all is " do not involve the "existence"

of 's, i.e. do not require that there should be terms which are 's. The above

definitions lead to the result that, if is always false, i.e. if there are no 's, then

"all is " and "no is " will both be true, whatever   may be. For, according to

the definition in the last chapter, "implies " means "not-or " which is always
  

true if not-is always true. At the first moment, this result might lead the
 

reader to desire different definitions, but a little practical experience soon

shows  that  any  different  definitions  would  be  inconvenient  and  wouldconceal  the  important  ideas.  The  proposition  "always  implies ,  and is
 

sometimes true" is essentially composite, and it would be very awkward to

give this as the definition of "all is ," for then we should have no language

left for "always implies ," which is needed a hundred times for once that the
 

other is needed. But, with our definitions, "all is " does not imply "some is ,"

since  the  first  allows  the  non-existence  of and  the  second  does  not;  thus

conversion per accidens becomes invalid, and some moods of the syllogism

are fallacious, e.g. Darapti: "All is , all is , therefore some is ," which fails if

there is no .

  The notion of "existence" has several forms, one of which will occupy us

in  the  next  chapter;  but  the  fundamental  form  is  that  which  is  derived

immediately from the notion of "sometimes true." We say that an argument

"satisfies" a function if is true; this is the same sense in which the roots of an

equation are said to satisfy the equation. Now if is sometimes true, we may

say there are 's for which it is true, or we may say "arguments satisfying

exist"  This  is  the  fundamental  meaning  of  the  word  "existence."  Other

meanings are either derived from this, or embody mere confusion of thought.

We may correctly say "men exist," meaning that " is a man" is sometimes

true. But if we make a pseudo-syllogism: "Men exist, Socrates is a man,

therefore Socrates exists," we are talking nonsense, since "Socrates" is not,

like  "men,"  merely  an  undetermined  argument  to  a  given  propositional

function. The fallacy is closely analogous to that of the argument: "Men are

numerous, Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is numerous." In this case it

is obvious that the conclusion is nonsensical, but  in the case of existence it is

not obvious, for reasons which will appear more fully in the next chapter. For

the present let us merely note the fact that, though it is correct to say "men

exist," it is incorrect, or rather meaningless, to ascribe existence to a given

particular who  happens  to  be  a  man.  Generally,  "terms  satisfying exist"

means "is sometimes true"; but " exists" (where is a term satisfying ) is a
 

mere noise or shape, devoid of significance. It will be found that by bearing

in mind this simple fallacy we can solve many ancient philosophical puzzles

concerning the meaning of existence.

  Another set of notions as to which philosophy has allowed itself to fall

into hopeless confusions through not sufficiently separating propositions and

propositional functions are the notions of "modality": necessary, possible,and impossible.  (Sometimes contingent  or assertoric  is  used  instead  of

possible.) The traditional view was that, among true propositions, some were

necessary, while others were merely contingent or assertoric; while among

false  propositions  some  were  impossible,  namely,  those  whose

contradictories were necessary, while others merely happened not to be true.

In fact, however, there was never any clear account of what was added to

truth by the conception of necessity. In the case of propositional functions,

the three-fold division is obvious. If "" is an undetermined value of a certain
 

propositional function, it will be necessary if the function is always true,

possible if it is sometimes true, and impossible if it is never true. This sort of

situation arises in regard to probability, for example. Suppose a ball is drawn

from a bag which contains a number of balls: if all the balls are white, " is

white" is necessary; if some are white, it is possible; if none, it is impossible.

Here all that is known about is that it satisfies a certain propositional function,

namely, " was  a  ball  in  the  bag."  This  is  a  situation  which  is  general  in

probability problems and not uncommon in practical life—e.g. when a person

calls of whom we know nothing except that he brings a letter of introduction

from our friend so-and-so. In all such  cases, as in regard to modality in 

general, the propositional function is relevant. For clear thinking, in many 

very diverse directions, the habit of keeping propositional functions sharply 

separated from propositions is of the utmost importance, and the failure to do 

so in the past has been a disgrace to philosophy.                                    CHAPTER XVI 


                                  DESCRIPTIONS

  We dealt in the preceding chapter with the words all and some; in this chapter we shall consider
the word the in the singular, and in the next chapter we shall consider the word the in the plural. It
may be thought excessive to devote two chapters to one word, but to the philosophical mathematician
it is a word of very great importance: like Browning's Grammarian with the enclitic , I would give the
doctrine of this word if I were "dead from the waist down" and not merely in a prison.

  We have already had occasion to mention "descriptive functions," i.e. such

expressions as "the father of " or "the sine of ." These are to be defined by

first defining "descriptions."

  A  "description"  may  be  of  two  sorts,  definite  and  indefinite  (or

ambiguous). An indefinite description is a phrase of the form "a so-and-so,"

and a definite description is a phrase of the form "the so-and-so" (in the

singular). Let us begin with the former.

  "Who  did  you  meet?"  "I  met  a  man."  "That  is  a  very  indefinite

description." We are therefore not departing from usage in our terminology.

Our question is: What do I really assert when I assert "I met a man"? Let us

assume, for the moment, that my assertion is true, and that in fact I met Jones.

It is clear that what I assert is not "I met Jones." I may say "I met a man, but

it was not Jones"; in that case, though I lie, I do not contradict myself, as I

should do if when I say I met a  man I really mean that I met Jones. It is clear

also that the person to whom I am speaking can understand what I say, even

if he is a foreigner and has never heard of Jones.

  But we may go further: not only Jones, but no actual man, enters into my

statement. This becomes obvious when the statement is false, since then there

is no more reason why Jones should be supposed to enter into the proposition

than why anyone else should. Indeed the statement would remain significant,

though it could not possibly be true, even if there were no man at all. "I met a

unicorn" or "I met a sea-serpent" is a perfectly significant assertion, if we

know what it would be to be a unicorn or a sea-serpent, i.e. what is the

definition of these fabulous monsters. Thus it is only what we may call the

concept that enters into the proposition. In the case of "unicorn," for example,

there is only the concept: there is not also, somewhere among the shades,

something  unreal  which  may  be  called  "a  unicorn."  Therefore,  since  it  is

significant  (though  false)  to  say  "I  met  a  unicorn,"  it  is  clear  that  this

proposition,  rightly  analysed,  does  not  contain  a  constituent  "a  unicorn,"though it does contain the concept "unicorn."

  The question of "unreality," which confronts us at this point, is a very

important one. Misled by grammar, the great majority of those logicians who

have dealt with this question have dealt with it on mistaken lines. They have

regarded grammatical form as a surer guide in analysis than, in fact, it is. And

they have not known what differences in grammatical form are important. "I

met Jones" and "I met a man" would count traditionally as propositions of the

same form, but in actual fact they are of quite different forms: the first names

an actual person, Jones; while the second involves a propositional function,

and becomes, when made explicit: "The function 'I met and is human' is

sometimes true." (It will be remembered that we adopted the convention of

using  "sometimes"  as  not  implying  more  than  once.)  This  proposition  is

obviously not of the form "I met ," which accounts  for the existence of the 

proposition "I met a unicorn" in spite of the fact that there is no such thing as 

"a unicorn." 

  For want of the apparatus of propositional functions, many logicians have

been driven to the conclusion that there are unreal objects. It is argued, e.g.

by Meinong,[40] that we can speak about "the golden mountain," "the round

square," and so on; we can make true propositions of which these are the

subjects; hence they must have some kind of logical being, since otherwise

the propositions in which they occur would be meaningless. In such theories,

it seems to me, there is a failure of that feeling for reality which ought to be

preserved even in the most abstract studies. Logic, I should maintain, must no

more admit a unicorn than zoology can; for logic is concerned with the real

world just as truly as zoology, though with its more abstract and general

features. To say that unicorns have an existence in heraldry, or in literature,

or in imagination, is a most pitiful and paltry evasion. What exists in heraldry

is not an animal, made of flesh and blood, moving and breathing of its own

initiative. What exists is a picture, or a description in words. Similarly, to

maintain that Hamlet, for example, exists in his own world, namely, in the

world of Shakespeare's imagination, just as truly as (say) Napoleon existed in

the  ordinary  world,  is  to  say  something  deliberately  confusing,  or  else

confused to a degree which is scarcely credible. There is only one world, the

"real" world: Shakespeare's imagination is part of it, and the thoughts that he

had in writing Hamlet are real. So are the thoughts that we have in reading

the  play.  But  it  is  of  the  very  essence  of  fiction  that  only  the  thoughts,feelings, etc., in Shakespeare and his readers are real, and that there is not, in

addition to them, an objective Hamlet. When you have taken account of all

the feelings roused by Napoleon in writers and readers of history, you have

not touched the actual man; but in the case of Hamlet you have come to the

end of him. If no one thought about Hamlet, there would be nothing  left of

him; if no one had thought about Napoleon, he would have soon seen to it

that some one did. The sense of reality is vital in logic, and whoever juggles

with  it  by  pretending  that  Hamlet  has  another  kind  of  reality  is  doing  a

disservice to thought. A robust sense of reality is very necessary in framing a

correct  analysis  of  propositions  about  unicorns,  golden  mountains,  round

squares, and other such pseudo-objects.

  [40]Untersuchungen zur Gegenstandstheorie und Psychologie, 1904.

  In obedience to the feeling of reality, we shall insist that, in the analysis of

propositions,  nothing  "unreal"  is  to  be  admitted.  But,  after  all,  if  there is

nothing unreal, how, it may be asked, could we admit anything unreal? The

reply is that, in dealing with propositions, we are dealing in the first instance

with symbols, and if we attribute significance to groups of symbols which

have no significance, we shall fall into the error of admitting unrealities, in

the only sense in which this is possible, namely, as objects described. In the

proposition  "I  met  a  unicorn,"  the  whole  four  words  together  make  a

significant proposition, and the word "unicorn" by itself is significant, in just

the same sense as the word "man." But the two words "a unicorn" do not form

a subordinate group having a meaning of its own. Thus if we falsely attribute

meaning to these two words, we find ourselves saddled with "a unicorn," and

with the problem how there can be such a thing in a world where there are no

unicorns. "A unicorn" is an indefinite description which describes nothing. It

is not an indefinite description which describes something unreal. Such a

proposition  as  " is  unreal"  only  has  meaning  when  " "  is  a  description,

definite  or  indefinite;  in  that  case  the  proposition  will  be  true  if  " " is a

description  which  describes  nothing.  But  whether  the  description  " "

describes something or describes nothing, it is in any case not a constituent of

the  proposition  in  which  it  occurs;  like  "a  unicorn"  just  now,  it  is  not  a

subordinate group having a meaning of its own. All this results from the fact

that,  when  " "  is  a  description,  " is  unreal"  or  "  does not exist" is not 

nonsense, but is always significant and sometimes true.  

  We  may  now  proceed  to  define  generally  the  meaning  of  propositionswhich  contain  ambiguous  descriptions.  Suppose  we  wish  to  make  some

statement  about  "a  so-and-so,"  where  "so-and-so's"  are  those  objects  that

have  a  certain  property , i.e.  those  objects for  which  the  propositional

function is true. (E.g. if we take "a man" as our instance of "a so-and-so," will

be " is human.") Let us now wish to assert the property of "a so-and-so," i.e.

we wish to assert that "a so-and-so" has that property which has when is true.

(E.g. in the case of "I met a man," will be "I met .") Now the proposition that

"a so-and-so" has the property is not a proposition of the form "." If it were,
 

"a so-and-so" would have to be identical with for a suitable ; and although (in

a sense) this may be true in some cases, it is certainly not true in such a case

as "a unicorn." It is just this fact, that the statement that a so-and-so has the

property is not of the form , which makes it possible for "a so-and-so" to be,

in a certain clearly definable sense, "unreal." The definition is as follows:—

  The statement that "an object having the property has the property "
  means:

  "The joint assertion of and is not always false."

  So far as logic goes, this is the same proposition as might be expressed by

"some 's are 's"; but rhetorically there is a difference, because in the one case

there is a suggestion of singularity, and in the other case of plurality. This,

however, is not the important point. The important point is that, when rightly

analysed, propositions verbally about "a so-and-so" are found to contain no

constituent represented by this phrase. And that is why such propositions can

be significant even when there is no such thing as a so-and-so.

  The definition of existence, as applied to ambiguous descriptions, results

from what was said at the end of the preceding chapter. We say that "men

exist"  or  "a  man  exists"  if the  propositional  function  " is  human"  is

sometimes  true;  and  generally  "a  so-and-so"  exists  if  " is  so-and-so"  is

sometimes  true.  We  may  put  this  in  other  language.  The  proposition

"Socrates is a man" is no doubt equivalent to "Socrates is human," but it is

not the very same proposition. The is of "Socrates is human" expresses the

relation  of  subject  and  predicate;  the is  of  "Socrates  is  a  man"  expresses

identity. It is a disgrace to the human race that it has chosen to employ the

same word "is" for these two entirely different ideas—a disgrace which a

symbolic logical language of course remedies. The identity in "Socrates is a

man" is identity between an object named (accepting "Socrates" as a name,

subject  to  qualifications  explained  later)  and  an  object  ambiguouslydescribed. An object ambiguously described will "exist" when at least one

such proposition is true, i.e. when there is at least one true proposition of the

form " is a so-and-so," where " " is a name. It is characteristic of ambiguous

(as opposed to definite) descriptions that there may be any number of true

propositions of the above form—Socrates is a man, Plato is a man, etc. Thus

"a man exists" follows from Socrates, or Plato, or anyone else. With definite

descriptions,  on  the  other  hand,  the  corresponding  form  of  proposition,

namely, " is the so-and-so" (where " " is a name), can only be true for one

value of at most. This brings us to the subject of definite descriptions, which

are  to  be  defined  in  a  way  analogous  to  that  employed  for  ambiguous

descriptions, but rather more complicated.

  We come now to the main subject of the present chapter, namely, the

definition of the word the (in the singular). One very important point about

the  definition  of  "a  so-and-so"  applies  equally  to  "the  so-and-so";  the

definition to be sought is a definition of propositions in which this phrase

occurs, not a definition of the phrase itself in isolation. In the case of "a so-

and-so," this is fairly obvious: no one could suppose that "a man" was a 

definite object, which could be defined by itself.  Socrates is a man, Plato is a 

man, Aristotle is a man, but we cannot infer that "a man" means the same as 

"Socrates" means and also the same as "Plato" means and also the same as

"Aristotle"  means,  since  these  three  names  have  different  meanings.

Nevertheless, when we have enumerated all the men in the world, there is

nothing left of which we can say, "This is a man, and not only so, but it is the

'a man,' the quintessential entity that is just an indefinite man without being

anybody in particular." It is of course quite clear that whatever there is in the

world is definite: if it is a man it is one definite man and not any other. Thus

there  cannot  be  such  an  entity  as  "a  man"  to  be  found  in  the  world,  as

opposed to specific man. And accordingly it is natural that we do not define

"a man" itself, but only the propositions in which it occurs.

  In the case of "the so-and-so" this is equally true, though at first sight less

obvious. We may demonstrate that this must be the case, by a consideration

of  the  difference  between  a name  and  a definite  description.  Take  the

proposition, "Scott is the author of Waverley." We have here a name, "Scott,"

and a description, "the author of Waverley," which are asserted to apply to the

same person. The distinction between a name and all other symbols may be

explained as follows:—  A name is a simple symbol whose meaning is something that can only

occur as subject, i.e. something of the kind that, in Chapter XIII., we defined

as an "individual" or a "particular." And a "simple" symbol is one which has

no parts that are symbols. Thus "Scott" is a simple symbol, because, though it

has parts (namely, separate letters), these parts are not symbols. On the other

hand, "the author of Waverley" is not a simple symbol, because the separate

words that compose the phrase are parts which are symbols. If, as may be the

case,  whatever seems  to  be  an  "individual"  is  really  capable  of  further

analysis, we shall have to content ourselves with what may be called "relative

individuals," which will be terms that, throughout the context in question, are

never analysed and never occur  otherwise than as subjects. And in that case

we shall have correspondingly to content ourselves with "relative names."

From  the  standpoint  of  our  present  problem,  namely,  the  definition  of

descriptions, this problem, whether these are absolute names or only relative

names, may be ignored, since it concerns different stages in the hierarchy of

"types," whereas we have to compare such couples as "Scott" and "the author

of Waverley,"  which  both  apply  to  the  same  object,  and  do  not  raise  the

problem of types. We may, therefore, for the moment, treat names as capable

of being absolute; nothing that we shall have to say will depend upon this

assumption, but the wording may be a little shortened by it.

  We have, then, two things to compare: (1) a name, which is a simple

symbol, directly designating an individual which is its meaning, and having

this meaning in its own right, independently of the meanings of all other

words; (2) a description, which consists of several words, whose meanings

are  already  fixed,  and  from  which  results  whatever  is  to  be  taken  as  the

"meaning" of the description.

  A  proposition  containing  a  description  is  not  identical  with  what  that

proposition becomes when a name is substituted, even if the name names the

same object as the description describes. "Scott is the author of Waverley" is

obviously a different proposition from "Scott is Scott": the first is a fact in

literary history, the second a trivial truism. And if we put anyone other than

Scott in place of "the author of Waverley," our proposition would become

false, and would therefore certainly no longer be the same proposition. But, it

may be said, our proposition is essentially of the same form as (say) "Scott is

Sir Walter," in which two names are said to apply to the same person. The

reply is that, if "Scott is Sir Walter" really means "the person named 'Scott' isthe person named 'Sir Walter,'" then the names are being used as descriptions:

i.e. the individual, instead of being named, is being described as the person

having that name. This is a way in which names are frequently used  in

practice, and there will, as a rule, be nothing in the phraseology to show

whether they are being used in this way or as names. When a name is used

directly, merely to indicate what we are speaking about, it is no part of the

fact asserted, or of the falsehood if our assertion happens to be false: it is

merely part of the symbolism by which we express our thought. What we

want to express is something which might (for example) be translated into a

foreign language; it is something for which the actual words are a vehicle, but

of which they are no part. On the other hand, when we make a proposition

about "the person called 'Scott,'" the actual name "Scott" enters into what we

are asserting, and not merely into the language used in making the assertion.

Our proposition will now be a different one if we substitute "the person called

'Sir Walter.'" But so long as we are using names as names, whether we say

"Scott"  or  whether  we  say  "Sir  Walter"  is  as  irrelevant  to  what  we  are

asserting as whether we speak English or French. Thus so long as names are

used as names, "Scott is Sir Walter" is the same trivial proposition as "Scott

is Scott." This completes the proof that "Scott is the author of Waverley" is

not the same proposition as results from substituting a name for "the author of

Waverley," no matter what name may be substituted.

  When we use a variable, and speak of a propositional function, say, the

process of applying general statements about to particular cases will consist

in substituting a name for the letter " ," assuming that is a function which has

individuals for its arguments. Suppose, for example, that is "always true"; let

it be, say, the "law of identity," . Then we may substitute for " " any name we

choose, and we shall obtain a true proposition. Assuming for the moment that

"Socrates," "Plato," and "Aristotle" are names (a very rash assumption), we

can infer from the law of identity that Socrates is Socrates, Plato is Plato, and

Aristotle is Aristotle. But we shall commit a fallacy if we attempt to infer,

without  further  premisses,  that  the  author  of Waverley  is  the  author  of

Waverley. This results  from what we have just proved, that, if we substitute a

name for "the author of Waverley" in a proposition, the proposition we obtain

is a different one. That is to say, applying the result to our present case: If " "

is a name, " " is not the same proposition as "the author of Waverley is theauthor of Waverley," no matter what name " " may be. Thus from the fact that

all propositions of the form " " are true we cannot infer, without more ado,

that the author of Waverley is the author of Waverley. In fact, propositions of

the form "the so-and-so is the so-and-so" are not always true: it is necessary

that the so-and-so should exist (a term which will be explained shortly). It is

false that the present King of France is the present King of France, or that the

round square is the round square. When we substitute a description for a

name, propositional functions which are "always true" may become false, if

the description describes nothing. There is no mystery in this as soon as we

realise (what was proved in the preceding paragraph) that when we substitute

a  description  the  result  is  not  a  value  of  the  propositional  function  in

question.

  We  are  now  in  a  position  to  define  propositions  in  which  a  definite

description occurs. The only thing that distinguishes "the so-and-so" from "a

so-and-so"  is  the  implication  of  uniqueness.  We  cannot  speak  of  "the

inhabitant of London," because inhabiting London is an attribute which is not

unique. We cannot speak about "the present King of France," because there is

none;  but  we  can  speak  about  "the  present  King  of  England."  Thus

propositions  about  "the  so-and-so"  always  imply  the  corresponding

propositions about "a so-and-so," with the addendum that there is not more

than one so-and-so. Such a proposition as "Scott is the author of Waverly"

could not be true if Waverly had never been written, or if several people had

written  it;  and  no  more  could  any  other  proposition  resulting  from  a

propositional function by the substitution of "the author of Waverly" for " ."

We may say that "the author of Waverly" means "the value of for which '

wrote  Waverly' is true." Thus the proposition "the author of Waverly was

Scotch," for example, involves:

  (1) " wrote Waverly" is not always false;

  (2) "if and wrote Waverly, and are identical" is always true;

  (3) "if wrote Waverly, was Scotch" is always true.
    These three propositions, translated into ordinary language, state:

  (1) at least one person wrote Waverly;

  (2) at most one person wrote Waverly;

  (3) whoever wrote Waverly was Scotch.
  All these three are implied by "the author of Waverly was Scotch." Conversely, the three together
(but no two of them) imply that the author of Waverly was Scotch. Hence the three together may be
taken as defining what is meant by the proposition "the author of Waverly was Scotch."  We may somewhat simplify these three propositions. The first and second

together are equivalent to: "There is a term such that ' wrote Waverly' is true

when is and is false when is not ." In other words, "There is a term such that '

wrote Waverly'  is  always  equivalent  to  ' is .'"  (Two  propositions  are

"equivalent" when both are true or both are false.) We have here, to begin

with, two functions of , " wrote Waverly" and " is ," and we form a function

of by considering the equivalence of these two functions of for all values of ;

we then proceed to assert that the resulting function of is "sometimes true,"

i.e. that it is true for at least one value of . (It obviously cannot be true for

more than one value of .) These two conditions together are defined as giving

the meaning of "the author of Waverly exists."

  We may now define "the term satisfying the function exists." This is the

general form of which the above is a particular case. "The author of Waverly"

is "the term satisfying the function ' wrote Waverly.'" And "the so-and-so" 

will  always involve reference to some propositional function, namely, that

which defines the property that makes a thing a so-and-so. Our definition is

as follows:—

  "The term satisfying the function exists" means:

  "There is a term such that is always equivalent to ' is .'"

  In order to define "the author of Waverly was Scotch," we have still to take

account  of  the  third  of  our  three  propositions,  namely,  "Whoever  wrote

Waverly was Scotch." This will be satisfied by merely adding that the in

question is to be Scotch. Thus "the author of Waverly was Scotch" is:

    "There is a term such that (1) ' wrote Waverly' is always equivalent to ' is

,' (2) is Scotch."
  And generally: "the term satisfying satisfies " is defined as meaning:

    "There is a term such that (1) is always equivalent to ' is ,' (2) is true."
  This is the definition of propositions in which descriptions occur.

  It is possible to have much knowledge concerning a term described, i.e. to

know  many  propositions  concerning  "the  so-and-so,"  without  actually

knowing what the so-and-so is, i.e. without knowing any proposition of the

form " is the so-and-so," where " " is a name. In a detective story propositions

about  "the  man  who  did  the  deed"  are  accumulated,  in  the  hope  that

ultimately they will suffice to demonstrate that it was who did the deed. We

may even go so far as to say that, in all such knowledge as can be expressed

in words—with the exception of "this" and "that" and a few other words ofwhich  the  meaning  varies  on  different  occasions—no  names,  in  the  strict

sense,  occur,  but  what  seem  like  names  are  really  descriptions.  We  may

inquire  significantly  whether  Homer  existed,  which  we  could  not  do  if

"Homer" were a name. The proposition "the so-and-so exists" is significant,

whether true or false; but if is the so-and-so (where " " is a name), the words

" exists" are meaningless. It is only of descriptions—definite  or indefinite—

that existence can be significantly asserted; for, if " " is a name, it must name

something: what does not name anything is not a name, and therefore, if

intended to be a name, is a symbol devoid of meaning, whereas a description,

like "the present King of France," does not become incapable of occurring

significantly merely on the ground that it describes nothing, the reason being

that it is a complex symbol, of which the meaning is derived from that of its

constituent symbols. And so, when we ask whether Homer existed, we are

using the word "Homer" as an abbreviated description: we may replace it by

(say) "the author of the Iliad and the Odyssey."  The  same  considerations

apply to almost all uses of what look like proper names.

  When  descriptions  occur  in  propositions,  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish

what  may  be  called  "primary"  and  "secondary"  occurrences.  The  abstract

distinction is as follows. A description has a "primary" occurrence when the

proposition in which it occurs results from substituting the description for " "

in some propositional function ; a description has a "secondary" occurrence

when the result of substituting the description for in gives only part of the

proposition  concerned.  An  instance  will  make  this  clearer.  Consider  "the

present King of France is bald." Here "the present King of France" has a

primary occurrence, and the proposition is false. Every proposition in which a

description which describes nothing has a primary occurrence is false. But

now consider "the present King of France is not bald." This is ambiguous. If

we are first to take " is bald," then substitute "the present King of France" for

" " and then deny the result, the occurrence of "the present King of France" is

secondary and our proposition is true; but if we are to take " is not bald" and

substitute "the present King of France" for " " then "the present King of 

France" has a primary occurrence and the proposition is false. Confusion of 

primary and secondary occurrences is a ready source of fallacies where 

descriptions are concerned.  

  Descriptions  occur  in  mathematics  chiefly  in  the  form  of descriptive

functions, i.e. "the term having the relation to ," or "the of " as we may say,on the analogy of "the father of " and similar phrases. To say "the father of is

rich," for example, is to say that the following propositional function of : " is

rich, and ' begat ' is always equivalent to ' is ,'" is "sometimes true," i.e. is true

for at least one value of . It obviously cannot be true for more than one value.

  The theory of descriptions, briefly outlined in the present chapter, is of the 

utmost importance both in logic and in theory of knowledge. But for purposes 

of mathematics, the more philosophical parts of the theory are not essential, 

and have therefore been omitted in the above account, which has confined 

itself to the barest mathematical requisites.                                    CHAPTER XVII 


                                      CLASSES

  IN the present chapter we shall be concerned with the in the plural: the inhabitants of London, the
sons of rich men, and so on. In other words, we shall be concerned with classes. We saw in Chapter II.
that a cardinal number is to be defined as a class of classes, and in Chapter III. that the number 1 is to
be defined as the class of all unit classes, i.e. of all that have just one member, as we should say but
for the vicious circle. Of course, when the number 1 is defined as the class of all unit classes, "unit
classes" must be defined so as not to assume that we know what is meant by "one"; in fact, they are
defined in a way closely analogous to that used for descriptions, namely: A class is said to be a "unit"
class if the propositional function "' is an ' is always equivalent to ' is '" (regarded as a function of ) is
not always false, i.e., in more ordinary language, if there is a term such that will be a member of when
is but not otherwise. This gives us a definition of a unit class if we already know what a class is in
general. Hitherto we have, in dealing with arithmetic, treated "class" as a primitive idea. But, for the
reasons set forth in Chapter XIII., if for no others, we cannot accept "class" as a primitive idea. We
must seek a definition on the same lines as the definition of descriptions, i.e. a definition which will
assign a meaning to propositions in whose verbal or symbolic expression words or symbols apparently
representing classes occur, but which will assign a meaning that altogether eliminates all mention of
classes from a right analysis  of such propositions. We shall then be able to say that the symbols for
classes are mere conveniences, not representing objects called "classes," and that classes are in fact,
like descriptions, logical fictions, or (as we say) "incomplete symbols."

  The theory of classes is less complete than the theory of descriptions, and

there are reasons (which we shall give in outline) for regarding the definition

of  classes  that  will  be  suggested  as  not  finally  satisfactory.  Some  further

subtlety appears to be required; but the reasons for regarding the definition

which will be offered as being approximately correct and on the right lines

are overwhelming.

  The first thing is to realise why classes cannot be regarded as part of the

ultimate furniture of the world. It is difficult to explain precisely what one

means by this statement, but one consequence which it implies may be used

to elucidate its meaning. If we had a complete symbolic language, with a

definition for everything definable, and an undefined symbol for everything

indefinable,  the  undefined  symbols  in  this  language  would  represent

symbolically  what  I  mean  by  "the  ultimate  furniture  of  the  world."  I  am

maintaining that no symbols either for "class" in general or for particular

classes would be included in this apparatus of undefined symbols. On the

other hand, all the particular things there are in the world would have to have

names which would be included among undefined symbols. We might try to

avoid this conclusion by the use of descriptions. Take (say) "the last thing

Cæsar saw before he died." This is a description of some particular; we mightuse it as (in one perfectly legitimate sense) a definition of that particular. But

if " " is a name for the same particular, a proposition in which " " occurs is

not (as we saw in the preceding chapter) identical with what this proposition

becomes when for " " we substitute "the last thing Cæsar saw before he died."

If our language does not contain the name " " or some other name for the

same particular, we shall have no means of expressing the proposition which

we expressed by means of " " as opposed to the one that  we  expressed  by

means  of  the  description.  Thus  descriptions  would  not  enable  a  perfect

language to dispense with names for all particulars. In this respect, we are

maintaining, classes differ from particulars, and need not be represented by

undefined symbols. Our first business is to give the reasons for this opinion.

  We  have  already  seen  that  classes  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  species  of

individuals,  on  account  of  the  contradiction  about  classes  which  are  not

members of themselves (explained in Chapter XIII.), and because we can

prove that the number of classes is greater than the number of individuals.

  We cannot take classes in the pure extensional way as simply heaps or

conglomerations.  If  we  were  to  attempt  to  do  that,  we  should  find  it

impossible to understand how there can be such a class as the null-class,

which has no members at all and cannot be regarded as a "heap"; we should

also find it very hard to understand how it comes about that a class which has

only one member is not identical with that one member. I do not mean to

assert, or to deny, that there are such entities as "heaps." As a mathematical

logician, I am not called upon to have an opinion on this point. All that I am

maintaining is that, if there are such things as heaps, we cannot identify them

with the classes composed of their constituents.

  We shall come much nearer to a satisfactory theory if we try to identify

classes with propositional functions. Every class, as we explained in Chapter

II., is defined by some propositional function which is true of the members of

the  class  and  false  of  other  things.  But  if  a  class  can  be  defined  by  one

propositional function, it can equally well be defined by any other which is

true whenever the first is true and false whenever the first is false. For this

reason the class cannot be identified with any one such propositional function

rather  than  with  any  other—and  given  a  propositional  function,  there  are

always many others which are true when it is true and false when it is false.

We say that two propositional functions are "formally equivalent" when this

happens. Two propositions are "equivalent"  when both are true or both false;two  propositional  functions , are  "formally  equivalent"  when is  always

equivalent to . It is the fact that there are other functions formally equivalent

to  a  given  function  that  makes  it  impossible  to  identify  a  class  with  a

function; for we wish classes to be such that no two distinct classes have

exactly the same members, and therefore two formally equivalent functions

will have to determine the same class.

  When we have decided that classes cannot be things of the same sort as

their members, that they cannot be just heaps or aggregates, and also that they

cannot be identified with propositional functions, it becomes very difficult to

see what they can be, if they are to be more than symbolic fictions. And if we

can find any way of dealing with them as symbolic fictions, we increase the

logical security of our position, since we avoid the need of assuming that

there are classes without being compelled to make the opposite assumption

that there are no classes. We merely abstain from both assumptions. This is

an  example  of  Occam's  razor,  namely,  "entities  are  not  to  be  multiplied

without necessity." But when we refuse to assert that there are classes, we

must not be supposed to be asserting dogmatically that there are none. We are

merely agnostic as regards them: like Laplace, we can say, "je n'ai pas besoin

de cette hypothèse."

  Let us set forth the conditions that a symbol must fulfil if it is to serve as a

class. I think the following conditions will be found necessary and sufficient:

—

  (1)  Every  propositional  function  must  determine  a  class,  consisting  of

those arguments for which the function is true. Given any proposition (true or

false),  say  about  Socrates,  we  can  imagine  Socrates  replaced  by  Plato  or

Aristotle or a gorilla or the man in the moon or any other individual in the

world. In general, some of these substitutions will give a true proposition and

some a false one. The class determined will consist of all those substitutions

that give a true one. Of course, we have still to decide what we mean by "all

those which, etc." All that  we  are  observing  at  present  is  that  a  class  is

rendered  determinate  by  a  propositional  function,  and  that  every

propositional function determines an appropriate class.

  (2) Two formally equivalent propositional functions must determine the

same  class,  and  two  which  are  not  formally  equivalent  must  determine

different classes. That is, a class is determined by its membership, and no two

different classes can have the same membership. (If a class is determined by afunction , we say that is a "member" of the class if is true.)

  (3) We must find some way of defining not only classes, but classes of

classes. We saw in Chapter II. that cardinal numbers are to be defined as

classes  of  classes.  The  ordinary  phrase  of  elementary  mathematics,  "The

combinations of things at a time" represents a class of classes, namely, the

class of all classes of terms that can be selected out of a given class of terms.

Without  some  symbolic  method  of  dealing  with  classes  of  classes,

mathematical logic would break down.

  (4) It must under all circumstances be meaningless (not false) to suppose a

class a member of itself or not a member of itself. This results from the

contradiction which we discussed in Chapter XIII.

  (5) Lastly—and this is the condition which is most difficult of fulfilment,

—it  must  be  possible  to  make  propositions  about all  the  classes  that  are

composed of individuals, or about all the classes that are composed of objects

of any one logical "type." If this were not the case, many uses of classes

would  go  astray—for  example,  mathematical  induction.  In  defining  the

posterity of a given term, we need to be able to say that a member of the

posterity belongs to all hereditary classes to which the given term belongs,

and this requires the sort of totality that is in question. The reason there is a

difficulty about this condition is that it can be proved to be impossible to

speak of all the propositional functions that can have arguments of a given

type.

  We will, to begin with, ignore this last condition and the problems which

it raises. The first two conditions may be  taken together. They state that there

is to be one class, no more and no less, for each group of formally equivalent

propositional functions; e.g. the class of men is to be the same as that of

featherless  bipeds  or  rational  animals  or  Yahoos  or  whatever  other

characteristic may be preferred for defining a human being. Now, when we

say that two formally equivalent propositional functions may be not identical,

although they define the same class, we may prove the truth of the assertion

by pointing out that a statement may be true of the one function and false of

the other; e.g. "I believe that all men are mortal" may be true, while "I believe

that all rational animals are mortal" may be false, since I may believe falsely

that the Phoenix is an immortal rational animal. Thus we are led to consider

statements about functions, or (more correctly) functions of functions.

  Some of the things that may be said about a function may be regarded assaid  about  the  class  defined  by  the  function,  whereas  others  cannot.  The

statement "all men are mortal" involves the functions " is human" and " is

mortal"; or, if we choose, we can say that it involves the classes men and

mortals. We can interpret the statement in either way, because its truth-value

is unchanged if we substitute for " is human" or for " is mortal" any formally

equivalent function. But, as we have just seen, the statement "I believe that

all men are mortal" cannot be regarded as being about the class determined

by either function, because its truth-value may be changed by the substitution

of a formally equivalent function (which leaves the class unchanged). We

will call a statement involving a function an "extensional" function of the

function , if it is like "all men are mortal," i.e. if its truth-value is unchanged

by the substitution of any formally equivalent function; and when a function

of a function is not extensional, we will call it "intensional," so that "I believe

that all men are mortal" is an intensional function of " is human" or " is

mortal."  Thus extensional  functions  of  a  function may,  for practical  

purposes,  be  regarded  as  functions  of  the  class  determined  by ,  while

intensional functions cannot be so regarded.

  It is to be observed that all the specific functions of functions that we have

occasion  to  introduce  in  mathematical  logic  are  extensional.  Thus,  for

example, the two fundamental functions of functions are: "is always true"
 

and "is sometimes true." Each of these has its truth-value unchanged if any
 

formally equivalent function is substituted for . In the language of classes, if

is the class determined by , "is always true" is equivalent to "everything is a
 

member of ," and "is sometimes true" is equivalent to " has members" or
 

(better) " has at least one member." Take, again, the condition, dealt with in

the  preceding  chapter,  for  the  existence  of  "the  term  satisfying ."  The

condition is that there is a term such that is always equivalent to " is ." This is

obviously extensional. It is equivalent to the assertion that the class defined

by the function is a unit class, i.e. a class having one member; in other words,

a class which is a member of 1.

  Given a function of a function which may or may not be extensional, we

can always derive from it a connected and certainly extensional function of

the  same  function,  by  the  following  plan:  Let  our  original  function  of  a

function be one which attributes to the property ; then consider the assertion

"there is a function having the property and formally equivalent to ." This isan extensional function of ; it is true when our original statement is true, and

it is formally equivalent to the original function of if this original function is

extensional; but when the original function is intensional, the new one is

more often true than the old one. For example, consider again "I believe that

all  men  are  mortal,"  regarded  as  a  function  of  " is  human."  The  derived

extensional function is: "There is a function formally equivalent to ' is human'

and such that I believe that whatever satisfies it is mortal." This remains true

when we substitute " is a rational animal"  for " is human," even if I believe

falsely that the Phoenix is rational and immortal.

  We  give  the  name  of  "derived  extensional  function"  to  the  function

constructed as above, namely, to the function: "There is a function having the

property and formally equivalent to ," where the original function was "the

function has the property ."

  We may regard the derived extensional function as having for its argument

the class determined by the function , and as asserting of this class. This may

be taken as the definition of a proposition about a class. I.e. we may define:

  To assert that "the class determined by the function has the property " is to

assert that satisfies the extensional function derived from .

  This gives a meaning to any statement about a class which can be made

significantly about a function; and it will be found that technically it yields

the  results  which  are  required  in  order  to  make  a  theory  symbolically

satisfactory.[41]

  [41]See Principia Mathematica, vol. I. pp. 75-84 and * 20.

  What  we  have  said  just  now  as  regards  the  definition  of  classes  is

sufficient to satisfy our first four conditions. The way in which it secures the

third  and  fourth,  namely,  the  possibility  of  classes  of  classes,  and  the

impossibility of a class being or not being a member of itself, is somewhat

technical; it is explained in Principia Mathematica, but may be taken for

granted here. It results that, but for our fifth condition, we might regard our

task as completed. But this condition—at once the most important and the

most difficult—is not fulfilled in virtue of anything we have said as yet. The

difficulty  is  connected  with  the  theory  of  types,  and  must  be  briefly

discussed.[42]

  [42]The reader who desires a fuller discussion should consult Principia

Mathematica, Introduction, chap. II.; also * 12.

  We saw in Chapter XIII. that there is a hierarchy of logical types, and that it is a fallacy to allow an object belonging to one of these to be substituted for 

an object belonging to another.  Now it is not difficult to show that the 

various functions which can take a given object  as  argument  are  not  all  of

one type. Let us call them all -functions. We may take first those among them

which do not involve reference to any collection of functions; these we will

call  "predicative -functions."  If  we  now  proceed  to  functions  involving

reference to the totality of predicative -functions, we shall incur a fallacy if

we regard these as of the same type as the predicative -functions. Take such

an everyday statement as " is a typical Frenchman." How shall we define a

"typical" Frenchman? We may define him as one "possessing all qualities

that are possessed by most French men." But unless we confine "all qualities"

to such as do not involve a reference to any totality of qualities, we shall have

to  observe  that  most  Frenchmen  are not  typical  in  the  above  sense,  and

therefore the definition shows that to be not typical is essential to a typical

Frenchman. This is not a logical contradiction, since there is no reason why

there  should  be  any  typical  Frenchmen;  but  it  illustrates  the  need  for

separating off qualities that involve reference to a totality of qualities from

those that do not.

  Whenever,  by  statements  about  "all"  or  "some"  of  the  values  that  a

variable can significantly take, we generate a new object, this new object

must not be among the values which our previous variable could take, since,

if it were, the totality of values over which the variable could range would

only be definable in terms of itself, and we should be involved in a vicious

circle. For example, if I say "Napoleon had all the qualities that make a great

general," I must define "qualities" in such a way that it will not include what I

am now saying, i.e. "having all the qualities that make a great general" must

not be itself a quality in the sense supposed. This is fairly obvious, and is the

principle  which  leads  to  the  theory  of  types  by  which  vicious-circle

paradoxes  are  avoided.  As  applied  to -functions,  we  may  suppose  that

"qualities" is to mean "predicative functions." Then when I say "Napoleon

had all the qualities, etc.," I mean  "Napoleon  satisfied  all  the  predicative

functions, etc." This statement attributes a property to Napoleon, but not a

predicative property; thus we escape the vicious circle. But wherever "all

functions which" occurs, the functions in question must be limited to one type

if  a  vicious  circle  is  to  be  avoided;  and,  as  Napoleon  and  the  typical

Frenchman have shown, the type is not rendered determinate by that of theargument. It would require a much fuller discussion to set forth this point

fully, but what has been said may suffice to make it clear that the functions

which can take a given argument are of an infinite series of types. We could,

by various technical devices, construct a variable which would run through

the first of these types, where is finite, but we cannot construct a variable

which will run through them all, and, if we could, that mere fact would at

once generate a new type of function with the same arguments, and would set

the whole process going again.

  We  call  predicative -functions  the first  type  of -functions; -functions

involving reference to the totality of the first type we call the second type;

and so on. No variable -function can run through all these different types: it

must stop short at some definite one.

  These  considerations  are  relevant  to  our  definition  of  the  derived

extensional function. We there spoke of "a function formally equivalent to ."

It is necessary to decide upon the type of our function. Any decision will do,

but  some  decision  is  unavoidable.  Let  us  call  the  supposed  formally

equivalent  function .  Then appears  as  a  variable,  and  must  be  of  some

determinate type. All that we know necessarily about the type of is that it

takes arguments of a given type—that it is (say) an -function. But this, as we

have just seen, does not determine its type. If we are to be able (as our fifth

requisite demands) to deal with all classes whose members are of the same

type as , we must be able to define all such classes by means of functions of

some one type; that is to say, there must be some type of -function, say the ,

such that any -function is formally  equivalent to some  -function of the type.

If this is the case, then any extensional function which holds of all -functions

of the type will hold of any -function whatever. It is chiefly as a technical

means of embodying an assumption leading to this result that classes are

useful.  The  assumption  is  called  the  "axiom  of  reducibility,"  and  may  be

stated as follows:—

  "There is a type ( say) of -functions such that, given any -function, it is

formally equivalent to some function of the type in question."

  If this axiom is assumed, we use functions of this type in defining our

associated extensional function. Statements about all -classes (i.e. all classes

defined by -functions) can be reduced to statements about all -functions of

the type . So long as only extensional functions of functions are involved, this

gives  us  in  practice  results  which  would  otherwise  have  required  theimpossible notion of "all -functions." One particular region where this is vital

is mathematical induction.

  The axiom of reducibility involves all that is really essential in the theory

of classes. It is therefore worth while to ask whether there is any reason to

suppose it true.

  This axiom, like the multiplicative axiom and the axiom of infinity, is

necessary  for  certain  results,  but  not  for  the  bare  existence  of  deductive

reasoning. The theory of deduction, as explained in Chapter XIV., and the

laws for propositions involving "all" and "some," are of the very texture of

mathematical reasoning: without them, or something like them, we should

not merely not obtain the same results, but we should not obtain any results at

all.  We  cannot  use  them  as  hypotheses,  and  deduce  hypothetical

consequences, for they are rules of deduction as well as premisses. They must

be absolutely true, or else what we deduce according to them does not even

follow from the premisses. On the other hand, the axiom of reducibility, like

our two previous mathematical axioms, could perfectly well be stated as an

hypothesis whenever it is used, instead of being assumed to be actually true.

We can deduce  its  consequences  hypothetically;  we  can  also  deduce  the

consequences  of  supposing  it  false.  It  is  therefore  only  convenient,  not

necessary. And in view of the complication of the theory of types, and of the

uncertainty of all except its most general principles, it is impossible as yet to

say whether there may not be some way of dispensing with the axiom of

reducibility  altogether.  However,  assuming  the  correctness  of  the  theory

outlined above, what can we say as to the truth or falsehood of the axiom?

  The axiom, we may observe, is a generalised form of Leibniz's identity of

indiscernibles.  Leibniz  assumed,  as  a  logical  principle,  that  two  different

subjects must differ as to predicates. Now predicates are only some among

what we called "predicative functions," which will include also relations to

given terms, and various properties not to be reckoned as predicates. Thus

Leibniz's assumption is a much stricter and narrower one than ours. (Not, of

course, according to his logic, which regarded all propositions as reducible to

the subject-predicate form.) But there is no good reason for believing his

form, so far as I can see. There might quite well, as a matter of abstract

logical possibility, be two things which had exactly the same predicates, in

the narrow sense in which we have been using the word "predicate." How

does our axiom look when we pass beyond predicates in this narrow sense?In the actual world there seems no way of doubting its empirical truth as

regards  particulars,  owing  to  spatio-temporal  differentiation:  no  two

particulars have exactly the same spatial and temporal relations to all other 

particulars. But this is, as it were, an accident, a fact about the world in which 

we happen to find ourselves. Pure logic, and pure mathematics (which is the 

same thing), aims at being true, in Leibnizian phraseology, in all possible 

worlds, not only in this higgledy-piggledy job-lot of a world in which chance 

has imprisoned us. There is a certain lordliness which the logician should 

preserve: he must not condescend to derive arguments from the things he sees 

about him.  

  Viewed from this strictly logical point of view, I do not see any reason to

believe that the axiom of reducibility is logically necessary, which is what

would be meant by saying that it is true in all possible worlds. The admission

of this axiom into a system of logic is therefore a defect, even if the axiom is

empirically true. It is for this reason that the theory of classes cannot be

regarded as being as complete as the theory of descriptions. There is need of

further work on the theory of types, in the hope of arriving at a doctrine of

classes  which  does  not  require  such  a  dubious  assumption.  But  it  is

reasonable to regard the theory outlined in the present chapter as right in its

main lines, i.e. in its reduction of propositions nominally about classes to

propositions  about  their  defining  functions.  The  avoidance  of  classes  as

entities by this method must, it would seem, be sound in principle, however

the detail may still require adjustment. It is because this seems indubitable

that we have included the theory of classes, in spite of our desire to exclude,

as far as possible, whatever seemed open to serious doubt.

  The theory of classes, as above outlined, reduces itself to one axiom and

one definition. For the sake of definiteness, we will here repeat them. The

axiom is:

      There	is	a	type	such	that	if	is	a	function	which	can	take	a	given	object as

        argument,	then	there	is	a	function	of	the	type	which	is	formally	equivalent

to	.

  The definition is:

      If	is	a	function	which	can	take	a	given	object as	argument,	and	the	type

        mentioned	in	the	above	axiom,	then	to	say	that	the	class	determined	by	has

        the	property	is	to	say	that	there	is	a	function	of	type	,	formally	equivalent  to	,	and	having	the	property	.                                    CHAPTER XVIII 


                        MATHEMATICS AND LOGIC

    MATHEMATICS and logic, historically speaking, have been entirely distinct studies.
Mathematics has been connected with science, logic with Greek. But both have developed in modern
times: logic has become more mathematical and mathematics has become more logical. The
consequence is that it has now become wholly impossible to draw a line between the two; in fact, the
two are one. They differ as boy and man: logic is the youth of mathematics and mathematics is the
manhood of logic. This view is resented by logicians who, having spent their time in the study of
classical texts, are incapable of following a piece of symbolic reasoning, and by mathematicians who
have learnt a technique without troubling to inquire into its meaning or justification. Both types are
now fortunately growing rarer. So much of modern mathematical work is obviously on the border-line
of logic, so much of modern logic is symbolic and formal, that the very close relationship of logic and
mathematics has become obvious to every instructed student. The proof of their identity is, of course,
a matter of detail: starting with premisses which would be universally admitted to belong to logic, and
arriving by deduction at results which as obviously belong to mathematics, we find that there is no
point at which a sharp line can be drawn, with logic to the left and mathematics to the right. If there
are still those who do not admit the identity of logic and mathematics, we may challenge them to
indicate at what point, in the successive definitions and  deductions of Principia Mathematica, they
consider that logic ends and mathematics begins. It will then be obvious that any answer must be quite
arbitrary.

  In the earlier chapters of this book, starting from the natural numbers, we

have  first  defined  "cardinal  number"  and  shown  how  to  generalise  the

conception of number, and have then analysed the conceptions involved in

the  definition,  until  we  found  ourselves  dealing  with  the  fundamentals  of

logic. In a synthetic, deductive treatment these fundamentals come first, and

the natural numbers are only reached after a long journey. Such treatment,

though  formally  more  correct  than  that  which  we  have  adopted,  is  more

difficult for the reader, because the ultimate logical concepts and propositions

with which it starts are remote and unfamiliar as compared with the natural

numbers.  Also  they  represent  the  present  frontier  of  knowledge,  beyond

which is the still unknown; and the dominion of knowledge over them is not

as yet very secure.

  It used to be said that mathematics is the science of "quantity." "Quantity"

is a vague word, but for the sake of argument we may replace it by the word

"number." The statement that mathematics is the science of number would be

untrue in two different ways. On the one hand, there are recognised branches

of mathematics which have nothing to do with number—all geometry that

does  not  use  co-ordinates  or  measurement,  for  example:  projective  and

descriptive geometry, down to the point at which co-ordinates are introduced,does  not  have  to  do  with  number,  or  even  with  quantity  in  the  sense  of

greater  and less.  On  the  other  hand,  through  the  definition  of  cardinals,

through the theory of induction and ancestral relations, through the general

theory of series, and through the definitions of the arithmetical operations, it

has  become  possible  to  generalise  much  that  used  to  be  proved  only  in

connection with numbers. The result is that what was formerly the single

study  of  Arithmetic  has  now  become  divided  into  numbers  of  separate

studies,  no  one  of  which  is  specially  concerned  with  numbers.  The most  

elementary properties of numbers are concerned with one-one relations, and

similarity between classes. Addition is concerned with the construction of

mutually exclusive classes respectively similar to a set of classes which are

not known to be mutually exclusive. Multiplication is merged in the theory of

"selections," i.e. of a certain kind of one-many relations. Finitude is merged

in the general study of ancestral relations, which yields the whole theory of

mathematical  induction.  The  ordinal  properties  of  the  various  kinds  of

number-series, and the elements of the theory of continuity of functions and

the limits of functions, can be generalised so as no longer to involve any

essential reference to numbers. It is a principle, in all formal reasoning, to

generalise to the utmost, since we thereby secure that a given process of

deduction shall have more widely applicable results; we are, therefore, in thus

generalising the reasoning of arithmetic, merely following a precept which is

universally admitted in mathematics. And in thus generalising we have, in

effect, created a set of new deductive systems, in which traditional arithmetic

is  at  once  dissolved  and  enlarged;  but  whether  any  one  of  these  new

deductive systems—for example, the theory of selections—is to be said to

belong to logic or to arithmetic is entirely arbitrary, and incapable of being

decided rationally.

  We are thus brought face to face with the question: What is this subject,

which may be called indifferently either mathematics or logic? Is there any

way in which we can define it?

  Certain characteristics of the subject are clear. To begin with, we do not,

in this subject, deal with particular things or particular properties: we deal

formally with what can be said about any thing or any property. We are

prepared to say that one and one are two, but not that Socrates and Plato are

two, because, in our capacity of logicians or pure mathematicians, we have

never heard of Socrates and Plato. A world in which there were no suchindividuals would still be a world in which one and one are two. It is not open

to  us,  as  pure  mathematicians  or  logicians,  to  mention  anything  at  all,

because, if we do so,  we introduce something irrelevant and not formal. We

may make this clear by applying it to the case of the syllogism. Traditional

logic  says:  "All  men  are  mortal,  Socrates  is  a  man,  therefore  Socrates  is

mortal." Now it is clear that what we mean to assert, to begin with, is only

that the premisses imply the conclusion, not that premisses and conclusion

are actually true; even the most traditional logic points out that the actual

truth of the premisses is irrelevant to logic. Thus the first change to be made

in the above traditional syllogism is to state it in the form: "If all men are

mortal and Socrates is a man, then Socrates is mortal." We may now observe

that it is intended to convey that this argument is valid in virtue of its form,

not  in  virtue  of  the  particular  terms  occurring  in  it.  If  we  had  omitted

"Socrates is a man" from our premisses, we should have had a non-formal

argument, only admissible because Socrates is in fact a man; in that case we

could not have generalised the argument. But when, as above, the argument is

formal,  nothing  depends  upon  the  terms  that  occur  in  it.  Thus  we  may

substitute for men, for mortals, and for Socrates, where and are any classes

whatever, and is any individual. We then arrive at the statement: "No matter

what possible values and and may have, if all 's are 's and is an , then is a "; in

other words, "the propositional function 'if all 's are and is an , then is a ' is

always true." Here at last we have a proposition of logic—the one which is

only suggested  by  the  traditional  statement  about  Socrates  and  men  and

mortals.

  It is clear that, if formal reasoning is what we are aiming at, we shall

always  arrive  ultimately  at  statements  like  the  above,  in  which  no  actual

things or properties are mentioned; this will happen through the mere desire

not  to  waste  our  time  proving  in  a  particular  case  what  can  be  proved

generally.  It  would  be  ridiculous  to  go  through  a  long  argument  about

Socrates, and then go through precisely the same argument again about Plato.

If  our  argument  is  one  (say)  which  holds  of  all  men,  we  shall  prove  it

concerning " ," with the hypothesis "if is a man." With  this hypothesis, the

argument will retain its hypothetical validity even when is not a man. But

now  we  shall  find  that  our  argument  would  still  be  valid  if,  instead  of

supposing to be a man, we were to suppose him to be a monkey or a goose or

a Prime Minister. We shall therefore not waste our time taking as our premiss" is a man" but shall take " is an ," where is any class of individuals, or ""
 

where is any propositional function of some assigned type. Thus the absence

of all mention of particular things or properties in logic or pure mathematics

is a necessary result of the fact that this study is, as we say, "purely formal."

  At this point we find ourselves faced with a problem which is easier to

state than to solve. The problem is: "What are the constituents of a logical

proposition?" I do not know the answer, but I propose to explain how the

problem arises.

  Take (say) the proposition "Socrates was before Aristotle." Here it seems

obvious that we have a relation between two terms, and that the constituents

of the proposition (as well as of the corresponding fact) are simply the two

terms and the relation, i.e. Socrates, Aristotle, and before. (I ignore the fact

that Socrates and Aristotle are not simple; also the fact that what appear to be

their names are really truncated descriptions. Neither of these facts is relevant

to the present issue.) We may represent the general form of such propositions

by "," which may be read " has the relation to ." This general form may occur
 

in logical propositions, but no particular instance of it can occur. Are we to

infer that the general form itself is a constituent of such logical propositions?

  Given  a  proposition,  such  as  "Socrates  is  before  Aristotle,"  we  have

certain constituents and also a certain form. But the form is not itself a new

constituent; if it were, we should need a new form to embrace both it and the

other constituents. We can, in fact, turn all the constituents of a proposition

into variables, while keeping the form unchanged. This is what we do when

we use such a schema as "," which stands for any  one of a certain class of 
 

propositions, namely, those asserting relations between two terms. We can 

proceed to general assertions, such as "is  sometimes  true"—i.e.  there  are
 

cases  where  dual  relations  hold.  This  assertion  will  belong  to  logic  (or

mathematics)  in  the  sense  in  which  we  are  using  the  word.  But  in  this

assertion we do not mention any particular things or particular relations; no

particular things or relations can ever enter into a proposition of pure logic.

We  are  left  with  pure forms  as  the  only  possible  constituents  of  logical

propositions.

  I do not wish to assert positively that pure forms—e.g. the form ""—do
 

actually enter into propositions of the kind we are considering. The question

of  the  analysis  of  such  propositions  is  a  difficult  one,  with  conflictingconsiderations on the one side and on the other. We cannot embark upon this

question now, but we may accept, as a first approximation, the view that

forms are what enter into logical propositions as their constituents. And we

may explain (though not formally define) what we mean by the "form" of a

proposition as follows:—

  The "form" of a proposition is that, in it, that remains unchanged when

every constituent of the proposition is replaced by another.

  Thus "Socrates is earlier than Aristotle" has the same form as "Napoleon is

greater than Wellington," though every constituent of the two propositions is

different.

  We  may  thus  lay  down,  as  a  necessary  (though  not  sufficient)

characteristic of logical or mathematical propositions, that they are to be such

as can be obtained from a proposition containing no variables (i.e. no such

words as all, some, a, the, etc.) by turning every constituent into a variable

and asserting that the result is always true or sometimes true, or that it is

always true in respect of some of the variables that the result is sometimes

true in respect of the others, or any variant of these forms. And another way

of stating the same thing is to say that logic (or mathematics) is concerned

only with forms, and is concerned with them only in the way of stating that

they are always or  sometimes true—with all the permutations of "always"

and "sometimes" that may occur.

  There are in every language some words whose sole function is to indicate

form. These words, broadly speaking, are commonest in languages having

fewest inflections. Take "Socrates is human." Here "is" is not a constituent of

the proposition, but merely indicates the subject-predicate form. Similarly in

"Socrates is earlier than Aristotle," "is" and "than" merely indicate form; the

proposition  is  the  same  as  "Socrates  precedes  Aristotle,"  in  which  these

words have disappeared and the form is otherwise indicated. Form, as a rule,

can be indicated otherwise than by specific words: the order of the words can

do  most  of  what  is  wanted.  But  this  principle  must  not  be  pressed.  For

example, it is difficult to see how we could conveniently express molecular

forms of propositions (i.e. what we call "truth-functions") without any word

at all. We saw in Chapter XIV. that one word or symbol is enough for this

purpose, namely, a word or symbol expressing incompatibility. But without

even one we should find ourselves in difficulties. This, however, is not the

point that is important for our present purpose. What is important for us is toobserve that form may be the one concern of a general proposition, even

when no word or symbol in that proposition designates the form. If we wish

to  speak  about  the  form  itself,  we  must  have  a  word  for  it;  but  if,  as  in

mathematics, we wish to speak about all propositions that have the form, a

word for the form will usually be found not indispensable; probably in theory

it is never indispensable.

    Assuming—as  I  think  we  may—that  the  forms  of  propositions  can  be

represented by the forms of the propositions in which they are expressed

without any special word for forms, we should arrive at a language in which

everything  formal  belonged  to  syntax  and  not  to  vocabulary.  In  such  a

language we could express all the propositions of mathematics even if we did

not know one single word of the language. The language of mathematical  

logic,  if  it  were  perfected,  would  be  such  a  language.  We  should  have

symbols for variables, such as " " and " " and "," arranged in various ways;
 

and the way of arrangement would indicate that something was being said to

be true of all values or some values of the variables. We should not need to

know any words, because they would only be needed for giving values to the

variables, which is the business of the applied mathematician, not of the pure

mathematician or logician. It is one of the marks of a proposition of logic

that, given a suitable language, such a proposition can be asserted in such a

language by a person who knows the syntax without knowing a single word

of the vocabulary.

  But, after all, there are words that express form, such as "is" and "than."

And in every symbolism hitherto invented for mathematical logic there are

symbols having constant formal meanings. We may take as an example the

symbol for incompatibility which is employed in building up truth-functions.

Such words or symbols may occur in logic. The question is: How are we to

define them?

  Such  words  or  symbols  express  what  are  called  "logical  constants."

Logical constants may be defined exactly as we defined forms; in fact, they

are in essence the same thing. A fundamental logical constant will be that

which is in common among a number of propositions, any one of which can

result from any other by substitution of terms one for another. For example,

"Napoleon is greater than Wellington" results from "Socrates is earlier than

Aristotle" by the substitution of "Napoleon" for "Socrates," "Wellington" for"Aristotle," and "greater" for "earlier." Some propositions can be obtained in

this way from the prototype "Socrates is earlier than Aristotle" and some

cannot; those that can are those that are of the form "," i.e. express dual
 

relations.  We  cannot  obtain  from  the  above  prototype  by  term-for-term

substitution such propositions as "Socrates is human" or "the Athenians gave

the hemlock to Socrates," because the first is of the subject-predicate  form

and the second expresses a three-term relation. If we are to have any words in

our pure logical language, they must be such as express "logical constants,"

and "logical constants" will always either be, or be derived from, what is in

common among a group of propositions derivable from each other, in the

above manner, by term-for-term substitution. And this which is in common is

what we call "form."

  In this sense all the "constants" that occur in pure mathematics are logical

constants. The number 1, for example, is derivative from propositions of the

form: "There is a term such that is true when, and only when, is ." This is a

function of , and various different propositions result from giving different

values to . We may (with a little omission of intermediate steps not relevant

to our present purpose) take the above function of as what is meant by "the

class determined by is a unit class" or "the class determined by is a member

of 1" (1 being a class of classes). In this way, propositions in which 1 occurs

acquire a meaning which is derived from a certain constant logical form. And

the same will be found to be the case with all mathematical constants: all are

logical  constants,  or  symbolic  abbreviations  whose  full  use  in  a  proper

context is defined by means of logical constants.

  But although all logical (or mathematical) propositions can be expressed

wholly in terms of logical constants together with variables, it is not the case

that, conversely, all propositions that can be expressed in this way are logical.

We  have  found  so  far  a  necessary  but  not  a  sufficient  criterion  of

mathematical propositions. We have sufficiently defined the character of the

primitive ideas in terms of which all the ideas of mathematics can be defined,

but  not  of  the  primitive propositions  from  which  all  the  propositions  of

mathematics can be deduced. This is a more difficult matter, as to which it is

not yet known what the full answer is.

  We may take the axiom of infinity as an example of a proposition which,

though it can be enunciated in logical terms,  cannot be asserted by logic tobe true. All the propositions of logic have a characteristic which used to be

expressed by saying that they were analytic, or that their contradictories were

self-contradictory. This mode of statement, however, is not satisfactory. The

law  of  contradiction  is  merely  one  among  logical  propositions;  it  has  no

special  pre-eminence;  and  the  proof  that  the  contradictory  of  some

proposition  is  self-contradictory  is  likely  to  require  other  principles  of

deduction besides the law of contradiction. Nevertheless, the characteristic of

logical propositions that we are in search of is the one which was felt, and

intended to be defined, by those who said that it consisted in deducibility

from the law of contradiction. This characteristic, which, for the moment, we

may  call tautology,  obviously  does  not  belong  to  the  assertion  that  the

number of individuals in the universe is , whatever number may be. But for

the diversity of types, it would be possible to prove logically that there are

classes of terms, where is any finite integer; or even that there are classes of

terms. But, owing to types, such proofs, as we saw in Chapter XIII., are

fallacious. We are left to empirical observation to determine whether there

are as many as individuals in the world. Among "possible" worlds, in the

Leibnizian sense, there will be worlds having one, two, three, ... individuals.

There does not even seem any logical necessity why there should be even one

individual[43]—why, in fact, there should be any world at all. The ontological

proof of the existence of God, if it were valid, would establish the logical

necessity of at least one individual. But it is generally recognised as invalid,

and in fact rests upon a mistaken view of existence—i.e. it fails to realise that

existence  can  only  be  asserted  of  something  described,  not  of  something

named, so that it is meaningless to argue from "this is the so-and-so" and "the

so-and-so exists" to "this exists." If we reject the ontological  argument,  we

seem driven to conclude that the existence of a world is an accident—i.e. it is

not  logically  necessary.  If  that  be  so,  no  principle  of  logic  can  assert

"existence"  except  under  a  hypothesis, i.e.  none  can  be  of  the  form  "the

propositional  function  so-and-so  is  sometimes  true."  Propositions  of  this

form,  when  they  occur  in  logic,  will  have  to  occur  as  hypotheses  or

consequences  of  hypotheses,  not  as  complete  asserted  propositions.  The

complete asserted propositions of logic will all be such as affirm that some

propositional function is always true. For example, it is always true that if

implies and implies then implies , or that, if all 's are 's and is an then is a .

Such propositions may occur in logic, and their truth is independent of theexistence of the universe. We may lay it down that, if there were no universe,

all  general  propositions  would  be  true;  for  the  contradictory  of  a  general

proposition (as we saw in Chapter XV.) is a proposition asserting existence,

and would therefore always be false if no universe existed.

  [43]The primitive propositions in Principia Mathematica are such as to

allow the inference that at least one individual exists. But I now view this as a

defect in logical purity.

  Logical propositions are such as can be known a priori, without study of

the actual world. We only know from a study of empirical facts that Socrates

is a man, but we know the correctness of the syllogism in its abstract form

(i.e. when it is stated in terms of variables) without needing any appeal to

experience. This is a characteristic, not of logical propositions in themselves,

but of the way in which we know them. It has, however, a bearing upon the

question what their nature may be, since there are some kinds of propositions

which  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  suppose  we  could  know  without

experience.

  It is clear that the definition of "logic" or "mathematics" must be sought by

trying to give a new definition of the old notion of "analytic" propositions.

Although we can no longer be satisfied to define logical propositions as those

that follow from the law of contradiction, we can and must still admit that

they are a wholly different class of propositions from those that we come to

know empirically. They all have the characteristic which, a moment ago, we

agreed to call "tautology." This,  combined  with  the  fact  that  they  can  be

expressed  wholly  in  terms  of  variables  and  logical  constants  (a  logical

constant being something which remains constant in a proposition even when

all its constituents are changed)—will give the definition of logic or pure

mathematics. For the moment, I do not know how to define "tautology."[44] It

would be easy to offer a definition which might seem satisfactory for a while;

but I know of none that I feel to be satisfactory, in spite of feeling thoroughly

familiar with the characteristic of which a definition is wanted. At this point,

therefore,  for  the  moment,  we  reach  the  frontier  of  knowledge  on  our

backward journey into the logical foundations of mathematics.

  [44]The importance of "tautology" for a definition of mathematics was

pointed out to me by my former pupil Ludwig Wittgenstein, who was

working on the problem. I do not know whether he has solved it, or even

whether he is alive or dead.  We have now come to an end of our somewhat summary introduction to

mathematical philosophy. It is impossible to convey adequately the ideas that

are concerned in this subject so long as we abstain from the use of logical

symbols. Since ordinary language has no words that naturally express exactly

what we wish to express, it is necessary, so long as we adhere to ordinary

language, to strain words into unusual meanings; and the reader is sure, after

a time if not at first, to lapse into attaching the usual meanings to words, thus

arriving  at  wrong  notions  as  to  what  is  intended  to  be  said.  Moreover,

ordinary grammar and syntax is extraordinarily misleading. This is the case,

e.g., as regards numbers; "ten men" is grammatically the same form as "white

men," so that 10 might be thought to be an adjective qualifying "men." It is

the  case,  again,  wherever  propositional  functions  are  involved,  and  in

particular  as  regards  existence  and  descriptions.  Because  language  is

misleading, as well as because it is diffuse and inexact when applied to logic

(for which it was never intended), logical symbolism is absolutely necessary

to any exact or thorough treatment of our subject. Those readers,  therefore, 

who wish to acquire a mastery of the principles of mathematics, will, it is to 

be hoped, not shrink from the labour of mastering the symbols—a labour 

which is, in fact, much less than might be thought. As the above hasty survey 

must have made evident, there are innumerable unsolved problems in the 

subject, and much work needs to be done. If any student is led into a serious 

study of mathematical logic by this little book, it will have served the chief 

purpose for which it has been written.  




                             The Analysis of Mind

                                       Contents

 

MUIRHEAD LIBRARY OF PHILOSOPHY

PREFACE

LECTURE I. RECENT CRITICISMS OF "CONSCIOUSNESS"

LECTURE II. INSTINCT AND HABIT

LECTURE III. DESIRE AND FEELING

LECTURE IV. INFLUENCE OF PAST HISTORY ON PRESENT

OCCURRENCES IN LIVING

LECTURE V. PSYCHOLOGICAL AND PHYSICAL CAUSAL LAWS

LECTURE VI. INTROSPECTION

LECTURE VII. THE DEFINITION OF PERCEPTION

LECTURE VIII. SENSATIONS AND IMAGES

LECTURE IX. MEMORY

LECTURE X. WORDS AND MEANING

LECTURE XI. GENERAL IDEAS AND THOUGHT

LECTURE XII. BELIEF

LECTURE XIII. TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD

LECTURE XIV. EMOTIONS AND WILL

LECTURE XV. CHARACTERISTICS OF MENTAL PHENOMENA

 
 

               MUIRHEAD LIBRARY OF PHILOSOPHY

  An  admirable  statement  of  the  aims  of  the  Library  of  Philosophy  was

provided  by  the  first  editor,  the  late  Professor  J.  H.  Muirhead,  in  his

description  of  the  original  programme  printed  in  Erdmann's  History  of

Philosophy under the date 1890. This was slightly modified in subsequent

volumes to take the form of the following statement:

  "The Muirhead Library of Philosophy was designed as a contribution to

the History of Modern Philosophy under the heads: first of Different Schools

of Thought—Sensationalist, Realist, Idealist, Intuitivist; secondly of different

Subjects—Psychology,  Ethics,  Aesthetics,  Political  Philosophy,  Theology.

While much had been done in England in tracing the course of evolution in

nature,  history,  economics,  morals  and  religion,  little  had  been  done  in

tracing the development of thought on these subjects. Yet 'the evolution of

opinion is part of the whole evolution'.

  "By the co-operation of different writers in carrying out this plan it was

hoped  that  a  thoroughness  and  completeness  of  treatment,  otherwise

unattainable, might be secured. It was believed also that from writers mainly

British and American fuller consideration of English Philosophy than it had

hitherto  received  might  be  looked  for.  In  the  earlier  series  of  books

containing,  among  others,  Bosanquet's  "History  of  Aesthetic,"  Pfleiderer's

"Rational Theology since Kant," Albee's "History of English Utilitarianism,"

Bonar's  "Philosophy  and  Political  Economy,"  Brett's  "History  of

Psychology," Ritchie's "Natural Rights," these objects were to a large extent

effected.

  "In the meantime original work of a high order was being produced both

in England and America by such writers as Bradley, Stout, Bertrand Russell,

Baldwin, Urban, Montague, and others, and a new interest in foreign works,

German,  French  and  Italian,  which  had  either  become  classical  or  were

attracting  public  attention,  had  developed.  The  scope  of  the  Library  thus

became extended into something more international, and it is entering on the

fifth decade of its existence in the hope that it may contribute to that mutual

understanding between countries which is so pressing a need of the present

time."

  The need which Professor Muirhead stressed is no less pressing to-day,

and few will deny that philosophy has much to do with enabling us to meet it,although no one, least of all Muirhead himself, would regard that as the sole,

or even the main, object of philosophy. As Professor Muirhead continues to

lend the distinction of his name to the Library of Philosophy it seemed not

inappropriate to allow him to recall us to these aims in his own words. The

emphasis on the history of thought also seemed to me very timely; and the

number of important works promised for the Library in the very near future

augur  well  for  the  continued  fulfilment,  in  this  and  other  ways,  of  the

expectations of the original editor.

  H. D. Lewis



 



                                          PREFACE

  This  book  has  grown  out  of  an  attempt  to  harmonize  two  different

tendencies, one in psychology, the other in physics, with both of which I find

myself in sympathy, although at first sight they might seem inconsistent. On

the  one  hand,  many  psychologists,  especially  those  of  the  behaviourist

school, tend to adopt what is essentially a materialistic position, as a matter of

method if not of metaphysics. They make psychology increasingly dependent

on  physiology  and  external  observation,  and  tend  to  think  of  matter  as

something  much  more  solid  and  indubitable  than  mind.  Meanwhile  the

physicists, especially Einstein and other exponents of the theory of relativity,

have been making "matter" less and less material. Their world consists of

"events," from which "matter" is derived by a logical construction. Whoever

reads,  for  example,  Professor  Eddington's  "Space,  Time  and  Gravitation"

(Cambridge  University  Press,  1920),  will  see  that  an  old-fashioned

materialism can receive no support from modern physics. I think that what

has permanent value in the outlook of the behaviourists is the feeling that

physics  is  the  most  fundamental  science  at  present  in  existence.  But  this

position cannot be called materialistic, if, as seems to be the case, physics

does not assume the existence of matter.

  The  view  that  seems  to  me  to  reconcile  the  materialistic  tendency  of

psychology  with  the  anti-materialistic  tendency  of  physics  is  the  view  of

William James and the American new realists, according to which the "stuff"

of the world is neither mental nor material, but a "neutral stuff," out of which

both are constructed. I have endeavoured in this work to develop this view in

some detail as regards the phenomena with which psychology is concerned.

  My thanks are due to Professor John B. Watson and to Dr. T. P. Nunn for

reading  my  MSS.  at  an  early  stage  and  helping  me  with  many  valuable

suggestions; also to Mr. A. Wohlgemuth for much very useful information as

regards important literature. I have also to acknowledge the help of the editor

of this Library of Philosophy, Professor Muirhead, for several suggestions by

which I have profited.

  The  work  has  been  given  in  the  form  of  lectures  both  in  London  and

Peking,  and  one  lecture,  that  on  Desire,  has  been  published  in  the

Athenaeum.

  There are a few allusions to China in this book, all of which were writtenbefore I had been in China, and are not intended to be taken by the reader as

geographically accurate. I have used "China" merely as a synonym for "a

distant country," when I wanted illustrations of unfamiliar things.

  Peking, January 1921.                LECTURE I. RECENT CRITICISMS OF

                              "CONSCIOUSNESS"

  There  are  certain  occurrences  which  we  are  in  the  habit  of  calling

"mental." Among these we may take as typical BELIEVING and DESIRING.

The exact definition of the word "mental" will, I hope, emerge as the lectures

proceed;  for  the  present,  I  shall  mean  by  it  whatever  occurrences  would

commonly be called mental.

  I wish in these lectures to analyse as fully as I can what it is that really

takes place when we, e.g. believe or desire. In this first lecture I shall be

concerned to refute a theory which is widely held, and which I formerly held

myself: the theory that the essence of everything mental is a certain quite

peculiar something called "consciousness," conceived either as a relation to

objects, or as a pervading quality of psychical phenomena.

  The reasons which I shall give against this theory will be mainly derived

from previous authors. There are two sorts of reasons, which will divide my

lecture into two parts:

  (1) Direct reasons, derived from analysis and its difficulties;

  (2)  Indirect  reasons,  derived  from  observation  of  animals  (comparative

psychology) and of the insane and hysterical (psycho-analysis).

  Few things are more firmly established in popular philosophy than the

distinction  between  mind  and  matter.  Those  who  are  not  professional

metaphysicians  are  willing  to  confess  that  they  do  not  know  what  mind

actually is, or how matter is constituted; but they remain convinced that there

is an impassable gulf between the two, and that both belong to what actually

exists in the world. Philosophers, on the other hand, have maintained often

that matter is a mere fiction imagined by mind, and sometimes that mind is a

mere property of a certain kind of matter. Those who maintain that mind is

the reality and matter an evil dream are called "idealists"—a word which has

a different meaning in philosophy from that which it bears in ordinary life.

Those  who  argue  that  matter  is  the  reality  and  mind  a  mere  property  of

protoplasm  are  called  "materialists."  They  have  been  rare  among

philosophers,  but  common,  at  certain  periods,  among  men  of  science.

Idealists, materialists, and ordinary mortals have been in agreement on one

point: that they knew sufficiently what they meant by the words "mind" and

"matter" to be able to conduct their debate intelligently. Yet it was just in thispoint, as to which they were at one, that they seem to me to have been all

alike in error.

  The stuff of which the world of our experience is composed is, in my

belief, neither mind nor matter, but something more primitive than either.

Both mind and matter seem to be composite, and the stuff of which they are

compounded lies in a sense between the two, in a sense above them both, like

a common ancestor. As regards matter, I have set forth my reasons for this

view on former occasions,* and I shall not now repeat them. But the question

of mind is more difficult, and it is this question that I propose to discuss in

these lectures. A great deal of what I shall have to say is not original; indeed,

much recent work, in various fields, has tended to show the necessity of such

theories as those which I shall be advocating. Accordingly in this first lecture

I shall try to give a brief description of the systems of ideas within which our

investigation is to be carried on.

* "Our Knowledge of the External World" (Allen & Unwin), 

Chapters III and IV. Also "Mysticism and Logic," Essays VII 

and VIII.

  If  there  is  one  thing  that  may  be  said,  in  the  popular  estimation,  to

characterize  mind,  that  one  thing  is  "consciousness."  We  say  that  we  are

"conscious" of what we see and hear, of what we remember, and of our own

thoughts  and  feelings.  Most  of  us  believe  that  tables  and  chairs  are  not

"conscious." We think that when we sit in a chair, we are aware of sitting in

it, but it is not aware of being sat in. It cannot for a moment be doubted that

we are right in believing that there is SOME difference between us and the

chair in this respect: so much may be taken as fact, and as a datum for our

inquiry.  But  as  soon  as  we  try  to  say  what  exactly  the  difference  is,  we

become  involved  in  perplexities.  Is  "consciousness"  ultimate  and  simple,

something  to  be  merely  accepted  and  contemplated?  Or  is  it  something

complex,  perhaps  consisting  in  our  way  of  behaving  in  the  presence  of

objects,  or,  alternatively,  in  the  existence  in  us  of  things  called  "ideas,"

having a certain relation to objects, though different from them, and only

symbolically representative of them? Such questions are not easy to answer;

but until they are answered we cannot profess to know what we mean by

saying that we are possessed of "consciousness."

  Before considering modern theories, let us look first at consciousness from

the standpoint of conventional psychology, since this embodies views whichnaturally occur when we begin to reflect upon the subject. For this purpose,

let us as a preliminary consider different ways of being conscious.

  First, there is the way of PERCEPTION. We "perceive" tables and chairs,

horses and dogs, our friends, traffic passing in the street—in short, anything

which we recognize through the senses. I leave on one side for the present the

question whether pure sensation is to be regarded as a form of consciousness:

what I am speaking of now is perception, where, according to conventional

psychology, we go beyond the sensation to the "thing" which it represents.

When you hear a donkey bray, you not only hear a noise, but realize that it

comes from a donkey. When you see a table, you not only see a coloured

surface, but realize that it is hard. The addition of these elements that go

beyond crude sensation is said to constitute perception. We shall have more

to say about this at a later stage. For the moment, I am merely concerned to

note that perception of objects is one of the most obvious examples of what is

called "consciousness." We are "conscious" of anything that we perceive.

  We may take next the way of MEMORY. If I set to work to recall what I

did this morning, that is a form of consciousness different from perception,

since it is concerned with the past. There are various problems as to how we

can be conscious now of what no longer exists. These will be dealt with

incidentally when we come to the analysis of memory.

  From memory it is an easy step to what are called "ideas"—not in the

Platonic sense, but in that of Locke, Berkeley and Hume, in which they are

opposed to "impressions." You may be conscious of a friend either by seeing

him  or  by  "thinking"  of  him;  and  by  "thought"  you  can  be  conscious  of

objects  which  cannot  be  seen,  such  as  the  human  race,  or  physiology.

"Thought" in the narrower sense is that form of consciousness which consists

in "ideas" as opposed to impressions or mere memories.

  We may end our preliminary catalogue with BELIEF, by which I mean

that way of being conscious which may be either true or false. We say that a

man is "conscious of looking a fool," by which we mean that he believes he

looks a fool, and is not mistaken in this belief. This is a different form of

consciousness  from  any  of  the  earlier  ones.  It  is  the  form  which  gives

"knowledge" in the strict sense, and also error. It is, at least apparently, more

complex than our previous forms of consciousness; though we shall find that

they are not so separable from it as they might appear to be.

  Besides  ways  of  being  conscious  there  are  other  things  that  wouldordinarily be called "mental," such as desire and pleasure and pain. These

raise problems of their own, which we shall reach in Lecture III. But the

hardest problems are those that arise concerning ways of being "conscious."

These ways, taken together, are called the "cognitive" elements in mind, and

it is these that will occupy us most during the following lectures.

  There  is  one  element  which  SEEMS  obviously  in  common  among  the

different ways of being conscious, and that is, that they are all directed to

OBJECTS. We are conscious "of" something. The consciousness, it seems, is

one thing, and that of which we are conscious is another thing. Unless we are

to acquiesce in the view that we can never be conscious of anything outside

our own minds, we must say that the object of consciousness need not be

mental, though the consciousness must be. (I am speaking within the circle of

conventional  doctrines,  not  expressing  my  own  beliefs.)  This  direction

towards  an  object  is  commonly  regarded  as  typical  of  every  form  of

cognition, and sometimes of mental life altogether. We may distinguish two

different  tendencies  in  traditional  psychology.  There  are  those  who  take

mental  phenomena  naively,  just  as  they  would  physical  phenomena.  This

school of psychologists tends not to emphasize the object. On the other hand,

there are those whose primary interest is in the apparent fact that we have

KNOWLEDGE, that there is a world surrounding us of which we are aware.

These men are interested in the mind because of its relation to the world,

because knowledge, if it is a fact, is a very mysterious one. Their interest in

psychology is naturally centred in the relation of consciousness to its object, a

problem which, properly, belongs rather to theory of knowledge. We may

take as one of the best and most typical representatives of this school the

Austrian  psychologist  Brentano,  whose  "Psychology  from  the  Empirical

Standpoint,"*  though  published  in  1874,  is  still  influential  and  was  the

starting-point of a great deal of interesting work. He says (p. 115):

* "Psychologie vom empirischen Standpunkte," vol. i, 1874. 

(The second volume was never published.)

  "Every psychical phenomenon is characterized by what the scholastics of

the Middle Ages called the intentional (also the mental) inexistence of an

object,  and  what  we,  although  with  not  quite  unambiguous  expressions,

would call relation to a content, direction towards an object (which is not here

to  be  understood  as  a  reality),  or  immanent  objectivity.  Each  contains

something  in  itself  as  an  object,  though  not  each  in  the  same  way.  Inpresentation something is presented, in judgment something is acknowledged

or rejected, in love something is loved, in hatred hated, in desire desired, and

so on.

  "This  intentional  inexistence  is  exclusively  peculiar  to  psychical

phenomena. No physical phenomenon shows anything similar. And so we

can define psychical phenomena by saying that they are phenomena which

intentionally contain an object in themselves."

  The  view  here  expressed,  that  relation  to  an  object  is  an  ultimate

irreducible  characteristic  of  mental  phenomena,  is  one  which  I  shall  be

concerned to combat. Like Brentano, I am interested in psychology, not so

much for its own sake, as for the light that it may throw on the problem of

knowledge. Until very lately I believed, as he did, that mental phenomena

have essential reference to objects, except possibly in the case of pleasure and

pain. Now I no longer believe this, even in the case of knowledge. I shall try

to make my reasons for this rejection clear as we proceed. It must be evident

at first glance that the analysis of knowledge is rendered more difficult by the

rejection; but the apparent simplicity of Brentano's view of knowledge will be

found, if I am not mistaken, incapable of maintaining itself either against an

analytic scrutiny or against a host of facts in psycho-analysis and animal

psychology. I do not wish to minimize the problems. I will merely observe, in

mitigation  of  our  prospective  labours,  that  thinking,  however  it  is  to  be

analysed, is in itself a delightful occupation, and that there is no enemy to

thinking so deadly as a false simplicity. Travelling, whether in the mental or

the physical world, is a joy, and it is good to know that, in the mental world

at least, there are vast countries still very imperfectly explored.

  The  view  expressed  by  Brentano  has  been  held  very  generally,  and

developed by many writers. Among these we may take as an example his

Austrian  successor  Meinong.*  According  to  him  there  are  three  elements

involved in the thought of an object. These three he calls the act, the content

and the object. The act is the same in any two cases of the same kind of

consciousness; for instance, if I think of Smith or think of Brown, the act of

thinking, in itself, is exactly similar on both occasions. But the content of my

thought, the particular event that is happening in my mind, is different when I

think of Smith and when I think of Brown. The content, Meinong argues,

must not be confounded with the object, since the content must exist in my

mind at the moment when I have the thought, whereas the object need not doso.  The  object  may  be  something  past  or  future;  it  may  be  physical,  not

mental; it may be something abstract, like equality for example; it may be

something imaginary, like a golden mountain; or it may even be something

self-contradictory, like a round square. But in all these cases, so he contends,

the content exists when the thought exists, and is what distinguishes it, as an

occurrence, from other thoughts.

* See, e.g. his article: "Ueber Gegenstande hoherer Ordnung 

und deren Verhaltniss zur inneren Wahrnehmung," "Zeitschrift 

fur Psychologie and Physiologie der Sinnesorgane," vol. xxi, 

pp. 182-272 (1899), especially pp. 185-8.

  To make this theory concrete, let us suppose that you are thinking of St.

Paul's. Then, according to Meinong, we have to distinguish three elements

which are necessarily combined in constituting the one thought. First, there is

the act of thinking, which would be just the same whatever you were thinking

about. Then there is what makes the character of the thought as contrasted

with other thoughts; this is the content. And finally there is St. Paul's, which

is the object of your thought. There must be a difference between the content

of a thought and what it is about, since the thought is here and now, whereas

what it is about may not be; hence it is clear that the thought is not identical

with St. Paul's. This seems to show that we must distinguish between content

and  object.  But  if  Meinong  is  right,  there  can  be  no  thought  without  an

object: the connection of the two is essential. The object might exist without

the thought, but not the thought without the object: the three elements of act,

content and object are all required to constitute the one single occurrence

called "thinking of St. Paul's."

  The above analysis of a thought, though I believe it to be mistaken, is very

useful as affording a schema in terms of which other theories can be stated. In

the remainder of the present lecture I shall state in outline the view which I

advocate, and show how various other views out of which mine has grown

result  from  modifications  of  the  threefold  analysis  into  act,  content  and

object.

  The first criticism I have to make is that the ACT seems unnecessary and

fictitious.  The  occurrence  of  the  content  of  a  thought  constitutes  the

occurrence  of  the  thought.  Empirically,  I  cannot  discover  anything

corresponding to the supposed act; and theoretically I cannot see that it is                            I
indispensable. We say: " think so-and-so," and this word "I" suggests that

thinking is the act of a person. Meinong's "act" is the ghost of the subject, or

what once was the full-blooded soul. It is supposed that thoughts cannot just

come and go, but need a person to think them. Now, of course it is true that

thoughts can be collected into bundles, so that one bundle is my thoughts,

another is your thoughts, and a third is the thoughts of Mr. Jones. But I think

the person is not an ingredient in the single thought: he is rather constituted

by relations of the thoughts to each other and to the body. This is a large

question, which need not, in its entirety, concern us at present. All that I am

concerned with for the moment is that the grammatical forms "I think," "you

think," and "Mr. Jones thinks," are misleading if regarded as indicating an

analysis of a single thought. It would be better to say "it thinks in me," like "it

rains here"; or better still, "there is a thought in me." This is simply on the

ground  that  what  Meinong  calls  the  act  in  thinking  is  not  empirically

discoverable, or logically deducible from what we can observe.

  The next point of criticism concerns the relation of content and object. The

reference of thoughts to objects is not, I believe, the simple direct essential

thing that Brentano and Meinong represent it as being. It seems to me to be

derivative, and to consist largely in BELIEFS: beliefs that what constitutes

the thought is connected with various other elements which together make up

the object. You have, say, an image of St. Paul's, or merely the word "St.

Paul's" in your head. You believe, however vaguely and dimly, that this is

connected with what you would see if you went to St. Paul's, or what you

would feel if you touched its walls; it is further connected with what other

people  see  and  feel,  with  services  and  the  Dean  and  Chapter  and  Sir

Christopher Wren. These things are not mere thoughts of yours, but your

thought stands in a relation to them of which you are more or less aware. The

awareness of this relation is a further thought, and constitutes your feeling

that the original thought had an "object." But in pure imagination you can get

very similar thoughts without these accompanying beliefs; and in this case

your  thoughts  do  not  have  objects  or  seem  to  have  them.  Thus  in  such

instances you have content without object. On the other hand, in seeing or

hearing  it  would  be  less  misleading  to  say  that  you  have  object  without

content, since what you see or hear is actually part of the physical world,

though not matter in the sense of physics. Thus the whole question of therelation of mental occurrences to objects grows very complicated, and cannot

be settled by regarding reference to objects as of the essence of thoughts. All

the above remarks are merely preliminary, and will be expanded later.

  Speaking  in  popular  and  unphilosophical  terms,  we  may  say  that  the

content of a thought is supposed to be something in your head when you

think the thought, while the object is usually something in the outer world. It

is held that knowledge of the outer world is constituted by the relation to the

object, while the fact that knowledge is different from what it knows is due to

the fact that knowledge comes by way of contents. We can begin to state the

difference  between  realism  and  idealism  in  terms  of  this  opposition  of

contents and objects. Speaking quite roughly and approximately, we may say

that idealism tends to suppress the object, while realism tends to suppress the

content.  Idealism,  accordingly,  says  that  nothing  can  be  known  except

thoughts, and all the reality that we know is mental; while realism maintains

that we know objects directly, in sensation certainly, and perhaps also in

memory  and  thought.  Idealism  does  not  say  that  nothing  can  be  known

beyond the present thought, but it maintains that the context of vague belief,

which we spoke of in connection with the thought of St. Paul's, only takes

you to other thoughts, never to anything radically different from thoughts.

The difficulty of this view is in regard to sensation, where it seems as if we

came into direct contact with the outer world. But the Berkeleian way of

meeting this difficulty is so familiar that I need not enlarge upon it now. I

shall return to it in a later lecture, and will only observe, for the present, that

there seem to me no valid grounds for regarding what we see and hear as not

part of the physical world.

  Realists, on the other hand, as a rule, suppress the content, and maintain

that a thought consists either of act and object alone, or of object alone. I

have been in the past a realist, and I remain a realist as regards sensation, but

not as regards memory or thought. I will try to explain what seem to me to be

the reasons for and against various kinds of realism.

  Modern  idealism  professes  to  be  by  no  means  confined  to  the  present

thought or the present thinker in regard to its knowledge; indeed, it contends

that the world is so organic, so dove-tailed, that from any one portion the

whole can be inferred, as the complete skeleton of an extinct animal can be

inferred from one bone. But the logic by which this supposed organic nature

of the world is nominally demonstrated appears to realists, as it does to me, tobe faulty. They argue that, if we cannot know the physical world directly, we

cannot really know any thing outside our own minds: the rest of the world

may be merely our dream. This is a dreary view, and they there fore seek

ways of escaping from it. Accordingly they maintain that in knowledge we

are in direct contact with objects, which may be, and usually are, outside our

own minds. No doubt they are prompted to this view, in the first place, by

bias, namely, by the desire to think that they can know of the existence of a

world outside themselves. But we have to consider, not what led them to

desire the view, but whether their arguments for it are valid.

  There are two different kinds of realism, according as we make a thought

consist of act and object, or of object alone. Their difficulties are different,

but neither seems tenable all through. Take, for the sake of definiteness, the

remembering of a past event. The remembering occurs now, and is therefore

necessarily not identical with the past event. So long as we retain the act, this

need cause no difficulty. The act of remembering occurs now, and has on this

view a certain essential relation to the past event which it remembers. There

is no LOGICAL objection to this theory, but there is the objection, which we

spoke  of  earlier,  that  the  act  seems  mythical,  and  is  not  to  be  found  by

observation. If, on the other hand, we try to constitute memory without the

act, we are driven to a content, since we must have something that happens

NOW, as opposed to the event which happened in the past. Thus, when we

reject the act, which I think we must, we are driven to a theory of memory

which is more akin to idealism. These arguments, however, do not apply to

sensation. It is especially sensation, I think, which is considered by those

realists who retain only the object.* Their views, which are chiefly held in

America, are in large measure derived from William James, and before going

further  it  will  be  well  to  consider  the  revolutionary  doctrine  which  he

advocated. I believe this doctrine contains important new truth, and what I

shall have to say will be in a considerable measure inspired by it.

* This is explicitly the case with Mach's "Analysis of 

Sensations," a book of fundamental importance in the present 

connection. (Translation of fifth German edition, Open Court 

Co., 1914. First German edition, 1886.)

  William  James's  view  was  first  set  forth  in  an  essay  called  "Does

'consciousness' exist?"* In this essay he explains how what used to be the

soul has gradually been refined down to the "transcendental ego," which, hesays, "attenuates itself to a thoroughly ghostly condition, being only a name

for the fact that the 'content' of experience IS KNOWN. It loses personal

form and activity—these passing over to the content—and becomes a bare

Bewusstheit or Bewusstsein uberhaupt, of which in its own right absolutely

nothing can be said. I believe (he continues) that 'consciousness,' when once

it  has  evaporated  to  this  estate  of  pure  diaphaneity,  is  on  the  point  of

disappearing altogether. It is the name of a nonentity, and has no right to a

place among first principles. Those who still cling to it are clinging to a mere

echo, the faint rumour left behind by the disappearing 'soul' upon the air of

philosophy"(p. 2).

* "Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific 

Methods," vol. i, 1904. Reprinted in "Essays in Radical 

Empiricism" (Longmans, Green & Co., 1912), pp. 1-38, to 

which references in what follows refer.

  He explains that this is no sudden change in his opinions. "For twenty

years past," he says, "I have mistrusted 'consciousness' as an entity; for seven

or eight years past I have suggested its non-existence to my students, and

tried to give them its pragmatic equivalent in realities of experience. It seems

to me that the hour is ripe for it to be openly and universally discarded"(p. 3).

  His next concern is to explain away the air of paradox, for James was

never wilfully paradoxical. "Undeniably," he says, "'thoughts' do exist." "I

mean  only  to  deny  that  the  word  stands  for  an  entity,  but  to  insist  most

emphatically that it does stand for a function. There is, I mean, no aboriginal

stuff or quality of being, contrasted with that of which material objects are

made, out of which our thoughts of them are made; but there is a function in

experience which thoughts perform, and for the performance of which this

quality of being is invoked. That function is KNOWING"(pp. 3-4).

  James's view is that the raw material out of which the world is built up is

not of two sorts, one matter and the other mind, but that it is arranged in

different patterns by its inter-relations, and that some arrangements may be

called mental, while others may be called physical.

  "My thesis is," he says, "that if we start with the supposition that there is

only one primal stuff or material in the world, a stuff of which everything is

composed, and if we call that stuff 'pure experience,' then knowing can easily

be explained as a particular sort of relation towards one another into which

portions of pure experience may enter. The relation itself is a part of pureexperience; one of its 'terms' becomes the subject or bearer of the knowledge,

the knower, the other becomes the object known"(p. 4).

  After mentioning the duality of subject and object, which is supposed to

constitute  consciousness,  he  proceeds  in  italics:  "EXPERIENCE,  I

BELIEVE,  HAS  NO  SUCH  INNER  DUPLICITY;  AND  THE

SEPARATION  OF  IT  INTO  CONSCIOUSNESS  AND  CONTENT

COMES,  NOT  BY  WAY  OF  SUBTRACTION,  BUT  BY  WAY  OF

ADDITION"(p. 9).

  He illustrates his meaning by the analogy of paint as it appears in a paint-

shop and as it appears in a picture: in the one case it is just "saleable matter,"

while in the other it "performs a spiritual function. Just so, I maintain (he

continues),  does  a  given  undivided  portion  of  experience,  taken  in  one

context  of  associates,  play  the  part  of  a  knower,  of  a  state  of  mind,  of

'consciousness';  while  in  a  different  context  the  same  undivided  bit  of

experience plays the part of a thing known, of an objective 'content.' In a

word, in one group it figures as a thought, in another group as a thing"(pp. 9-

10).

  He does not believe in the supposed immediate certainty of thought. "Let

the case be what it may in others," he says, "I am as confident as I am of

anything  that,  in  myself,  the  stream  of  thinking  (which  I  recognize

emphatically  as  a  phenomenon)  is  only  a  careless  name  for  what,  when

scrutinized, reveals itself to consist chiefly of the stream of my breathing. The

'I think' which Kant said must be able to accompany all my objects, is the 'I

breathe' which actually does accompany them"(pp. 36-37).

  The same view of "consciousness" is set forth in the succeeding essay, "A

World  of  Pure  Experience"  (ib.,  pp.  39-91).  The  use  of  the  phrase  "pure

experience"  in  both  essays  points  to  a  lingering  influence  of  idealism.

"Experience,"  like  "consciousness,"  must  be  a  product,  not  part  of  the

primary stuff of the world. It must be possible, if James is right in his main

contentions, that roughly the same stuff, differently arranged, would not give

rise  to  anything  that  could  be  called  "experience."  This  word  has  been

dropped by the American realists, among whom we may mention specially

Professor R. B. Perry of Harvard and Mr. Edwin B. Holt. The interests of this

school are in general philosophy and the philosophy of the sciences, rather

than in psychology; they have derived a strong impulsion from James, but

have more interest than he had in logic and mathematics and the abstract partof philosophy. They speak of "neutral" entities as the stuff out of which both

mind  and  matter  are  constructed.  Thus  Holt  says:  "If  the  terms  and

propositions  of  logic  must  be  substantialized,  they  are  all  strictly  of  one

substance, for which perhaps the least dangerous name is neutral-stuff. The

relation  of  neutral-stuff  to  matter  and  mind  we  shall  have  presently  to

consider at considerable length." *

* "The Concept of Consciousness" (Geo. Allen & Co., 1914), 

p. 52.

  My own belief—for which the reasons will appear in subsequent lectures

—is that James is right in rejecting consciousness as an entity, and that the

American realists are partly right, though not wholly, in considering that both

mind and matter are composed of a neutral-stuff which, in isolation, is neither

mental nor material. I should admit this view as regards sensations: what is

heard or seen belongs equally to psychology and to physics. But I should say

that images belong only to the mental world, while those occurrences (if any)

which  do  not  form  part  of  any  "experience"  belong  only  to  the  physical

world. There are, it seems to me, prima facie different kinds of causal laws,

one belonging to physics and the other to psychology. The law of gravitation,

for example, is a physical law, while the law of association is a psychological

law. Sensations are subject to both kinds of laws, and are therefore truly

"neutral" in Holt's sense. But entities subject only to physical laws, or only to

psychological laws, are not neutral, and may be called respectively purely

material and purely mental. Even those, however, which are purely mental

will not have that intrinsic reference to objects which Brentano assigns to

them  and  which  constitutes  the  essence  of  "consciousness"  as  ordinarily

understood. But it is now time to pass on to other modern tendencies, also

hostile to "consciousness."

  There  is  a  psychological  school  called  "Behaviourists,"  of  whom  the

protagonist is Professor John B. Watson,* formerly of the Johns Hopkins

University. To them also, on the whole, belongs Professor John Dewey, who,

with James and Dr. Schiller, was one of the three founders of pragmatism.

The  view  of  the  "behaviourists"  is  that  nothing  can  be  known  except  by

external observation. They deny altogether that there is a separate source of

knowledge  called  "introspection,"  by  which  we  can  know  things  about

ourselves which we could never observe in others. They do not by any means

deny that all sorts of things MAY go on in our minds: they only say that suchthings, if they occur, are not susceptible of scientific observation, and do not

therefore concern psychology as a science. Psychology as a science, they say,

is only concerned with BEHAVIOUR, i.e. with what we DO; this alone, they

contend, can be accurately observed. Whether we think meanwhile, they tell

us, cannot be known; in their observation of the behaviour of human beings,

they have not so far found any evidence of thought. True, we talk a great

deal, and imagine that in so doing we are showing that we can think; but

behaviourists say that the talk they have to listen to can be explained without

supposing that people think. Where you might expect a chapter on "thought

processes" you come instead upon a chapter on "The Language Habit." It is

humiliating to find how terribly adequate this hypothesis turns out to be.

* See especially his "Behavior: an Introduction to 

Comparative Psychology," New York, 1914.

    Behaviourism has not, however, sprung from observing the folly of men.

It is the wisdom of animals that has suggested the view. It has always been a

common topic of popular discussion whether animals "think." On this topic

people are prepared to take sides without having the vaguest idea what they

mean by "thinking." Those who desired to investigate such questions were

led to observe the behaviour of animals, in the hope that their behaviour

would throw some light on their mental faculties. At first sight, it might seem

that this is so. People say that a dog "knows" its name because it comes when

it is called, and that it "remembers" its master, because it looks sad in his

absence, but wags its tail and barks when he returns. That the dog behaves in

this  way  is  matter  of  observation,  but  that  it  "knows"  or  "remembers"

anything is an inference, and in fact a very doubtful one. The more such

inferences are examined, the more precarious they are seen to be. Hence the

study of animal behaviour has been gradually led to abandon all attempt at

mental interpretation. And it can hardly be doubted that, in many cases of

complicated  behaviour  very  well  adapted  to  its  ends,  there  can  be  no

prevision of those ends. The first time a bird builds a nest, we can hardly

suppose it knows that there will be eggs to be laid in it, or that it will sit on

the eggs, or that they will hatch into young birds. It does what it does at each

stage  because  instinct  gives  it  an  impulse  to  do  just  that,  not  because  it

foresees and desires the result of its actions.** An interesting discussion of the question whether 

instinctive actions, when first performed, involve any 

prevision, however vague, will be found in Lloyd Morgan's 

"Instinct and Experience" (Methuen, 1912), chap. ii.

  Careful  observers  of  animals,  being  anxious  to  avoid  precarious

inferences, have gradually discovered more and more how to give an account

of the actions of animals without assuming what we call "consciousness." It

has seemed to the behaviourists that similar methods can be applied to human

behaviour, without assuming anything not open to external observation. Let

us give a crude illustration, too crude for the authors in question, but capable

of affording a rough insight into their meaning. Suppose two children in a

school, both of whom are asked "What is six times nine?" One says fifty-

four, the other says fifty-six. The one, we say, "knows" what six times nine

is, the other does not. But all that we can observe is a certain language-habit.

The one child has acquired the habit of saying "six times nine is fifty-four";

the other has not. There is no more need of "thought" in this than there is

when  a  horse  turns  into  his  accustomed  stable;  there  are  merely  more

numerous  and  complicated  habits.  There  is  obviously  an  observable  fact

called "knowing" such-and-such a thing; examinations are experiments for

discovering such facts. But all that is observed or discovered is a certain set

of  habits  in  the  use  of  words.  The  thoughts  (if  any)  in  the  mind  of  the

examinee are of no interest to the examiner; nor has the examiner any reason

to suppose even the most successful examinee capable of even the smallest

amount of thought.

  Thus what is called "knowing," in the sense in which we can ascertain

what other people "know," is a phenomenon exemplified in their physical

behaviour,  including  spoken  and  written  words.  There  is  no  reason—so

Watson  argues—to  suppose  that  their  knowledge  IS  anything  beyond  the

habits  shown  in  this  behaviour:  the  inference  that  other  people  have

something nonphysical called "mind" or "thought" is therefore unwarranted.

  So  far,  there  is  nothing  particularly  repugnant  to  our  prejudices  in  the

conclusions of the behaviourists. We are all willing to admit that other people

are thoughtless. But when it comes to ourselves, we feel convinced that we

can  actually  perceive  our  own  thinking.  "Cogito,  ergo  sum"  would  be

regarded  by  most  people  as  having  a  true  premiss.  This,  however,  the

behaviourist  denies.  He  maintains  that  our  knowledge  of  ourselves  is  nodifferent in kind from our knowledge of other people. We may see MORE,

because our own body is easier to observe than that of other people; but we

do not see anything radically unlike what we see of others. Introspection, as a

separate  source  of  knowledge,  is  entirely  denied  by  psychologists  of  this

school. I shall discuss this question at length in a later lecture; for the present

I will only observe that it is by no means simple, and that, though I believe

the behaviourists somewhat overstate their case, yet there is an important

element of truth in their contention, since the things which we can discover

by introspection do not seem to differ in any very fundamental way from the

things which we discover by external observation.

  So far, we have been principally concerned with knowing. But it might

well be maintained that desiring is what is really most characteristic of mind.

Human  beings  are  constantly  engaged  in  achieving  some  end  they  feel

pleasure in success and pain in failure. In a purely material world, it may be

said, there would be no opposition of pleasant and unpleasant, good and bad,

what is desired and what is feared. A man's acts are governed by purposes.

He decides, let us suppose, to go to a certain place, whereupon he proceeds to

the station, takes his ticket and enters the train. If the usual route is blocked

by an accident, he goes by some other route. All that he does is determined—

or so it seems—by the end he has in view, by what lies in front of him, rather

than by what lies behind. With dead matter, this is not the case. A stone at the

top of a hill may start rolling, but it shows no pertinacity in trying to get to

the bottom. Any ledge or obstacle will stop it, and it will exhibit no signs of

discontent if this happens. It is not attracted by the pleasantness of the valley,

as a sheep or cow might be, but propelled by the steepness of the hill at the

place where it is. In all this we have characteristic differences between the

behaviour of animals and the behaviour of matter as studied by physics.

  Desire,  like  knowledge,  is,  of  course,  in  one  sense  an  observable

phenomenon. An elephant will eat a bun, but not a mutton chop; a duck will

go into the water, but a hen will not. But when we think of our own desires,

most people believe that we can know them by an immediate self-knowledge

which does not depend upon observation of our actions. Yet if this were the

case, it would be odd that people are so often mistaken as to what they desire.

It is matter of common observation that "so-and-so does not know his own

motives,"  or  that  "A  is  envious  of  B  and  malicious  about  him,  but  quite

unconscious  of  being  so."  Such  people  are  called  self-deceivers,  and  aresupposed to have had to go through some more or less elaborate process of

concealing  from  themselves  what  would  otherwise  have  been  obvious.  I

believe that this is an entire mistake. I believe that the discovery of our own

motives can only be made by the same process by which we discover other

people's, namely, the process of observing our actions and inferring the desire

which  could  prompt  them.  A  desire  is  "conscious"  when  we  have  told

ourselves that we have it. A hungry man may say to himself: "Oh, I do want

my  lunch."  Then  his  desire  is  "conscious."  But  it  only  differs  from  an

"unconscious" desire by the presence of appropriate words, which is by no

means a fundamental difference.

  The  belief  that  a  motive  is  normally  conscious  makes  it  easier  to  be

mistaken as to our own motives than as to other people's. When some desire

that we should be ashamed of is attributed to us, we notice that we have never

had it consciously, in the sense of saying to ourselves, "I wish that would

happen." We therefore look for some other interpretation of our actions, and

regard our friends as very unjust when they refuse to be convinced by our

repudiation of what we hold to be a calumny. Moral considerations greatly

increase the difficulty of clear thinking in this matter. It is commonly argued

that people are not to blame for unconscious motives, but only for conscious

ones. In order, therefore, to be wholly virtuous it is only necessary to repeat

virtuous formulas. We say: "I desire to be kind to my friends, honourable in

business, philanthropic towards the poor, public-spirited in politics." So long

as we refuse to allow ourselves, even in the watches of the night, to avow any

contrary desires, we may be bullies at home, shady in the City, skinflints in

paying wages and profiteers in dealing with the public; yet, if only conscious

motives are to count in moral valuation, we shall remain model characters.

This is an agreeable doctrine, and it is not surprising that men are un willing

to abandon it. But moral considerations are the worst enemies of the scientific

spirit and we must dismiss them from our minds if we wish to arrive at truth.

  I believe—as I shall try to prove in a later lecture—that desire, like force

in mechanics, is of the nature of a convenient fiction for describing shortly

certain laws of behaviour. A hungry animal is restless until it finds food; then

it becomes quiescent. The thing which will bring a restless condition to an

end is said to be what is desired. But only experience can show what will

have  this  sedative  effect,  and  it  is  easy  to  make  mistakes.  We  feel

dissatisfaction, and think that such and-such a thing would remove it; but inthinking this, we are theorizing, not observing a patent fact. Our theorizing is

often mistaken, and when it is mistaken there is a difference between what we

think  we  desire  and  what  in  fact  will  bring  satisfaction.  This  is  such  a

common phenomenon that any theory of desire which fails to account for it

must be wrong.

  What  have  been  called  "unconscious"  desires  have  been  brought  very

much  to  the  fore  in  recent  years  by  psycho-analysis.  Psycho-analysis,  as

every one knows, is primarily a method of understanding hysteria and certain

forms of insanity*; but it has been found that there is much in the lives of

ordinary  men  and  women  which  bears  a  humiliating  resemblance  to  the

delusions  of  the  insane.  The  connection  of  dreams,  irrational  beliefs  and

foolish actions with unconscious wishes has been brought to light, though

with some exaggeration, by Freud and Jung and their followers. As regards

the nature of these unconscious wishes, it seems to me—though as a layman I

speak  with  diffidence—that  many  psycho-analysts  are  unduly  narrow;  no

doubt the wishes they emphasize exist, but others, e.g. for honour and power,

are equally operative and equally liable to concealment. This, however, does

not  affect  the  value  of  their  general  theories  from  the  point  of  view  of

theoretic psychology, and it is from this point of view that their results are

important for the analysis of mind.

* There is a wide field of "unconscious" phenomena which 

does not depend upon psycho-analytic theories. Such 

occurrences as automatic writing lead Dr. Morton Prince to 

say: "As I view this question of the subconscious, far too 

much weight is given to the point of awareness or not 

awareness of our conscious processes. As a matter of fact, 

we find entirely identical phenomena, that is, identical in 

every respect but one-that of awareness in which sometimes 

we are aware of these conscious phenomena and sometimes 

not"(p. 87 of "Subconscious Phenomena," by various authors, 

Rebman). Dr. Morton Price conceives that there may be 

"consciousness" without "awareness." But this is a difficult 

view, and one which makes some definition of "consciousness" 

imperative. For nay part, I cannot see how to separate 

consciousness from awareness.

  What, I think, is clearly established, is that a man's actions and beliefs maybe wholly dominated by a desire of which he is quite unconscious, and which

he  indignantly  repudiates  when  it  is  suggested  to  him.  Such  a  desire  is

generally,  in  morbid  cases,  of  a  sort  which  the  patient  would  consider

wicked; if he had to admit that he had the desire, he would loathe himself.

Yet it is so strong that it must force an outlet for itself; hence it becomes

necessary to entertain whole systems of false beliefs in order to hide the

nature  of  what  is  desired.  The  resulting  delusions  in  very  many  cases

disappear  if  the  hysteric  or  lunatic  can  be  made  to  face  the  facts  about

himself.  The  consequence  of  this  is  that  the  treatment  of  many  forms  of

insanity has grown more psychological and less physiological than it used to

be.  Instead  of  looking  for  a  physical  defect  in  the  brain,  those  who  treat

delusions look for the repressed desire which has found this contorted mode

of  expression.  For  those  who  do  not  wish  to  plunge  into  the  somewhat

repulsive and often rather wild theories of psychoanalytic pioneers, it will be

worth while to read a little book by Dr. Bernard Hart on "The Psychology of

Insanity."* On this question of the mental as opposed to the physiological

study of the causes of insanity, Dr. Hart says:

* Cambridge, 1912; 2nd edition, 1914. The following 

references are to the second edition.

  "The  psychological  conception  [of  insanity]  is  based  on  the  view  that

mental  processes  can  be  directly  studied  without  any  reference  to  the

accompanying changes which are presumed to take place in the brain, and

that  insanity  may  therefore  be  properly  attacked  from  the  standpoint  of

psychology"(p. 9).

  This illustrates a point which I am anxious to make clear from the outset.

Any attempt to classify modern views, such as I propose to advocate, from

the old standpoint of materialism and idealism, is only misleading. In certain

respects, the views which I shall be setting forth approximate to materialism;

in certain others, they approximate to its opposite. On this question of the

study of delusions, the practical effect of the modern theories, as Dr. Hart

points out, is emancipation from the materialist method. On the other hand, as

he  also  points  out  (pp.  38-9),  imbecility  and  dementia  still  have  to  be

considered physiologically, as caused by defects in the brain. There is no

inconsistency in this If, as we maintain, mind and matter are neither of them

the actual stuff of reality, but different convenient groupings of an underlying

material,  then,  clearly,  the  question  whether,  in  regard  to  a  givenphenomenon, we are to seek a physical or a mental cause, is merely one to be

decided by trial. Metaphysicians have argued endlessly as to the interaction

of mind and matter. The followers of Descartes held that mind and matter are

so different as to make any action of the one on the other impossible. When I

will to move my arm, they said, it is not my will that operates on my arm, but

God, who, by His omnipotence, moves my arm whenever I want it moved.

The  modern  doctrine  of  psychophysical  parallelism  is  not  appreciably

different  from  this  theory  of  the  Cartesian  school.  Psycho-physical

parallelism is the theory that mental and physical events each have causes in

their own sphere, but run on side by side owing to the fact that every state of

the brain coexists with a definite state of the mind, and vice versa. This view

of the reciprocal causal independence of mind and matter has no basis except

in  metaphysical  theory.*  For  us,  there  is  no  necessity  to  make  any  such

assumption, which is very difficult to harmonize with obvious facts. I receive

a  letter  inviting  me  to  dinner:  the  letter  is  a  physical  fact,  but  my

apprehension of its meaning is mental. Here we have an effect of matter on

mind. In consequence of my apprehension of the meaning of the letter, I go to

the right place at the right time; here we have an effect of mind on matter. I

shall try to persuade you, in the course of these lectures, that matter is not so

material  and  mind  not  so  mental  as  is  generally  supposed.  When  we  are

speaking of matter, it will seem as if we were inclining to idealism; when we

are speaking of mind, it will seem as if we were inclining to materialism.

Neither is the truth. Our world is to be constructed out of what the American

realists  call  "neutral"  entities,  which  have  neither  the  hardness  and

indestructibility of matter, nor the reference to objects which is supposed to

characterize mind.

* It would seem, however, that Dr. Hart accepts this theory 

as 8 methodological precept. See his contribution to 

"Subconscious Phenomena" (quoted above), especially pp. 121-2.

  There is, it is true, one objection which might be felt, not indeed to the

action of matter on mind, but to the action of mind on matter. The laws of

physics, it may be urged, are apparently adequate to explain everything that

happens to matter, even when it is matter in a man's brain. This, however, is

only a hypothesis, not an established theory. There is no cogent empirical

reason for supposing that the laws determining the motions of living bodies

are exactly the same as those that apply to dead matter. Sometimes, of course,they are clearly the same. When a man falls from a precipice or slips on a

piece of orange peel, his body behaves as if it were devoid of life. These are

the occasions that make Bergson laugh. But when a man's bodily movements

are what we call "voluntary," they are, at any rate prima facie, very different

in their laws from the movements of what is devoid of life. I do not wish to

say dogmatically that the difference is irreducible; I think it highly probable

that it is not. I say only that the study of the behaviour of living bodies, in the

present state of our knowledge, is distinct from physics. The study of gases

was originally quite distinct from that of rigid bodies, and would never have

advanced  to  its  present  state  if  it  had  not  been  independently  pursued.

Nowadays both the gas and the rigid body are manufactured out of a more

primitive  and  universal  kind  of  matter.  In  like  manner,  as  a  question  of

methodology, the laws of living bodies are to be studied, in the first place,

without any undue haste to subordinate them to the laws of physics. Boyle's

law  and  the  rest  had  to  be  discovered  before  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases

became possible. But in psychology we are hardly yet at the stage of Boyle's

law. Meanwhile we need not be held up by the bogey of the universal rigid

exactness  of  physics.  This  is,  as  yet,  a  mere  hypothesis,  to  be  tested

empirically without any preconceptions. It may be true, or it may not. So far,

that is all we can say.

  Returning from this digression to our main topic, namely, the criticism of

"consciousness," we observe that Freud and his followers, though they have

demonstrated  beyond  dispute  the  immense  importance  of  "unconscious"

desires in determining our actions and beliefs, have not attempted the task of

telling us what an "unconscious" desire actually is, and have thus invested

their doctrine with an air of mystery and mythology which forms a large part

of  its  popular  attractiveness.  They  speak  always  as  though  it  were  more

normal for a desire to be conscious, and as though a positive cause had to be

assigned for its being unconscious. Thus "the unconscious" becomes a sort of

underground prisoner, living in a dungeon, breaking in at long intervals upon

our  daylight  respectability  with  dark  groans  and  maledictions  and  strange

atavistic  lusts.  The  ordinary  reader,  almost  inevitably,  thinks  of  this

underground person as another consciousness, prevented by what Freud calls

the "censor" from making his voice heard in company, except on rare and

dreadful occasions when he shouts so loud that every one hears him and there

is a scandal. Most of us like the idea that we could be desperately wicked ifonly we let ourselves go. For this reason, the Freudian "unconscious" has

been a consolation to many quiet and well-behaved persons.

  I  do  not  think  the  truth  is  quite  so  picturesque  as  this.  I  believe  an

"unconscious" desire is merely a causal law of our behaviour,* namely, that

we remain restlessly active until a certain state of affairs is realized, when we

achieve  temporary  equilibrium  If  we  know  beforehand  what  this  state  of

affairs is, our desire is conscious; if not, unconscious. The unconscious desire

is  not  something  actually  existing,  but  merely  a  tendency  to  a  certain

behaviour;  it  has  exactly  the  same  status  as  a  force  in  dynamics.  The

unconscious desire is in no way mysterious; it is the natural primitive form of

desire, from which the other has developed through our habit of observing

and theorizing (often wrongly). It is not necessary to suppose, as Freud seems

to do, that every unconscious wish was once conscious, and was then, in his

terminology, "repressed" because we disapproved of it. On the contrary, we

shall suppose that, although Freudian "repression" undoubtedly occurs and is

important, it is not the usual reason for unconsciousness of our wishes. The

usual reason is merely that wishes are all, to begin with, unconscious, and

only become known when they are actively noticed. Usually, from laziness,

people do not notice, but accept the theory of human nature which they find

current, and attribute to themselves whatever wishes this theory would lead

them to expect. We used to be full of virtuous wishes, but since Freud our

wishes have become, in the words of the Prophet Jeremiah, "deceitful above

all things and desperately wicked." Both these views, in most of those who

have  held  them,  are  the  product  of  theory  rather  than  observation,  for

observation requires effort, whereas repeating phrases does not.

* Cf. Hart, "The Psychology of Insanity," p. 19.

  The interpretation of unconscious wishes which I have been advocating

has been set forth briefly by Professor John B. Watson in an article called

"The  Psychology  of  Wish  Fulfilment,"  which  appeared  in  "The  Scientific

Monthly" in November, 1916. Two quotations will serve to show his point of

view:

  "The Freudians (he says) have made more or less of a 'metaphysical entity'

out of the censor. They suppose that when wishes are repressed they are

repressed into the 'unconscious,' and that this mysterious censor stands at the

trapdoor lying between the conscious and the unconscious. Many of us do not

believe in a world of the unconscious (a few of us even have grave doubtsabout  the  usefulness  of  the  term  consciousness),  hence  we  try  to  explain

censorship  along  ordinary  biological  lines.  We  believe  that  one  group  of

habits  can  'down'  another  group  of  habits—or  instincts.  In  this  case  our

ordinary  system  of  habits—those  which  we  call  expressive  of  our  'real

selves'—inhibit or quench (keep inactive or partially inactive) those habits

and instinctive tendencies which belong largely in the past"(p. 483).

  Again,  after  speaking  of  the  frustration  of  some  impulses  which  is

involved in acquiring the habits of a civilized adult, he continues:

  "It is among these frustrated impulses that I would find the biological

basis of the unfulfilled wish. Such 'wishes' need never have been 'conscious,'

and NEED NEVER HAVE BEEN SUPPRESSED INTO FREUD'S REALM

OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  It  may  be  inferred  from  this  that  there  is  no

particular reason for applying the term 'wish' to such tendencies"(p. 485).

  One  of  the  merits  of  the  general  analysis  of  mind  which  we  shall  be

concerned with in the following lectures is that it removes the atmosphere of

mystery  from  the  phenomena  brought  to  light  by  the  psycho-analysts.

Mystery is delightful, but unscientific, since it depends upon ignorance. Man

has developed out of the animals, and there is no serious gap between him

and the amoeba. Something closely analogous to knowledge and desire, as

regards its effects on behaviour, exists among animals, even where what we

call "consciousness" is hard to believe in; something equally analogous exists

in ourselves in cases where no trace of "consciousness" can be found. It is

therefore natural to suppose that, what ever may be the correct definition of

"consciousness," "consciousness" is not the essence of life or mind. In the

following lectures, accordingly, this term will disappear until we have dealt

with  words,  when  it  will  re-emerge  as  mainly  a  trivial  and  unimportant

outcome of linguistic habits.

                    LECTURE II. INSTINCT AND HABIT

  In attempting to understand the elements out of which mental phenomena

are compounded, it is of the greatest importance to remember that from the

protozoa to man there is nowhere a very wide gap either in structure or in

behaviour. From this fact it is a highly probable inference that there is also

nowhere a very wide mental gap. It is, of course, POSSIBLE that there may

be, at certain stages in evolution, elements which are entirely new from the

standpoint of analysis, though in their nascent form they have little influence

on behaviour and no very marked correlatives in structure. But the hypothesis

of continuity in mental development is clearly preferable if no psychological

facts make it impossible. We shall find, if I am not mistaken, that there are no

facts which refute the hypothesis of mental continuity, and that, on the other

hand, this hypothesis affords a useful test of suggested theories as to the

nature of mind.

  The hypothesis of mental continuity throughout organic evolution may be

used in two different ways. On the one hand, it may be held that we have

more knowledge of our own minds than those of animals, and that we should

use this knowledge to infer the existence of something similar to our own

mental processes in animals and even in plants. On the other hand, it may be

held  that  animals  and  plants  present  simpler  phenomena,  more  easily

analysed than those of human minds; on this ground it may be urged that

explanations which are adequate in the case of animals ought not to be lightly

rejected  in  the  case  of  man.  The  practical  effects  of  these  two  views  are

diametrically opposite: the first leads us to level up animal intelligence with

what we believe ourselves to know about our own intelligence, while the

second  leads  us  to  attempt  a  levelling  down  of  our  own  intelligence  to

something  not  too  remote  from  what  we  can  observe  in  animals.  It  is

therefore important to consider the relative justification of the two ways of

applying the principle of continuity.

  It is clear that the question turns upon another, namely, which can we

know best, the psychology of animals or that of human beings? If we can

know  most  about  animals,  we  shall  use  this  knowledge  as  a  basis  for

inference about human beings; if we can know most about human beings, we

shall adopt the opposite procedure. And the question whether we can know

most about the psychology of human beings or about that of animals turnsupon yet another, namely: Is introspection or external observation the surer

method in psychology? This is a question which I propose to discuss at length

in Lecture VI; I shall therefore content myself now with a statement of the

conclusions to be arrived at.

  We  know  a  great  many  things  concerning  ourselves  which  we  cannot

know nearly so directly concerning animals or even other people. We know

when we have a toothache, what we are thinking of, what dreams we have

when we are asleep, and a host of other occurrences which we only know

about others when they tell us of them, or otherwise make them inferable by

their behaviour. Thus, so far as knowledge of detached facts is concerned, the

advantage is on the side of self-knowledge as against external observation.

  But  when  we  come  to  the  analysis  and  scientific  understanding  of  the

facts, the advantages on the side of self-knowledge become far less clear. We

know, for example, that we have desires and beliefs, but we do not know

what constitutes a desire or a belief. The phenomena are so familiar that it is

difficult to realize how little we really know about them. We see in animals,

and to a lesser extent in plants, behaviour more or less similar to that which,

in us, is prompted by desires and beliefs, and we find that, as we descend in

the scale of evolution, behaviour becomes simpler, more easily reducible to

rule, more scientifically analysable and predictable. And just because we are

not  misled  by  familiarity  we  find  it  easier  to  be  cautious  in  interpreting

behaviour when we are dealing with phenomena remote from those of our

own minds: Moreover, introspection, as psychoanalysis has demonstrated, is

extraordinarily fallible even in cases where we feel a high degree of certainty.

The net result seems to be that, though self-knowledge has a definite and

important contribution to make to psychology, it is exceedingly misleading

unless  it  is  constantly  checked  and  controlled  by  the  test  of  external

observation,  and  by  the  theories  which  such  observation  suggests  when

applied to animal behaviour. On the whole, therefore, there is probably more

to  be  learnt  about  human  psychology  from  animals  than  about  animal

psychology from human beings; but this conclusion is one of degree, and

must not be pressed beyond a point.

  It is only bodily phenomena that can be directly observed in animals, or

even, strictly speaking, in other human beings. We can observe such things as

their movements, their physiological processes, and the sounds they emit.

Such things as desires and beliefs, which seem obvious to introspection, arenot  visible  directly  to  external  observation.  Accordingly,  if  we  begin  our

study of psychology by external observation, we must not begin by assuming

such  things  as  desires  and  beliefs,  but  only  such  things  as  external

observation can reveal, which will be characteristics of the movements and

physiological processes of animals. Some animals, for example, always run

away from light and hide themselves in dark places. If you pick up a mossy

stone which is lightly embedded in the earth, you will see a number of small

animals scuttling away from the unwonted daylight and seeking again the

darkness of which you have deprived them. Such animals are sensitive to

light, in the sense that their movements are affected by it; but it would be rash

to infer that they have sensations in any way analogous to our sensations of

sight.  Such  inferences,  which  go  beyond  the  observable  facts,  are  to  be

avoided with the utmost care.

  It is customary to divide human movements into three classes, voluntary,

reflex and mechanical. We may illustrate the distinction by a quotation from

William James ("Psychology," i, 12):

  "If I hear the conductor calling 'all aboard' as I enter the depot, my heart

first stops, then palpitates, and my legs respond to the air-waves falling on

my tympanum by quickening their movements. If I stumble as I run, the

sensation of falling provokes a movement of the hands towards the direction

of the fall, the effect of which is to shield the body from too sudden a shock.

If a cinder enter my eye, its lids close forcibly and a copious flow of tears

tends to wash it out.

  "These three responses to a sensational stimulus differ, however, in many

respects. The closure of the eye and the lachrymation are quite involuntary,

and so is the disturbance of the heart. Such involuntary responses we know as

'reflex' acts. The motion of the arms to break the shock of falling may also be

called reflex, since it occurs too quickly to be deliberately intended. Whether

it  be  instinctive  or  whether  it  result  from  the  pedestrian  education  of

childhood may be doubtful; it is, at any rate, less automatic than the previous

acts, for a man might by conscious effort learn to perform it more skilfully, or

even to suppress it altogether. Actions of this kind, with which instinct and

volition enter upon equal terms, have been called 'semi-reflex.' The act of

running towards the train, on the other hand, has no instinctive element about

it. It is purely the result of education, and is preceded by a consciousness of

the purpose to be attained and a distinct mandate of the will. It is a 'voluntaryact.' Thus the animal's reflex and voluntary performances shade into each

other  gradually,  being  connected  by  acts  which  may  often  occur

automatically, but may also be modified by conscious intelligence.

  "An  outside  observer,  unable  to  perceive  the  accompanying

consciousness,  might  be  wholly  at  a  loss  to  discriminate  between  the

automatic  acts  and  those  which  volition  escorted.  But  if  the  criterion  of

mind's existence be the choice of the proper means for the attainment of a

supposed  end,  all  the  acts  alike  seem  to  be  inspired  by  intelligence,  for

APPROPRIATENESS characterizes them all alike."

  There is one movement, among those that James mentions at first, which

is  not  subsequently  classified,  namely,  the  stumbling.  This  is  the  kind  of

movement which may be called "mechanical"; it is evidently of a different

kind  from  either  reflex  or  voluntary  movements,  and  more  akin  to  the

movements of dead matter. We may define a movement of an animal's body

as "mechanical" when it proceeds as if only dead matter were involved. For

example, if you fall over a cliff, you move under the influence of gravitation,

and your centre of gravity describes just as correct a parabola as if you were

already  dead.  Mechanical  movements  have  not  the  characteristic  of

appropriateness,  unless  by  accident,  as  when  a  drunken  man  falls  into  a

waterbutt  and  is  sobered.  But  reflex  and  voluntary  movements  are  not

ALWAYS appropriate, unless in some very recondite sense. A moth flying

into a lamp is not acting sensibly; no more is a man who is in such a hurry to

get  his  ticket  that  he  cannot  remember  the  name  of  his  destination.

Appropriateness is a complicated and merely approximate idea, and for the

present we shall do well to dismiss it from our thoughts.

  As  James  states,  there  is  no  difference,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the

outside observer, between voluntary and reflex movements. The physiologist

can discover that both depend upon the nervous system, and he may find that

the movements which we call voluntary depend upon higher centres in the

brain than those that are reflex. But he cannot discover anything as to the

presence or absence of "will" or "consciousness," for these things can only be

seen  from  within,  if  at  all.  For  the  present,  we  wish  to  place  ourselves

resolutely in the position of outside observers; we will therefore ignore the

distinction between voluntary and reflex movements. We will call the two

together  "vital"  movements.  We  may  then  distinguish  "vital"  from

mechanical  movements  by  the  fact  that  vital  movements  depend  for  theircausation  upon  the  special  properties  of  the  nervous  system,  while

mechanical movements depend only upon the properties which animal bodies

share with matter in general.

  There is need for some care if the distinction between mechanical and vital

movements is to be made precise. It is quite likely that, if we knew more

about animal bodies, we could deduce all their movements from the laws of

chemistry and physics. It is already fairly easy to see how chemistry reduces

to physics, i.e. how the differences between different chemical elements can

be accounted for by differences of physical structure, the constituents of the

structure being electrons which are exactly alike in all kinds of matter. We

only  know  in  part  how  to  reduce  physiology  to  chemistry,  but  we  know

enough  to  make  it  likely  that  the  reduction  is  possible.  If  we  suppose  it

effected, what would become of the difference between vital and mechanical

movements?

  Some  analogies  will  make  the  difference  clear.  A  shock  to  a  mass  of

dynamite produces quite different effects from an equal shock to a mass of

steel: in the one case there is a vast explosion, while in the other case there is

hardly any noticeable disturbance. Similarly, you may sometimes find on a

mountain-side  a  large  rock  poised  so  delicately  that  a  touch  will  set  it

crashing down into the valley, while the rocks all round are so firm that only

a considerable force can dislodge them What is analogous in these two cases

is the existence of a great store of energy in unstable equilibrium ready to

burst  into  violent  motion  by  the  addition  of  a  very  slight  disturbance.

Similarly, it requires only a very slight expenditure of energy to send a post-

card  with  the  words  "All  is  discovered;  fly!"  but  the  effect  in  generating

kinetic energy is said to be amazing. A human body, like a mass of dynamite,

contains a store of energy in unstable equilibrium, ready to be directed in this

direction or that by a disturbance which is physically very small, such as a

spoken word. In all such cases the reduction of behaviour to physical laws

can only be effected by entering into great minuteness; so long as we confine

ourselves to the observation of comparatively large masses, the way in which

the equilibrium will be upset cannot be determined. Physicists distinguish

between macroscopic and microscopic equations: the former determine the

visible  movements  of  bodies  of  ordinary  size,  the  latter  the  minute

occurrences in the smallest parts. It is only the microscopic equations that are

supposed to be the same for all sorts of matter. The macroscopic equationsresult  from  a  process  of  averaging  out,  and  may  be  different  in  different

cases. So, in our instance, the laws of macroscopic phenomena are different

for  mechanical  and  vital  movements,  though  the  laws  of  microscopic

phenomena may be the same.

  We may say, speaking somewhat roughly, that a stimulus applied to the

nervous system, like a spark to dynamite, is able to take advantage of the

stored energy in unstable equilibrium, and thus to produce movements out of

proportion to the proximate cause. Movements produced in this way are vital

movements,  while  mechanical  movements  are  those  in  which  the  stored

energy of a living body is not involved. Similarly dynamite may be exploded,

thereby displaying its characteristic properties, or may (with due precautions)

be carted about like any other mineral. The explosion is analogous to vital

movements, the carting about to mechanical movements.

  Mechanical movements are of no interest to the psychologist, and it has

only been necessary to define them in order to be able to exclude them. When

a psychologist studies behaviour, it is only vital movements that concern him.

We shall, therefore, proceed to ignore mechanical movements, and study only

the properties of the remainder.

  The next point is to distinguish between movements that are instinctive

and movements that are acquired by experience. This distinction also is to

some  extent  one  of  degree.  Professor  Lloyd  Morgan  gives  the  following

definition of "instinctive behaviour":

  "That which is, on its first occurrence, independent of prior experience;

which tends to the well-being of the individual and the preservation of the

race; which is similarly performed by all members of the same more or less

restricted  group  of  animals;  and  which  may  be  subject  to  subsequent

modification under the guidance of experience." *

* "Instinct and Experience" (Methuen, 1912) p. 5.

  This  definition  is  framed  for  the  purposes  of  biology,  and  is  in  some

respects unsuited to the needs of psychology. Though perhaps unavoidable,

allusion  to  "the  same  more  or  less  restricted  group  of  animals"  makes  it

impossible  to  judge  what  is  instinctive  in  the  behaviour  of  an  isolated

individual. Moreover, "the well-being of the individual and the preservation

of the race" is only a usual characteristic, not a universal one, of the sort of

movements that, from our point of view, are to be called instinctive; instances

of  harmful  instincts  will  be  given  shortly.  The  essential  point  of  thedefinition,  from  our  point  of  view,  is  that  an  instinctive  movement  is  in

dependent of prior experience.

  We  may  say  that  an  "instinctive"  movement  is  a  vital  movement

performed by an animal the first time that it finds itself in a novel situation;

or, more correctly, one which it would perform if the situation were novel.*

The instincts of an animal are different at different periods of its growth, and

this fact may cause changes of behaviour which are not due to learning. The

maturing  and  seasonal  fluctuation  of  the  sex-instinct  affords  a  good

illustration. When the sex-instinct first matures, the behaviour of an animal in

the presence of a mate is different from its previous behaviour in similar

circumstances, but is not learnt, since it is just the same if the animal has

never previously been in the presence of a mate.

* Though this can only be decided by comparison with other 

members of the species, and thus exposes us to the need of 

comparison which we thought an objection to Professor Lloyd 

Morgan's definition.

  On the other hand, a movement is "learnt," or embodies a "habit," if it is

due to previous experience of similar situations, and is not what it would be if

the animal had had no such experience.

  There  are  various  complications  which  blur  the  sharpness  of  this

distinction in practice. To begin with, many instincts mature gradually, and

while they are immature an animal may act in a fumbling manner which is

very  difficult  to  distinguish  from  learning.  James  ("Psychology,"  ii,  407)

maintains that children walk by instinct, and that the awkwardness of their

first attempts is only due to the fact that the instinct has not yet ripened. He

hopes  that  "some  scientific  widower,  left  alone  with  his  offspring  at  the

critical  moment,  may  ere  long  test  this  suggestion  on  the  living  subject."

However this may be, he quotes evidence to show that "birds do not LEARN

to fly," but fly by instinct when they reach the appropriate age (ib., p. 406). In

the second place, instinct often gives only a rough outline of the sort of thing

to do, in which case learning is necessary in order to acquire certainty and

precision in action. In the third place, even in the clearest cases of acquired

habit, such as speaking, some instinct is required to set in motion the process

of learning. In the case of speaking, the chief instinct involved is commonly

supposed to be that of imitation, but this may be questioned. (See Thorndike's

"Animal Intelligence," p. 253 ff.)  In spite of these qualifications, the broad distinction between instinct and

habit is undeniable. To take extreme cases, every animal at birth can take

food by instinct, before it has had opportunity to learn; on the other hand, no

one  can  ride  a  bicycle  by  instinct,  though,  after  learning,  the  necessary

movements become just as automatic as if they were instinctive.

  The process of learning, which consists in the acquisition of habits, has

been  much  studied  in  various  animals.*  For  example:  you  put  a  hungry

animal, say a cat, in a cage which has a door that can be opened by lifting a

latch; outside the cage you put food. The cat at first dashes all round the cage,

making frantic efforts to force a way out. At last, by accident, the latch is

lifted and the cat pounces on the food. Next day you repeat the experiment,

and you find that the cat gets out much more quickly than the first time,

although it still makes some random movements. The third day it gets out

still more quickly, and before long it goes straight to the latch and lifts it at

once. Or you make a model of the Hampton Court maze, and put a rat in the

middle, assaulted by the smell of food on the outside. The rat starts running

down the passages, and is constantly stopped by blind alleys, but at last, by

persistent attempts, it gets out. You repeat this experiment day after day; you

measure the time taken by the rat in reaching the food; you find that the time

rapidly diminishes, and that after a while the rat ceases to make any wrong

turnings. It is by essentially similar processes that we learn speaking, writing,

mathematics, or the government of an empire.

* The scientific study of this subject may almost be said to 

begin with Thorndike's "Animal Intelligence" (Macmillan, 

1911).

  Professor Watson ("Behavior," pp. 262-3) has an ingenious theory as to

the way in which habit arises out of random movements. I think there is a

reason why his theory cannot be regarded as alone sufficient, but it seems not

unlikely that it is partly correct. Suppose, for the sake of simplicity, that there

are just ten random movements which may be made by the animal—say, ten

paths down which it may go—and that only one of these leads to food, or

whatever else represents success in the case in question. Then the successful

movement always occurs during the animal's attempts, whereas each of the

others, on the average, occurs in only half the attempts. Thus the tendency to

repeat  a  previous  performance  (which  is  easily  explicable  without  the

intervention of "consciousness") leads to a greater emphasis on the successfulmovement than on any other, and in time causes it alone to be performed.

The  objection  to  this  view,  if  taken  as  the  sole  explanation,  is  that  on

improvement ought to set in till after the SECOND trial, whereas experiment

shows that already at the second attempt the animal does better than the first

time. Something further is, therefore, required to account for the genesis of

habit from random movements; but I see no reason to suppose that what is

further required involves "consciousness."

  Mr.  Thorndike  (op.  cit.,  p.  244)  formulates  two  "provisional  laws  of

acquired behaviour or learning," as follows:

  "The  Law  of  Effect  is  that:  Of  several  responses  made  to  the  same

situation, those which are accompanied or closely followed by satisfaction to

the animal will, other things being equal, be more firmly connected with the

situation, so that, when it recurs, they will be more likely to recur; those

which are accompanied or closely followed by discomfort to the animal will,

other things being equal, have their connections with that situation weakened,

so  that,  when  it  recurs,  they  will  be  less  likely  to  occur.  The  greater  the

satisfaction or discomfort, the greater the strengthening or weakening of the

bond.

  "The Law of Exercise is that: Any response to a situation will, other things

being equal, be more strongly connected with the situation in proportion to

the  number  of  times  it  has  been  connected  with  that  situation  and  to  the

average vigour and duration of the connections."

  With the explanation to be presently given of the meaning of "satisfaction"

and "discomfort," there seems every reason to accept these two laws.

  What is true of animals, as regards instinct and habit, is equally true of

men. But the higher we rise in the evolutionary scale, broadly speaking, the

greater becomes the power of learning, and the fewer are the occasions when

pure instinct is exhibited unmodified in adult life. This applies with great

force to man, so much so that some have thought instinct less important in the

life  of  man  than  in  that  of  animals.  This,  however,  would  be  a  mistake.

Learning  is  only  possible  when  instinct  supplies  the  driving-force.  The

animals  in  cages,  which  gradually  learn  to  get  out,  perform  random

movements  at  first,  which  are  purely  instinctive.  But  for  these  random

movements,  they  would  never  acquire  the  experience  which  afterwards

enables them to produce the right movement. (This is partly questioned by

Hobhouse*—wrongly, I think.) Similarly, children learning to talk make allsorts of sounds, until one day the right sound comes by accident. It is clear

that  the  original  making  of  random  sounds,  without  which  speech  would

never be learnt, is instinctive. I think we may say the same of all the habits

and aptitudes that we acquire in all of them there has been present throughout

some instinctive activity, prompting at first rather inefficient movements, but

supplying the driving force while more and more effective methods are being

acquired. A cat which is hungry smells fish, and goes to the larder. This is a

thoroughly efficient method when there is fish in the larder, and it is often

successfully practised by children. But in later life it is found that merely

going to the larder does not cause fish to be there; after a series of random

movements it is found that this result is to be caused by going to the City in

the morning and coming back in the evening. No one would have guessed a

priori that this movement of a middle-aged man's body would cause fish to

come out of the sea into his larder, but experience shows that it does, and the

middle-aged man therefore continues to go to the City, just as the cat in the

cage continues to lift the latch when it has once found it. Of course, in actual

fact,  human  learning  is  rendered  easier,  though  psychologically  more

complex,  through  language;  but  at  bottom  language  does  not  alter  the

essential character of learning, or of the part played by instinct in promoting

learning. Language, however, is a subject upon which I do not wish to speak

until a later lecture.* "Mind in Evolution" (Macmillan, 1915), pp. 236-237.

  The popular conception of instinct errs by imagining it to be infallible and

preternaturally wise, as well as incapable of modification. This is a complete

delusion. Instinct, as a rule, is very rough and ready, able to achieve its result

under ordinary circumstances, but easily misled by anything unusual. Chicks

follow  their  mother  by  instinct,  but  when  they  are  quite  young  they  will

follow  with  equal  readiness  any  moving  object  remotely  resembling  their

mother,  or  even  a  human  being  (James,  "Psychology,"  ii,  396).  Bergson,

quoting Fabre, has made play with the supposed extraordinary accuracy of

the solitary wasp Ammophila, which lays its eggs in a caterpillar. On this

subject I will quote from Drever's "Instinct in Man," p. 92:

  "According  to  Fabre's  observations,  which  Bergson  accepts,  the

Ammophila stings its prey EXACTLY and UNERRINGLY in EACH of the

nervous  centres.  The  result  is  that  the  caterpillar  is  paralyzed,  but  not

immediately  killed,  the  advantage  of  this  being  that  the  larva  cannot  be

injured by any movement of the caterpillar, upon which the egg is deposited,

and is provided with fresh meat when the time comes.

  "Now Dr. and Mrs. Peckham have shown that the sting of the wasp is

NOT  UNERRING,  as  Fabre  alleges,  that  the  number  of  stings  is  NOT

CONSTANT,  that  sometimes  the  caterpillar  is  NOT  PARALYZED,  and

sometimes  it  is  KILLED  OUTRIGHT,  and  that  THE  DIFFERENT

CIRCUMSTANCES DO NOT APPARENTLY MAKE ANY DIFFERENCE

TO  THE  LARVA,  which  is  not  injured  by  slight  movements  of  the

caterpillar, nor by consuming food decomposed rather than fresh caterpillar."

  This illustrates how love of the marvellous may mislead even so careful an

observer as Fabre and so eminent a philosopher as Bergson.

  In  the  same  chapter  of  Dr.  Drever's  book  there  are  some  interesting

examples of the mistakes made by instinct. I will quote one as a sample:

  "The larva of the Lomechusa beetle eats the young of the ants, in whose

nest it is reared. Nevertheless, the ants tend the Lomechusa larvae with the

same care they bestow on their own young. Not only so, but they apparently

discover that the methods of feeding, which suit their own larvae, would

prove fatal to the guests, and accordingly they change their whole system of

nursing" (loc. cit., p. 106).

  Semon ("Die Mneme," pp. 207-9) gives a good illustration of an instinct

growing wiser through experience. He relates how hunters attract stags byimitating the sounds of other members of their species, male or female, but

find that the older a stag becomes the more difficult it is to deceive him, and

the more accurate the imitation has to be. The literature of instinct is vast, and

illustrations  might  be  multiplied  indefinitely.  The  main  points  as  regards

instinct, which need to be emphasized as against the popular conceptions of

it, are:

  (1)  That  instinct  requires  no  prevision  of  the  biological  end  which  it

serves;

  (2)  That  instinct  is  only  adapted  to  achieve  this  end  in  the  usual

circumstances of the animal in question, and has no more precision than is

necessary for success AS A RULE;

  (3) That processes initiated by instinct often come to be performed better

after experience;

  (4) That instinct supplies the impulses to experimental movements which

are required for the process of learning;

  (5) That instincts in their nascent stages are easily modifiable, and capable

of being attached to various sorts of objects.

  All  the  above  characteristics  of  instinct  can  be  established  by  purely

external observation, except the fact that instinct does not require prevision.

This,  though  not  strictly  capable  of  being  PROVED  by  observation,  is

irresistibly suggested by the most obvious phenomena. Who can believe, for

example,  that  a  new-born  baby  is  aware  of  the  necessity  of  food  for

preserving  life?  Or  that  insects,  in  laying  eggs,  are  concerned  for  the

preservation of their species? The essence of instinct, one might say, is that it

provides  a  mechanism  for  acting  without  foresight  in  a  manner  which  is

usually advantageous biologically. It is partly for this reason that it is so

important to understand the fundamental position of instinct in prompting

both animal and human behaviour.

                    LECTURE III. DESIRE AND FEELING

  Desire is a subject upon which, if I am not mistaken, true views can only

be  arrived  at  by  an  almost  complete  reversal  of  the  ordinary  unreflecting

opinion. It is natural to regard desire as in its essence an attitude towards

something which is imagined, not actual; this something is called the END or

OBJECT of the desire, and is said to be the PURPOSE of any action resulting

from the desire. We think of the content of the desire as being just like the

content  of  a  belief,  while  the  attitude  taken  up  towards  the  content  is

different. According to this theory, when we say: "I hope it will rain," or "I

expect it will rain," we express, in the first case, a desire, and in the second, a

belief, with an identical content, namely, the image of rain. It would be easy

to say that, just as belief is one kind of feeling in relation to this content, so

desire is another kind. According to this view, what comes first in desire is

something imagined, with a specific feeling related to it, namely, that specific

feeling  which  we  call  "desiring"  it.  The  discomfort  associated  with

unsatisfied desire, and the actions which aim at satisfying desire, are, in this

view, both of them effects of the desire. I think it is fair to say that this is a

view against which common sense would not rebel; nevertheless, I believe it

to be radically mistaken. It cannot be refuted logically, but various facts can

be adduced which make it gradually less simple and plausible, until at last it

turns out to be easier to abandon it wholly and look at the matter in a totally

different way.

  The first set of facts to be adduced against the common sense view of

desire are those studied by psycho-analysis. In all human beings, but most

markedly in those suffering from hysteria and certain forms of insanity, we

find what are called "unconscious" desires, which are commonly regarded as

showing  self-deception.  Most  psycho-analysts  pay  little  attention  to  the

analysis of desire, being interested in discovering by observation what it is

that people desire, rather than in discovering what actually constitutes desire.

I think the strangeness of what they report would be greatly diminished if it

were expressed in the language of a behaviourist theory of desire, rather than

in the language of every-day beliefs. The general description of the sort of

phenomena that bear on our present question is as follows: A person states

that  his  desires  are  so-and-so,  and  that  it  is  these  desires  that  inspire  his

actions; but the outside observer perceives that his actions are such as torealize  quite  different  ends  from  those  which  he  avows,  and  that  these

different ends are such as he might be expected to desire. Generally they are

less virtuous than his professed desires, and are therefore less agreeable to

profess than these are. It is accordingly supposed that they really exist as

desires for ends, but in a subconscious part of the mind, which the patient

refuses to admit into consciousness for fear of having to think ill of himself.

There are no doubt many cases to which such a supposition is applicable

without  obvious  artificiality.  But  the  deeper  the  Freudians  delve  into  the

underground  regions  of  instinct,  the  further  they  travel  from  anything

resembling conscious desire, and the less possible it becomes to believe that

only positive self-deception conceals from us that we really wish for things

which are abhorrent to our explicit life.

  In the cases in question we have a conflict between the outside observer

and the patient's consciousness. The whole tendency of psycho-analysis is to

trust the outside observer rather than the testimony of introspection. I believe

this  tendency  to  be  entirely  right,  but  to  demand  a  re-statement  of  what

constitutes  desire,  exhibiting  it  as  a  causal  law  of  our  actions,  not  as

something actually existing in our minds.

  But let us first get a clearer statement of the essential characteristic of the

phenomena.

  A person, we find, states that he desires a certain end A, and that he is

acting with a view to achieving it. We observe, however, that his actions are

such as are likely to achieve a quite different end B, and that B is the sort of

end that often seems to be aimed at by animals and savages, though civilized

people are supposed to have discarded it. We sometimes find also a whole set

of false beliefs, of such a kind as to persuade the patient that his actions are

really a means to A, when in fact they are a means to B. For example, we

have  an  impulse  to  inflict  pain  upon  those  whom  we  hate;  we  therefore

believe that they are wicked, and that punishment will reform them. This

belief enables us to act upon the impulse to inflict pain, while believing that

we are acting upon the desire to lead sinners to repentance. It is for this

reason that the criminal law has been in all ages more severe than it would

have been if the impulse to ameliorate the criminal had been what really

inspired it. It seems simple to explain such a state of affairs as due to "self-

deception," but this explanation is often mythical. Most people, in thinking

about punishment, have had no more need to hide their vindictive impulsesfrom themselves than they have had to hide the exponential theorem. Our

impulses are not patent to a casual observation, but are only to be discovered

by a scientific study of our actions, in the course of which we must regard

ourselves  as  objectively  as  we  should  the  motions  of  the  planets  or  the

chemical reactions of a new element.

  The study of animals reinforces this conclusion, and is in many ways the

best preparation for the analysis of desire. In animals we are not troubled by

the  disturbing  influence  of  ethical  considerations.  In  dealing  with  human

beings, we are perpetually distracted by being told that such-and-such a view

is gloomy or cynical or pessimistic: ages of human conceit have built up such

a  vast  myth  as  to  our  wisdom  and  virtue  that  any  intrusion  of  the  mere

scientific desire to know the facts is instantly resented by those who cling to

comfortable illusions. But no one cares whether animals are virtuous or not,

and no one is under the delusion that they are rational. Moreover, we do not

expect  them  to  be  so  "conscious,"  and  are  prepared  to  admit  that  their

instincts prompt useful actions without any prevision of the ends which they

achieve. For all these reasons, there is much in the analysis of mind which is

more easily discovered by the study of animals than by the observation of

human beings.

  We all think that, by watching the behaviour of animals, we can discover

more or less what they desire. If this is the case—and I fully agree that it is—

desire must be capable of being exhibited in actions, for it is only the actions

of animals that we can observe. They MAY have minds in which all sorts of

things  take  place,  but  we  can  know  nothing  about  their  minds  except  by

means of inferences from their actions; and the more such inferences are

examined,  the  more  dubious  they  appear.  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that

actions alone must be the test of the desires of animals. From this it is an easy

step to the conclusion that an animal's desire is nothing but a characteristic of

a certain series of actions, namely, those which would be commonly regarded

as inspired by the desire in question. And when it has been shown that this

view affords a satisfactory account of animal desires, it is not difficult to see

that the same explanation is applicable to the desires of human beings.

  We  judge  easily  from  the  behaviour  of  an  animal  of  a  familiar  kind

whether it is hungry or thirsty, or pleased or displeased, or inquisitive or

terrified. The verification of our judgment, so far as verification is possible,

must be derived from the immediately succeeding actions of the animal. Mostpeople would say that they infer first something about the animal's state of

mind—whether it is hungry or thirsty and so on—and thence derive their

expectations  as  to  its  subsequent  conduct.  But  this  detour  through  the

animal's  supposed  mind  is  wholly  unnecessary.  We  can  say  simply:  The

animal's behaviour during the last minute has had those characteristics which

distinguish what is called "hunger," and it is likely that its actions during the

next  minute  will  be  similar  in  this  respect,  unless  it  finds  food,  or  is

interrupted by a stronger impulse, such as fear. An animal which is hungry is

restless, it goes to the places where food is often to be found, it sniffs with its

nose or peers with its eyes or otherwise increases the sensitiveness of its

sense-organs; as soon as it is near enough to food for its sense-organs to be

affected, it goes to it with all speed and proceeds to eat; after which, if the

quantity of food has been sufficient, its whole demeanour changes it may

very likely lie down and go to sleep. These things and others like them are

observable phenomena distinguishing a hungry animal from one which is not

hungry. The characteristic mark by which we recognize a series of actions

which  display  hunger  is  not  the  animal's  mental  state,  which  we  cannot

observe, but something in its bodily behaviour; it is this observable trait in

the bodily behaviour that I am proposing to call "hunger," not some possibly

mythical and certainly unknowable ingredient of the animal's mind.

  Generalizing what occurs in the case of hunger, we may say that what we

call a desire in an animal is always displayed in a cycle of actions having

certain fairly well marked characteristics. There is first a state of activity,

consisting,  with  qualifications  to  be  mentioned  presently,  of  movements

likely to have a certain result; these movements, unless interrupted, continue

until  the  result  is  achieved,  after  which  there  is  usually  a  period  of

comparative quiescence. A cycle of actions of this sort has marks by which it

is broadly distinguished from the motions of dead matter. The most notable

of these marks are—(1) the appropriateness of the actions for the realization

of a certain result; (2) the continuance of action until that result has been

achieved. Neither of these can be pressed beyond a point. Either may be (a)

to some extent present in dead matter, and (b) to a considerable extent absent

in animals, while vegetable are intermediate, and display only a much fainter

form of the behaviour which leads us to attribute desire to animals. (a) One

might say rivers "desire" the sea water, roughly speaking, remains in restless

motion until it reaches either the sea or a place from which it cannot issuewithout going uphill, and therefore we might say that this is what it wishes

while  it  is  flowing.  We  do  not  say  so,  because  we  can  account  for  the

behaviour  of  water  by  the  laws  of  physics;  and  if  we  knew  more  about

animals, we might equally cease to attribute desires to them, since we might

find physical and chemical reactions sufficient to account for their behaviour.

(b) Many of the movements of animals do not exhibit the characteristics of

the cycles which seem to embody desire. There are first of all the movements

which are "mechanical," such as slipping and falling, where ordinary physical

forces operate upon the animal's body almost as if it were dead matter. An

animal which falls over a cliff may make a number of desperate struggles

while it is in the air, but its centre of gravity will move exactly as it would if

the animal were dead. In this case, if the animal is killed at the end of the fall,

we have, at first sight, just the characteristics of a cycle of actions embodying

desire,  namely,  restless  movement  until  the  ground  is  reached,  and  then

quiescence. Nevertheless, we feel no temptation to say that the animal desired

what  occurred,  partly  because  of  the  obviously  mechanical  nature  of  the

whole occurrence, partly because, when an animal survives a fall, it tends not

to repeat the experience.

  There may be other reasons also, but of them I do not wish to speak yet.

Besides mechanical movements, there are interrupted movements, as when a

bird, on its way to eat your best peas, is frightened away by the boy whom

you  are  employing  for  that  purpose.  If  interruptions  are  frequent  and

completion of cycles rare, the characteristics by which cycles are observed

may become so blurred as to be almost unrecognizable. The result of these

various  considerations  is  that  the  differences  between  animals  and  dead

matter,  when  we  confine  ourselves  to  external  unscientific  observation  of

integral behaviour, are a matter of degree and not very precise. It is for this

reason that it has always been possible for fanciful people to maintain that

even stocks and stones have some vague kind of soul. The evidence that

animals have souls is so very shaky that, if it is assumed to be conclusive, one

might just as well go a step further and extend the argument by analogy to all

matter. Nevertheless, in spite of vagueness and doubtful cases, the existence

of cycles in the behaviour of animals is a broad characteristic by which they

are  prima  facie  distinguished  from  ordinary  matter;  and  I  think  it  is  this

characteristic which leads us to attribute desires to animals, since it makes

their behaviour resemble what we do when (as we say) we are acting fromdesire.

  I  shall  adopt  the  following  definitions  for  describing  the  behaviour  of

animals:

  A "behaviour-cycle" is a series of voluntary or reflex movements of an

animal, tending to cause a certain result, and continuing until that result is

caused,  unless  they  are  interrupted  by  death,  accident,  or  some  new

behaviour-cycle.  (Here  "accident"  may  be  defined  as  the  intervention  of

purely physical laws causing mechanical movements.)

  The "purpose" of a behaviour-cycle is the result which brings it to an end,

normally  by  a  condition  of  temporary  quiescence-provided  there  is  no

interruption.

  An animal is said to "desire" the purpose of a behaviour cycle while the

behaviour-cycle is in progress.

  I  believe  these  definitions  to  be  adequate  also  to  human  purposes  and

desires, but for the present I am only occupied with animals and with what

can be learnt by external observation. I am very anxious that no ideas should

be attached to the words "purpose" and "desire" beyond those involved in the

above definitions.

  We have not so far considered what is the nature of the initial stimulus to a

behaviour-cycle. Yet it is here that the usual view of desire seems on the

strongest ground. The hungry animal goes on making movements until it gets

food; it seems natural, therefore, to suppose that the idea of food is present

throughout the process, and that the thought of the end to be achieved sets the

whole process in motion. Such a view, however, is obviously untenable in

many  cases,  especially  where  instinct  is  concerned.  Take,  for  example,

reproduction and the rearing of the young. Birds mate, build a nest, lay eggs

in it, sit on the eggs, feed the young birds, and care for them until they are

fully grown. It is totally impossible to suppose that this series of actions,

which constitutes one behaviour-cycle, is inspired by any prevision of the

end, at any rate the first time it is performed.* We must suppose that the

stimulus to the performance of each act is an impulsion from behind, not an

attraction from the future. The bird does what it does, at each stage, because

it has an impulse to that particular action, not because it perceives that the

whole cycle of actions will contribute to the preservation of the species. The

same considerations apply to other instincts. A hungry animal feels restless,

and is led by instinctive impulses to perform the movements which give itnourishment;  but  the  act  of  seeking  food  is  not  sufficient  evidence  from

which to conclude that the animal has the thought of food in its "mind."

* For evidence as to birds' nests, cf. Semon, "Die Mneme," 

pp. 209, 210.

  Coming  now  to  human  beings,  and  to  what  we  know  about  our  own

actions, it seems clear that what, with us, sets a behaviour-cycle in motion is

some  sensation  of  the  sort  which  we  call  disagreeable.  Take  the  case  of

hunger:  we  have  first  an  uncomfortable  feeling  inside,  producing  a

disinclination to sit still, a sensitiveness to savoury smells, and an attraction

towards any food that there may be in our neighbourhood. At any moment

during this process we may become aware that we are hungry, in the sense of

saying  to  ourselves,  "I  am  hungry";  but  we  may  have  been  acting  with

reference to food for some time before this moment. While we are talking or

reading, we may eat in complete unconsciousness; but we perform the actions

of eating just as we should if we were conscious, and they cease when our

hunger  is  appeased.  What  we  call  "consciousness"  seems  to  be  a  mere

spectator of the process; even when it issues orders, they are usually, like

those of a wise parent, just such as would have been obeyed even if they had

not been given. This view may seem at first exaggerated, but the more our so-

called volitions and their causes are examined, the more it is forced upon us.

The part played by words in all this is complicated, and a potent source of

confusions; I shall return to it later. For the present, I am still concerned with

primitive desire, as it exists in man, but in the form in which man shows his

affinity to his animal ancestors.

  Conscious desire is made up partly of what is essential to desire, partly of

beliefs as to what we want. It is important to be clear as to the part which

does not consist of beliefs.

  The primitive non-cognitive element in desire seems to be a push, not a

pull, an impulsion away from the actual, rather than an attraction towards the

ideal. Certain sensations and other mental occurrences have a property which

we call discomfort; these cause such bodily movements as are likely to lead

to their cessation. When the discomfort ceases, or even when it appreciably

diminishes,  we  have  sensations  possessing  a  property  which  we  call

PLEASURE. Pleasurable sensations either stimulate no action at all, or at

most stimulate such action as is likely to prolong them. I shall return shortly

to the consideration of what discomfort and pleasure are in themselves; forthe present, it is their connection with action and desire that concerns us.

Abandoning momentarily the standpoint of behaviourism, we may presume

that  hungry  animals  experience  sensations  involving  discomfort,  and

stimulating such movements as seem likely to bring them to the food which is

outside  the  cages.  When  they  have  reached  the  food  and  eaten  it,  their

discomfort  ceases  and  their  sensations  become  pleasurable.  It  SEEMS,

mistakenly, as if the animals had had this situation in mind throughout, when

in  fact  they  have  been  continually  pushed  by  discomfort.  And  when  an

animal is reflective, like some men, it comes to think that it had the final

situation in mind throughout; sometimes it comes to know what situation will

bring satisfaction, so that in fact the discomfort does bring the thought of

what will allay it. Nevertheless the sensation involving discomfort remains

the prime mover.

  This brings us to the question of the nature of discomfort and pleasure.

Since Kant it has been customary to recognize three great divisions of mental

phenomena,  which  are  typified  by  knowledge,  desire  and  feeling,  where

"feeling" is used to mean pleasure and discomfort. Of course, "knowledge" is

too definite a word: the states of mind concerned are grouped together as

"cognitive," and are to embrace not only beliefs, but perceptions, doubts, and

the  understanding  of  concepts.  "Desire,"  also,  is  narrower  than  what  is

intended: for example, WILL is to be included in this category, and in fact

every  thing  that  involves  any  kind  of  striving,  or  "conation"  as  it  is

technically  called.  I  do  not  myself  believe  that  there  is  any  value  in  this

threefold division of the contents of mind. I believe that sensations (including

images) supply all the "stuff" of the mind, and that everything else can be

analysed into groups of sensations related in various ways, or characteristics

of  sensations  or  of  groups  of  sensations.  As  regards  belief,  I  shall  give

grounds for this view in later lectures. As regards desires, I have given some

grounds in this lecture. For the present, it is pleasure and discomfort that

concern us. There are broadly three theories that might be held in regard to

them.  We  may  regard  them  as  separate  existing  items  in  those  who

experience them, or we may regard them as intrinsic qualities of sensations

and other mental occurrences, or we may regard them as mere names for the

causal characteristics of the occurrences which are uncomfortable or pleasant.

The  first  of  these  theories,  namely,  that  which  regards  discomfort  and

pleasure  as  actual  contents  in  those  who  experience  them,  has,  I  think,nothing conclusive to be said in its favour.* It is suggested chiefly by an

ambiguity  in  the  word  "pain,"  which  has  misled  many  people,  including

Berkeley,  whom  it  supplied  with  one  of  his  arguments  for  subjective

idealism. We may use "pain" as the opposite of "pleasure," and "painful" as

the opposite of "pleasant," or we may use "pain" to mean a certain sort of

sensation, on a level with the sensations of heat and cold and touch. The latter

use of the word has prevailed in psychological literature, and it is now no

longer  used  as  the  opposite  of  "pleasure."  Dr.  H.  Head,  in  a  recent

publication, has stated this distinction as follows:**

* Various arguments in its favour are advanced by A. 

Wohlgemuth, "On the feelings and their neural correlate, 

with an examination of the nature of pain," "British Journal 

of Psychology," viii, 4. (1917). But as these arguments are 

largely a reductio ad absurdum of other theories, among 

which that which I am advocating is not included, I cannot 

regard them as establishing their contention. 


** "Sensation and the Cerebral Cortex," "Brain," vol. xli, 

part ii (September, 1918), p. 90. Cf. also Wohlgemuth, loc. 

cit. pp. 437, 450.

  "It is necessary at the outset to distinguish clearly between 'discomfort' and

'pain.' Pain is a distinct sensory quality equivalent to heat and cold, and its

intensity  can  be  roughly  graded  according  to  the  force  expended  in

stimulation.  Discomfort,  on  the  other  hand,  is  that  feeling-tone  which  is

directly opposed to pleasure. It may accompany sensations not in themselves

essentially painful; as for instance that produced by tickling the sole of the

foot.  The  reaction  produced  by  repeated  pricking  contains  both  these

elements; for it evokes that sensory quality known as pain, accompanied by a

disagreeable  feeling-tone,  which  we  have  called  discomfort.  On  the  other

hand,  excessive  pressure,  except  when  applied  directly  over  some  nerve-

trunk, tends to excite more discomfort than pain."

  The  confusion  between  discomfort  and  pain  has  made  people  regard

discomfort as a more substantial thing than it is, and this in turn has reacted

upon the view taken of pleasure, since discomfort and pleasure are evidently

on a level in this respect. As soon as discomfort is clearly distinguished from

the  sensation  of  pain,  it  becomes  more  natural  to  regard  discomfort  andpleasure as properties of mental occurrences than to regard them as separate

mental occurrences on their own account. I shall therefore dismiss the view

that they are separate mental occurrences, and regard them as properties of

such experiences as would be called respectively uncomfortable and pleasant.

  It  remains  to  be  examined  whether  they  are  actual  qualities  of  such

occurrences, or are merely differences as to causal properties. I do not myself

see any way of deciding this question; either view seems equally capable of

accounting for the facts. If this is true, it is safer to avoid the assumption that

there are such intrinsic qualities of mental occurrences as are in question, and

to  assume  only  the  causal  differences  which  are  undeniable.  Without

condemning the intrinsic theory, we can define discomfort and pleasure as

consisting in causal properties, and say only what will hold on either of the

two theories. Following this course, we shall say:

  "Discomfort"  is  a  property  of  a  sensation  or  other  mental  occurrence,

consisting in the fact that the occurrence in question stimulates voluntary or

reflex  movements  tending  to  produce  some  more  or  less  definite  change

involving the cessation of the occurrence.

  "Pleasure"  is  a  property  of  a  sensation  or  other  mental  occurrence,

consisting in the fact that the occurrence in question either does not stimulate

any voluntary or reflex movement, or, if it does, stimulates only such as tend

to prolong the occurrence in question.*

* Cf. Thorndike, op. cit., p. 243.

  "Conscious" desire, which we have now to consider, consists of desire in

the sense hitherto discussed, together with a true belief as to its "purpose," i.e.

as  to  the  state  of  affairs  that  will  bring  quiescence  with  cessation  of  the

discomfort. If our theory of desire is correct, a belief as to its purpose may

very  well  be  erroneous,  since  only  experience  can  show  what  causes  a

discomfort to cease. When the experience needed is common and simple, as

in the case of hunger, a mistake is not very probable. But in other cases—e.g.

erotic desire in those who have had little or no experience of its satisfaction—

mistakes are to be expected, and do in fact very often occur. The practice of

inhibiting  impulses,  which  is  to  a  great  extent  necessary  to  civilized  life,

makes mistakes easier, by preventing experience of the actions to which a

desire  would  otherwise  lead,  and  by  often  causing  the  inhibited  impulses

themselves  to  be  unnoticed  or  quickly  forgotten.  The  perfectly  natural

mistakes which thus arise constitute a large proportion of what is, mistakenlyin part, called self-deception, and attributed by Freud to the "censor."

  But there is a further point which needs emphasizing, namely, that a belief

that something is desired has often a tendency to cause the very desire that is

believed in. It is this fact that makes the effect of "consciousness" on desire

so complicated.

  When we believe that we desire a certain state of affairs, that often tends

to cause a real desire for it. This is due partly to the influence of words upon

our  emotions,  in  rhetoric  for  example,  and  partly  to  the  general  fact  that

discomfort  normally  belongs  to  the  belief  that  we  desire  such-and-such  a

thing that we do not possess. Thus what was originally a false opinion as to

the object of a desire acquires a certain truth: the false opinion generates a

secondary subsidiary desire, which nevertheless becomes real. Let us take an

illustration.  Suppose  you  have  been  jilted  in  a  way  which  wounds  your

vanity. Your natural impulsive desire will be of the sort expressed in Donne's

poem:

When by thy scorn, O Murderess, I am dead,

  in which he explains how he will haunt the poor lady as a ghost, and

prevent her from enjoying a moment's peace. But two things stand in the way

of your expressing yourself so naturally: on the one hand, your vanity, which

will  not  acknowledge  how  hard  you  are  hit;  on  the  other  hand,  your

conviction  that  you  are  a  civilized  and  humane  person,  who  could  not

possibly indulge so crude a desire as revenge. You will therefore experience a

restlessness which will at first seem quite aimless, but will finally resolve

itself in a conscious desire to change your profession, or go round the world,

or  conceal  your  identity  and  live  in  Putney,  like  Arnold  Bennett's  hero.

Although  the  prime  cause  of  this  desire  is  a  false  judgment  as  to  your

previous  unconscious  desire,  yet  the  new  conscious  desire  has  its  own

derivative  genuineness,  and  may  influence  your  actions  to  the  extent  of

sending you round the world. The initial mistake, however, will have effects

of  two  kinds.  First,  in  uncontrolled  moments,  under  the  influence  of

sleepiness or drink or delirium, you will say things calculated to injure the

faithless deceiver. Secondly, you will find travel disappointing, and the East

less fascinating than you had hoped—unless, some day, you hear that the

wicked one has in turn been jilted. If this happens, you will believe that you

feel sincere sympathy, but you will suddenly be much more delighted than

before with the beauties of tropical islands or the wonders of Chinese art. Asecondary desire, derived from a false judgment as to a primary desire, has its

own power of influencing action, and is therefore a real desire according to

our definition. But it has not the same power as a primary desire of bringing

thorough  satisfaction  when  it  is  realized;  so  long  as  the  primary  desire

remains unsatisfied, restlessness continues in spite of the secondary desire's

success. Hence arises a belief in the vanity of human wishes: the vain wishes

are those that are secondary, but mistaken beliefs prevent us from realizing

that they are secondary.

  What may, with some propriety, be called self-deception arises through

the operation of desires for beliefs. We desire many things which it is not in

our power to achieve: that we should be universally popular and admired, that

our work should be the wonder of the age, and that the universe should be so

ordered as to bring ultimate happiness to all, though not to our enemies until

they have repented and been purified by suffering. Such desires are too large

to be achieved through our own efforts. But it is found that a considerable

portion of the satisfaction which these things would bring us if they were

realized is to be achieved by the much easier operation of believing that they

are or will be realized. This desire for beliefs, as opposed to desire for the

actual facts, is a particular case of secondary desire, and, like all secondary

desire  its  satisfaction  does  not  lead  to  a  complete  cessation  of  the  initial

discomfort. Nevertheless, desire for beliefs, as opposed to desire for facts, is

exceedingly potent both individually and socially. According to the form of

belief  desired,  it  is  called  vanity,  optimism,  or  religion.  Those  who  have

sufficient power usually imprison or put to death any one who tries to shake

their faith in their own excellence or in that of the universe; it is for this

reason that seditious libel and blasphemy have always been, and still are,

criminal offences.

  It is very largely through desires for beliefs that the primitive nature of

desire has become so hidden, and that the part played by consciousness has

been so confusing and so exaggerated.

  We may now summarize our analysis of desire and feeling.

  A mental occurrence of any kind—sensation, image, belief, or emotion—

may be a cause of a series of actions, continuing, unless interrupted, until

some more or less definite state of affairs is realized. Such a series of actions

we call a "behaviour-cycle." The degree of definiteness may vary greatly:

hunger requires only food in general, whereas the sight of a particular pieceof food raises a desire which requires the eating of that piece of food. The

property of causing such a cycle of occurrences is called "discomfort"; the

property  of  the  mental  occurrences  in  which  the  cycle  ends  is  called

"pleasure." The actions constituting the cycle must not be purely mechanical,

i.e. they must be bodily movements in whose causation the special properties

of nervous tissue are involved. The cycle ends in a condition of quiescence,

or of such action as tends only to preserve the status quo. The state of affairs

in which this condition of quiescence is achieved is called the "purpose" of

the cycle, and the initial mental occurrence involving discomfort is called a

"desire"  for  the  state  of  affairs  that  brings  quiescence.  A  desire  is  called

"conscious" when it is accompanied by a true belief as to the state of affairs

that will bring quiescence; otherwise it is called "unconscious." All primitive

desire  is  unconscious,  and  in  human  beings  beliefs  as  to  the  purposes  of

desires  are  often  mistaken.  These  mistaken  beliefs  generate  secondary

desires, which cause various interesting complications in the psychology of

human desire, without fundamentally altering the character which it shares

with animal desire.

          LECTURE IV. INFLUENCE OF PAST HISTORY ON

              PRESENT OCCURRENCES IN LIVING

    ORGANISMS

  In this lecture we shall be concerned with a very general characteristic

which broadly, though not absolutely, distinguishes the behaviour of living

organisms from that of dead matter. The characteristic in question is this:

  The response of an organism to a given stimulus is very often dependent

upon the past history of the organism, and not merely upon the stimulus and

the HITHERTO DISCOVERABLE present state of the organism.

  This characteristic is embodied in the saying "a burnt child fears the fire."

The burn may have left no visible traces, yet it modifies the reaction of the

child in the presence of fire. It is customary to assume that, in such cases, the

past operates by modifying the structure of the brain, not directly. I have no

wish to suggest that this hypothesis is false; I wish only to point out that it is

a hypothesis. At the end of the present lecture I shall examine the grounds in

its  favour.  If  we  confine  ourselves  to  facts  which  have  been  actually

observed,  we  must  say  that  past  occurrences,  in  addition  to  the  present

stimulus and the present ascertainable condition of the organism, enter into

the causation of the response.

  The  characteristic  is  not  wholly  confined  to  living  organisms.  For

example,  magnetized  steel  looks  just  like  steel  which  has  not  been

magnetized, but its behaviour is in some ways different. In the case of dead

matter, however, such phenomena are less frequent and important than in the

case  of  living  organisms,  and  it  is  far  less  difficult  to  invent  satisfactory

hypotheses as to the microscopic changes of structure which mediate between

the past occurrence and the present changed response. In the case of living

organisms, practically everything that is distinctive both of their physical and

of their mental behaviour is bound up with this persistent influence of the

past. Further, speaking broadly, the change in response is usually of a kind

that is biologically advantageous to the organism.

  Following  a  suggestion  derived  from  Semon  ("Die  Mneme,"  Leipzig,

1904; 2nd edition, 1908, English translation, Allen & Unwin, 1921; "Die

mnemischen  Empfindungen,"  Leipzig,  1909),  we  will  give  the  name  of

"mnemic phenomena" to those responses of an organism which, so far as

hitherto observed facts are concerned, can only be brought under causal lawsby including past occurrences in the history of the organism as part of the

causes of the present response. I do not mean merely—what would always be

the case—that past occurrences are part of a CHAIN of causes leading to the

present event. I mean that, in attempting to state the PROXIMATE cause of

the present event, some past event or events must be included, unless we take

refuge  in  hypothetical  modifications  of  brain  structure.  For  example:  you

smell peat-smoke, and you recall some occasion when you smelt it before.

The cause of your recollection, so far as hitherto observable phenomena are

concerned,  consists  both  of  the  peat  smoke  (present  stimulus)  and  of  the

former occasion (past experience). The same stimulus will not produce the

same recollection in another man who did not share your former experience,

although the former experience left no OBSERVABLE traces in the structure

of the brain. According to the maxim "same cause, same effect," we cannot

therefore regard the peat-smoke alone as the cause of your recollection, since

it does not have the same effect in other cases. The cause of your recollection

must  be  both  the  peat-smoke  and  the  past  occurrence.  Accordingly  your

recollection is an instance of what we are calling "mnemic phenomena."

  Before  going  further,  it  will  be  well  to  give  illustrations  of  different

classes of mnemic phenomena.

  (a) ACQUIRED HABITS.—In Lecture II we saw how animals can learn

by experience how to get out of cages or mazes, or perform other actions

which are useful to them but not provided for by their instincts alone. A cat

which is put into a cage of which it has had experience behaves differently

from the way in which it behaved at first. We can easily invent hypotheses,

which are quite likely to be true, as to connections in the brain caused by past

experience, and themselves causing the different response. But the observable

fact is that the stimulus of being in the cage produces differing results with

repetition, and that the ascertainable cause of the cat's behaviour is not merely

the cage and its own ascertainable organization, but also its past history in

regard to the cage. From our present point of view, the matter is independent

of the question whether the cat's behaviour is due to some mental fact called

"knowledge," or displays a merely bodily habit. Our habitual knowledge is

not always in our minds, but is called up by the appropriate stimuli. If we are

asked "What is the capital of France?" we answer "Paris," because of past

experience; the past experience is as essential as the present question in the

causation  of  our  response.  Thus  all  our  habitual  knowledge  consists  ofacquired habits, and comes under the head of mnemic phenomena.

  (b) IMAGES.—I shall have much to say about images in a later lecture;

for the present I am merely concerned with them in so far as they are "copies"

of  past  sensations.  When  you  hear  New  York  spoken  of,  some  image

probably comes into your mind, either of the place itself (if you have been

there), or of some picture of it (if you have not). The image is due to your

past experience, as well as to the present stimulus of the words "New York."

Similarly, the images you have in dreams are all dependent upon your past

experience, as well as upon the present stimulus to dreaming. It is generally

believed that all images, in their simpler parts, are copies of sensations; if so,

their mnemic character is evident. This is important, not only on its own

account, but also because, as we shall see later, images play an essential part

in what is called "thinking."

  (c) ASSOCIATION.—The broad fact of association, on the mental side, is

that when we experience something which we have experienced before, it

tends to call up the context of the former experience. The smell of peat-

smoke recalling a former scene is an instance which we discussed a moment

ago. This is obviously a mnemic phenomenon. There is also a more purely

physical association, which is indistinguishable from physical habit. This is

the kind studied by Mr. Thorndike in animals, where a certain stimulus is

associated with a certain act. This is the sort which is taught to soldiers in

drilling, for example. In such a case there need not be anything mental, but

merely  a  habit  of  the  body.  There  is  no  essential  distinction  between

association and habit, and the observations which we made concerning habit

as a mnemic phenomenon are equally applicable to association.

  (d)  NON-SENSATIONAL  ELEMENTS  IN  PERCEPTION.—When  we

perceive any object of a familiar kind, much of what appears subjectively to

be immediately given is really derived from past experience. When we see an

object, say a penny, we seem to be aware of its "real" shape we have the

impression of something circular, not of something elliptical. In learning to

draw, it is necessary to acquire the art of representing things according to the

sensation, not according to the perception. And the visual appearance is filled

out with feeling of what the object would be like to touch, and so on. This

filling out and supplying of the "real" shape and so on consists of the most

usual correlates of the sensational core in our perception. It may happen that,

in the particular case, the real correlates are unusual; for example, if what weare seeing is a carpet made to look like tiles. If so, the non-sensational part of

our perception will be illusory, i.e. it will supply qualities which the object in

question does not in fact have. But as a rule objects do have the qualities

added by perception, which is to be expected, since experience of what is

usual is the cause of the addition. If our experience had been different, we

should not fill out sensation in the same way, except in so far as the filling

out is instinctive, not acquired. It would seem that, in man, all that makes up

space perception, including the correlation of sight and touch and so on, is

almost entirely acquired. In that case there is a large mnemic element in all

the  common  perceptions  by  means  of  which  we  handle  common  objects.

And, to take another kind of instance, imagine what our astonishment would

be if we were to hear a cat bark or a dog mew. This emotion would be

dependent  upon  past  experience,  and  would  therefore  be  a  mnemic

phenomenon according to the definition.

  (e) MEMORY AS KNOWLEDGE.—The kind of memory of which I am

now  speaking  is  definite  knowledge  of  some  past  event  in  one's  own

experience. From time to time we remember things that have happened to us,

because  something  in  the  present  reminds  us  of  them.  Exactly  the  same

present fact would not call up the same memory if our past experience had

been different. Thus our remembering is caused by—

  (1) The present stimulus,

  (2) The past occurrence.

  It  is  therefore  a  mnemic  phenomenon  according  to  our  definition.  A

definition of "mnemic phenomena" which did not include memory would, of

course,  be  a  bad  one.  The  point  of  the  definition  is  not  that  it  includes

memory, but that it includes it as one of a class of phenomena which embrace

all that is characteristic in the subject matter of psychology.

  (f) EXPERIENCE.—The word "experience" is often used very vaguely.

James, as we saw, uses it to cover the whole primal stuff of the world, but

this usage seems objection able, since, in a purely physical world, things

would  happen  without  there  being  any  experience.  It  is  only  mnemic

phenomena  that  embody  experience.  We  may  say  that  an  animal

"experiences"  an  occurrence  when  this  occurrence  modifies  the  animal's

subsequent  behaviour,  i.e.  when  it  is  the  mnemic  portion  of  the  cause  of

future occurrences in the animal's life. The burnt child that fears the fire has

"experienced" the fire, whereas a stick that has been thrown on and taken offagain has not "experienced" anything, since it offers no more resistance than

before to being thrown on. The essence of "experience" is the modification of

behaviour produced by what is experienced. We might, in fact, define one

chain of experience, or one biography, as a series of occurrences linked by

mnemic causation. I think it is this characteristic, more than any other, that

distinguishes sciences dealing with living organisms from physics.

  The best writer on mnemic phenomena known to me is Richard Semon,

the fundamental part of whose theory I shall endeavour to summarize before

going further:

  When  an  organism,  either  animal  or  plant,  is  subjected  to  a  stimulus,

producing in it some state of excitement, the removal of the stimulus allows it

to return to a condition of equilibrium. But the new state of equilibrium is

different from the old, as may be seen by the changed capacity for reaction.

The  state  of  equilibrium  before  the  stimulus  may  be  called  the  "primary

indifference-state"; that after the cessation of the stimulus, the "secondary

indifference-state."  We  define  the  "engraphic  effect"  of  a  stimulus  as  the

effect  in  making  a  difference  between  the  primary  and  secondary

indifference-states, and this difference itself we define as the "engram" due to

the stimulus. "Mnemic phenomena" are defined as those due to engrams; in

animals,  they  are  specially  associated  with  the  nervous  system,  but  not

exclusively, even in man.

  When two stimuli occur together, one of them, occurring afterwards, may

call out the reaction for the other also. We call this an "ekphoric influence,"

and stimuli having this character are called "ekphoric stimuli." In such a case

we  call  the  engrams  of  the  two  stimuli  "associated."  All  simultaneously

generated engrams are associated; there is also association of successively

aroused engrams, though this is reducible to simultaneous association. In fact,

it is not an isolated stimulus that leaves an engram, but the totality of the

stimuli at any moment; consequently any portion of this totality tends, if it

recurs, to arouse the whole reaction which was aroused before. Semon holds

that engrams can be inherited, and that an animal's innate habits may be due

to the experience of its ancestors; on this subject he refers to Samuel Butler.

  Semon  formulates  two  "mnemic  principles."  The  first,  or  "Law  of

Engraphy," is as follows: "All simultaneous excitements in an organism form

a  connected  simultaneous  excitement-complex,  which  as  such  works

engraphically, i.e. leaves behind a connected engram-complex, which in sofar forms a whole" ("Die mnemischen Empfindungen," p. 146). The second

mnemic principle, or "Law of Ekphory," is as follows: "The partial return of

the  energetic  situation  which  formerly  worked  engraphically  operates

ekphorically on a simultaneous engram-complex" (ib., p. 173). These two

laws  together  represent  in  part  a  hypothesis  (the  engram),  and  in  part  an

observable  fact.  The  observable  fact  is  that,  when  a  certain  complex  of

stimuli has originally caused a certain complex of reactions, the recurrence of

part of the stimuli tends to cause the recurrence of the whole of the reactions.

  Semon's applications of his fundamental ideas in various directions are

interesting and ingenious. Some of them will concern us later, but for the

present  it  is  the  fundamental  character  of  mnemic  phenomena  that  is  in

question.

  Concerning the nature of an engram, Semon confesses that at present it is

impossible to say more than that it must consist in some material alteration in

the body of the organism ("Die mnemischen Empfindungen," p. 376). It is, in

fact, hypothetical, invoked for theoretical uses, and not an outcome of direct

observation.  No  doubt  physiology,  especially  the  disturbances  of  memory

through lesions in the brain, affords grounds for this hypothesis; nevertheless

it does remain a hypothesis, the validity of which will be discussed at the end

of this lecture.

  I  am  inclined  to  think  that,  in  the  present  state  of  physiology,  the

introduction of the engram does not serve to simplify the account of mnemic

phenomena. We can, I think, formulate the known laws of such phenomena

in terms, wholly, of observable facts, by recognizing provisionally what we

may call "mnemic causation." By this I mean that kind of causation of which

I  spoke  at  the  beginning  of  this  lecture,  that  kind,  namely,  in  which  the

proximate cause consists not merely of a present event, but of this together

with a past event. I do not wish to urge that this form of causation is ultimate,

but that, in the present state of our knowledge, it affords a simplification, and

enables  us  to  state  laws  of  behaviour  in  less  hypothetical  terms  than  we

should otherwise have to employ.

  The clearest instance of what I mean is recollection of a past event. What

we  observe  is  that  certain  present  stimuli  lead  us  to  recollect  certain

occurrences, but that at times when we are not recollecting them, there is

nothing  discoverable  in  our  minds  that  could  be  called  memory  of  them.

Memories, as mental facts, arise from time to time, but do not, so far as wecan see, exist in any shape while they are "latent." In fact, when we say that

they  are  "latent,"  we  mean  merely  that  they  will  exist  under  certain

circumstances. If, then, there is to be some standing difference between the

person who can remember a certain fact and the person who cannot, that

standing difference must be, not in anything mental, but in the brain. It is

quite probable that there is such a difference in the brain, but its nature is

unknown and it remains hypothetical. Everything that has, so far, been made

matter  of  observation  as  regards  this  question  can  be  put  together  in  the

statement: When a certain complex of sensations has occurred to a man, the

recurrence  of  part  of  the  complex  tends  to  arouse  the  recollection  of  the

whole.  In  like  manner,  we  can  collect  all  mnemic  phenomena  in  living

organisms under a single law, which contains what is hitherto verifiable in

Semon's two laws. This single law is:

  IF  A  COMPLEX  STIMULUS  A  HAS  CAUSED  A  COMPLEX

REACTION B IN AN ORGANISM, THE OCCURRENCE OF A PART OF

A  ON  A  FUTURE  OCCASION  TENDS  TO  CAUSE  THE  WHOLE

REACTION B.

  This law would need to be supplemented by some account of the influence

of frequency, and so on; but it seems to contain the essential characteristic of

mnemic phenomena, without admixture of anything hypothetical.

  Whenever  the  effect  resulting  from  a  stimulus  to  an  organism  differs

according to the past history of the organism, without our being able actually

to detect any relevant difference in its present structure, we will speak of

"mnemic causation," provided we can discover laws embodying the influence

of the past. In ordinary physical causation, as it appears to common sense, we

have approximate uniformities of sequence, such as "lightning is followed by

thunder," "drunkenness is followed by headache," and so on. None of these

sequences  are  theoretically  invariable,  since  something  may  intervene  to

disturb them. In order to obtain invariable physical laws, we have to proceed

to differential equations, showing the direction of change at each moment,

not  the  integral  change  after  a  finite  interval,  however  short.  But  for  the

purposes  of  daily  life  many  sequences  are  to  all  in  tents  and  purposes

invariable.  With  the  behaviour  of  human  beings,  however,  this  is  by  no

means the case. If you say to an Englishman, "You have a smut on your

nose," he will proceed to remove it, but there will be no such effect if you say

the same thing to a Frenchman who knows no English. The effect of wordsupon  the  hearer  is  a  mnemic  phenomena,  since  it  depends  upon  the  past

experience which gave him understanding of the words. If there are to be

purely psychological causal laws, taking no account of the brain and the rest

of the body, they will have to be of the form, not "X now causes Y now," but

—

  "A, B, C,... in the past, together with X now, cause Y now." For it cannot

be successfully maintained that our understanding of a word, for example, is

an actual existent content of the mind at times when we are not thinking of

the word. It is merely what may be called a "disposition," i.e. it is capable of

being  aroused  whenever  we  hear  the  word  or  happen  to  think  of  it.  A

"disposition" is not something actual, but merely the mnemic portion of a

mnemic causal law.

  In such a law as "A, B, C,... in the past, together with X now, cause Y

now," we will call A, B, C,... the mnemic cause, X the occasion or stimulus,

and Y the reaction. All cases in which experience influences behaviour are

instances of mnemic causation.

  Believers  in  psycho-physical  parallelism  hold  that  psychology  can

theoretically be freed entirely from all dependence on physiology or physics.

That is to say, they believe that every psychical event has a psychical cause

and a physical concomitant. If there is to be parallelism, it is easy to prove by

mathematical logic that the causation in physical and psychical matters must

be of the same sort, and it is impossible that mnemic causation should exist in

psychology but not in physics. But if psychology is to be independent of

physiology, and if physiology can be reduced to physics, it would seem that

mnemic  causation  is  essential  in  psychology.  Otherwise  we  shall  be

compelled  to  believe  that  all  our  knowledge,  all  our  store  of  images  and

memories,  all  our  mental  habits,  are  at  all  times  existing  in  some  latent

mental form, and are not merely aroused by the stimuli which lead to their

display. This is a very difficult hypothesis. It seems to me that if, as a matter

of  method  rather  than  metaphysics,  we  desire  to  obtain  as  much

independence for psychology as is practically feasible, we shall do better to

accept  mnemic  causation  in  psychology  protem,  and  therefore  reject

parallelism, since there is no good ground for admitting mnemic causation in

physics.

  It is perhaps worth while to observe that mnemic causation is what led

Bergson to deny that there is causation at all in the psychical sphere. Hepoints out, very truly, that the same stimulus, repeated, does not have the

same consequences, and he argues that this is contrary to the maxim, "same

cause, same effect." It is only necessary, however, to take account of past

occurrences  and  include  them  with  the  cause,  in  order  to  re-establish  the

maxim, and the possibility of psychological causal laws. The metaphysical

conception of a cause lingers in our manner of viewing causal laws: we want

to be able to FEEL a connection between cause and effect, and to be able to

imagine the cause as "operating." This makes us unwilling to regard causal

laws  as  MERELY  observed  uniformities  of  sequence;  yet  that  is  all  that

science has to offer. To ask why such-and-such a kind of sequence occurs is

either to ask a meaningless question, or to demand some more general kind of

sequence which includes the one in question. The widest empirical laws of

sequence known at any time can only be "explained" in the sense of being

subsumed by later discoveries under wider laws; but these wider laws, until

they  in  turn  are  subsumed,  will  remain  brute  facts,  resting  solely  upon

observation, not upon some supposed inherent rationality.

  There is therefore no a priori objection to a causal law in which part of the

cause has ceased to exist. To argue against such a law on the ground that

what is past cannot operate now, is to introduce the old metaphysical notion

of cause, for which science can find no place. The only reason that could be

validly  alleged  against  mnemic  causation  would  be  that,  in  fact,  all  the

phenomena can be explained without it. They are explained without it by

Semon's "engram," or by any theory which regards the results of experience

as  embodied  in  modifications  of  the  brain  and  nerves.  But  they  are  not

explained, unless with extreme artificiality, by any theory which regards the

latent  effects  of  experience  as  psychical  rather  than  physical.  Those  who

desire  to  make  psychology  as  far  as  possible  independent  of  physiology

would do well, it seems to me, if they adopted mnemic causation. For my

part, however, I have no such desire, and I shall therefore endeavour to state

the grounds which occur to me in favour of some such view as that of the

"engram."

  One of the first points to be urged is that mnemic phenomena are just as

much to be found in physiology as in psychology. They are even to be found

in plants, as Sir Francis Darwin pointed out (cf. Semon, "Die Mneme," 2nd

edition, p. 28 n.). Habit is a characteristic of the body at least as much as of

the  mind.  We  should,  therefore,  be  compelled  to  allow  the  intrusion  ofmnemic causation, if admitted at all, into non-psychological regions, which

ought, one feels, to be subject only to causation of the ordinary physical sort.

The fact is that a great deal of what, at first sight, distinguishes psychology

from physics is found, on examination, to be common to psychology and

physiology; this whole question of the influence of experience is a case in

point. Now it is possible, of course, to take the view advocated by Professor

J. S. Haldane, who contends that physiology is not theoretically reducible to

physics  and  chemistry.*  But  the  weight  of  opinion  among  physiologists

appears to be against him on this point; and we ought certainly to require

very  strong  evidence  before  admitting  any  such  breach  of  continuity  as

between living and dead matter. The argument from the existence of mnemic

phenomena in physiology must therefore be allowed a certain weight against

the hypothesis that mnemic causation is ultimate.* See his "The New Physiology and Other Addresses," Griffin, 

1919, also the symposium, "Are Physical, Biological and 

Psychological Categories Irreducible?" in "Life and Finite 

Individuality," edited for the Aristotelian Society, with an 

Introduction. By H. Wildon Carr, Williams & Norgate, 1918.

  The argument from the connection of brain-lesions with loss of memory is

not so strong as it looks, though it has also, some weight. What we know is

that  memory,  and  mnemic  phenomena  generally,  can  be  disturbed  or

destroyed by changes in the brain. This certainly proves that the brain plays

an essential part in the causation of memory, but does not prove that a certain

state  of  the  brain  is,  by  itself,  a  sufficient  condition  for  the  existence  of

memory. Yet it is this last that has to be proved. The theory of the engram, or

any similar theory, has to maintain that, given a body and brain in a suitable

state, a man will have a certain memory, without the need of any further

conditions. What is known, however, is only that he will not have memories

if his body and brain are not in a suitable state. That is to say, the appropriate

state of body and brain is proved to be necessary for memory, but not to be

sufficient. So far, therefore, as our definite knowledge goes, memory may

require for its causation a past occurrence as well as a certain present state of

the brain.

  In order to prove conclusively that mnemic phenomena arise whenever

certain physiological conditions are fulfilled, we ought to be able actually to

see differences between the brain of a man who speaks English and that of a

man who speaks French, between the brain of a man who has seen New York

and can recall it, and that of a man who has never seen that city. It may be

that the time will come when this will be possible, but at present we are very

far removed  from it. At present, there is, so far as I am aware, no good

evidence that every difference between the knowledge possessed by A and

that possessed by B is paralleled by some difference in their brains. We may

believe that this is the case, but if we do, our belief is based upon analogies

and  general  scientific  maxims,  not  upon  any  foundation  of  detailed

observation.  I  am  myself  inclined,  as  a  working  hypothesis,  to  adopt  the

belief  in  question,  and  to  hold  that  past  experience  only  affects  present

behaviour through modifications of physiological structure. But the evidence

seems not quite conclusive, so that I do not think we ought to forget the other

hypothesis, or to reject entirely the possibility that mnemic causation may bethe ultimate explanation of mnemic phenomena. I say this, not because I

think it LIKELY that mnemic causation is ultimate, but merely because I

think it POSSIBLE, and because it often turns out important to the progress

of  science  to  remember  hypotheses  which  have  previously  seemed

improbable.

          LECTURE V. PSYCHOLOGICAL AND PHYSICAL

                                  CAUSAL LAWS

  The  traditional  conception  of  cause  and  effect  is  one  which  modern

science shows to be fundamentally erroneous, and requiring to be replaced by

a  quite  different  notion,  that  of  LAWS  OF  CHANGE.  In  the  traditional

conception, a particular event A caused a particular event B, and by this it

was  implied  that,  given  any  event  B,  some  earlier  event  A  could  be

discovered which had a relation to it, such that—

  (1) Whenever A occurred, it was followed by B;

  (2) In this sequence, there was something "necessary," not a mere de facto

occurrence of A first and then B.

  The second point is illustrated by the old discussion as to whether it can be

said that day causes night, on the ground that day is always followed by

night. The orthodox answer was that day could not be called the cause of

night, because it would not be followed by night if the earth's rotation were to

cease, or rather to grow so slow that one complete rotation would take a year.

A cause, it was held, must be such that under no conceivable circumstances

could it fail to be followed by its effect.

  As a matter of fact, such sequences as were sought by believers in the

traditional form of causation have not so far been found in nature. Everything

in nature is apparently in a state of continuous change,* so that what we call

one "event" turns out to be really a process. If this event is to cause another

event, the two will have to be contiguous in time; for if there is any interval

between  them,  something  may  happen  during  that  interval  to  prevent  the

expected  effect.  Cause  and  effect,  therefore,  will  have  to  be  temporally

contiguous processes. It is difficult to believe, at any rate where physical laws

are concerned, that the earlier part of the process which is the cause can make

any difference to the effect, so long as the later part of the process which is

the  cause  remains  unchanged.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  a  man  dies  of

arsenic poisoning, we say that his taking arsenic was the cause of death. But

clearly the process by which he acquired the arsenic is irrelevant: everything

that happened before he swallowed it may be ignored, since it cannot alter the

effect except in so far as it alters his condition at the moment of taking the

dose. But we may go further: swallowing arsenic is not really the proximate

cause of death, since a man might be shot through the head immediately aftertaking the dose, and then it would not be of arsenic that he would die. The

arsenic  produces  certain  physiological  changes,  which  take  a  finite  time

before they end in death. The earlier parts of these changes can be ruled out

in the same way as we can rule out the process by which the arsenic was

acquired. Proceeding in this way, we can shorten the process which we are

calling  the  cause  more  and  more.  Similarly  we  shall  have  to  shorten  the

effect.  It  may  happen  that  immediately  after  the  man's  death  his  body  is

blown to pieces by a bomb. We cannot say what will happen after the man's

death,  through  merely  knowing  that  he  has  died  as  the  result  of  arsenic

poisoning. Thus, if we are to take the cause as one event and the effect as

another, both must be shortened indefinitely. The result is that we merely

have, as the embodiment of our causal law, a certain direction of change at

each moment. Hence we are brought to differential equations as embodying

causal laws. A physical law does not say "A will be followed by B," but tells

us what acceleration a particle will have under given circumstances, i.e. it

tells us how the particle's motion is changing at each moment, not where the

particle will be at some future moment.

* The theory of quanta suggests that the continuity is only 

apparent. If so, we shall be able theoretically to reach 

events which are not processes. But in what is directly 

observable there is still apparent continuity, which 

justifies the above remarks for the prevent.

  Laws embodied in differential equations may possibly be exact, but cannot

be known to be so. All that we can know empirically is approximate and

liable to exceptions; the exact laws that are assumed in physics are known to

be somewhere near the truth, but are not known to be true just as they stand.

The laws that we actually know empirically have the form of the traditional

causal laws, except that they are not to be regarded as universal or necessary.

"Taking arsenic is followed by death" is a good empirical generalization; it

may have exceptions, but they will be rare. As against the professedly exact

laws of physics, such empirical generalizations have the advantage that they

deal with observable phenomena. We cannot observe infinitesimals, whether

in time or space; we do not even know whether time and space are infinitely

divisible. Therefore rough empirical generalizations have a definite place in

science, in spite of not being exact of universal. They are the data for more

exact laws, and the grounds for believing that they are USUALLY true arestronger  than  the  grounds  for  believing  that  the  more  exact  laws  are

ALWAYS true.

  Science starts, therefore, from generalizations of the form, "A is usually

followed by B." This is the nearest approach that can be made to a causal law

of the traditional sort. It may happen in any particular instance that A is

ALWAYS followed by B, but we cannot know this, since we cannot foresee

all the perfectly possible circumstances that might make the sequence fail, or

know that none of them will actually occur. If, however, we know of a very

large number of cases in which A is followed by B, and few or none in which

the sequence fails, we shall in PRACTICE be justified in saying "A causes

B," provided we do not attach to the notion of cause any of the metaphysical

superstitions that have gathered about the word.

  There is another point, besides lack of universality and necessity, which it

is important to realize as regards causes in the above sense, and that is the

lack of uniqueness. It is generally assumed that, given any event, there is

some one phenomenon which is THE cause of the event in question. This

seems to be a mere mistake. Cause, in the only sense in which it can be

practically  applied,  means  "nearly  invariable  antecedent."  We  cannot  in

practice  obtain  an  antecedent  which  is  QUITE  invariable,  for  this  would

require us to take account of the whole universe, since something not taken

account of may prevent the expected effect. We cannot distinguish, among

nearly invariable antecedents, one as THE cause, and the others as merely its

concomitants: the attempt to do this depends upon a notion of cause which is

derived from will, and will (as we shall see later) is not at all the sort of thing

that it is generally supposed to be, nor is there any reason to think that in the

physical world there is anything even remotely analogous to what will is

supposed  to  be.  If  we  could  find  one  antecedent,  and  only  one,  that  was

QUITE invariable, we could call that one THE cause without introducing any

notion derived from mistaken ideas about will. But in fact we cannot find any

antecedent that we know to be quite invariable, and we can find many that are

nearly  so.  For  example,  men  leave  a  factory  for  dinner  when  the  hooter

sounds at twelve o'clock. You may say the hooter is THE cause of their

leaving. But innumerable other hooters in other factories, which also always

sound at twelve o'clock, have just as good a right to be called the cause. Thus

every  event  has  many  nearly  invariable  antecedents,  and  therefore  many

antecedents which may be called its cause.  The  laws  of  traditional  physics,  in  the  form  in  which  they  deal  with

movements  of  matter  or  electricity,  have  an  apparent  simplicity  which

somewhat conceals the empirical character of what they assert. A piece of

matter, as it is known empirically, is not a single existing thing, but a system

of existing things. When several people simultaneously see the same table,

they  all  see  something  different;  therefore  "the"  table,  which  they  are

supposed all to see, must be either a hypothesis or a construction. "The" table

is to be neutral as between different observers: it does not favour the aspect

seen by one man at the expense of that seen by another. It was natural, though

to my mind mistaken, to regard the "real" table as the common cause of all

the appearances which the table presents (as we say) to different observers.

But why should we suppose that there is some one common cause of all these

appearances? As we have just seen, the notion of "cause" is not so reliable as

to allow us to infer the existence of something that, by its very nature, can

never be observed.

  Instead of looking for an impartial source, we can secure neutrality by the

equal representation of all parties. Instead of supposing that there is some

unknown cause, the "real" table, behind the different sensations of those who

are  said  to  be  looking  at  the  table,  we  may  take  the  whole  set  of  these

sensations  (together  possibly  with  certain  other  particulars)  as  actually

BEING  the  table.  That  is  to  say,  the  table  which  is  neutral  as  between

different observers (actual and possible) is the set of all those particulars

which would naturally be called "aspects" of the table from different points of

view. (This is a first approximation, modified later.)

  It may be said: If there is no single existent which is the source of all these

"aspects," how are they collected together? The answer is simple: Just as they

would  be  if  there  were  such  a  single  existent.  The  supposed  "real"  table

underlying its appearances is, in any case, not itself perceived, but inferred,

and the question whether such-and-such a particular is an "aspect" of this

table is only to be settled by the connection of the particular in question with

the one or more particulars by which the table is defined. That is to say, even

if we assume a "real" table, the particulars which are its aspects have to be

collected together by their relations to each other, not to it, since it is merely

inferred from them. We have only, therefore, to notice how they are collected

together, and we can then keep the collection without assuming any "real"

table as distinct from the collection. When different people see what they callthe same table, they see things which are not exactly the same, owing to

difference of point of view, but which are sufficiently alike to be described in

the same words, so long as no great accuracy or minuteness is sought. These

closely similar particulars are collected together by their similarity primarily

and,  more  correctly,  by  the  fact  that  they  are  related  to  each  other

approximately  according  to  the  laws  of  perspective  and  of  reflection  and

diffraction of light. I suggest, as a first approximation, that these particulars,

together  with  such  correlated  others  as  are  unperceived,  jointly  ARE  the

table; and that a similar definition applies to all physical objects.*

*See "Our Knowledge of the External World" (Allen & Unwin), 

chaps. iii and iv.

  In order to eliminate the reference to our perceptions, which introduces an

irrelevant  psychological  suggestion,  I  will  take  a  different  illustration,

namely, stellar photography. A photographic plate exposed on a clear night

reproduces the appearance of the portion of the sky concerned, with more or

fewer stars according to the power of the telescope that is being used. Each

separate star which is photographed produces its separate effect on the plate,

just as it would upon ourselves if we were looking at the sky. If we assume,

as science normally does, the continuity of physical processes, we are forced

to conclude that, at the place where the plate is, and at all places between it

and  a  star  which  it  photographs,  SOMETHING  is  happening  which  is

specially connected with that star. In the days when the aether was less in

doubt, we should have said that what was happening was a certain kind of

transverse vibration in the aether. But it is not necessary or desirable to be so

explicit: all that we need say is that SOMETHING happens which is specially

connected with the star in question. It must be something specially connected

with that star, since that star produces its own special effect upon the plate.

Whatever it is must be the end of a process which starts from the star and

radiates outwards, partly on general grounds of continuity, partly to account

for the fact that light is transmitted with a certain definite velocity. We thus

arrive at the conclusion that, if a certain star is visible at a certain place, or

could  be  photographed  by  a  sufficiently  sensitive  plate  at  that  place,

something is happening there which is specially connected with that star.

Therefore  in  every  place  at  all  times  a  vast  multitude  of  things  must  be

happening, namely, at least one for every physical object which can be seen

or photographed from that place. We can classify such happenings on eitherof two principles:

  (1) We can collect together all the happenings in one place, as is done by

photography so far as light is concerned;

  (2) We can collect together all the happenings, in different places, which

are connected in the way that common sense regards as being due to their

emanating from one object.

  Thus, to return to the stars, we can collect together either—

  (1) All the appearances of different stars in a given place, or,

  (2) All the appearances of a given star in different places.

  But when I speak of "appearances," I do so only for brevity: I do not mean

anything that must "appear" to somebody, but only that happening, whatever

it may be, which is connected, at the place in question, with a given physical

object—according  to  the  old  orthodox  theory,  it  would  be  a  transverse

vibration in the aether. Like the different appearances of the table to a number

of  simultaneous  observers,  the  different  particulars  that  belong  to  one

physical object are to be collected together by continuity and inherent laws of

correlation,  not  by  their  supposed  causal  connection  with  an  unknown

assumed  existent  called  a  piece  of  matter,  which  would  be  a  mere

unnecessary metaphysical thing in itself. A piece of matter, according to the

definition that I propose, is, as a first approximation,* the collection of all

those  correlated  particulars  which  would  normally  be  regarded  as  its

appearances  or  effects  in  different  places.  Some  further  elaborations  are

desirable, but we can ignore them for the present. I shall return to them at the

end of this lecture.

*The exact definition of a piece of matter as a construction 

will be given later.

  According to the view that I am suggesting, a physical object or piece of

matter is the collection of all those correlated particulars which would be

regarded by common sense as its effects or appearances in different places.

On  the  other  hand,  all  the  happenings  in  a  given  place  represent  what

common sense would regard as the appearances of a number of different

objects as viewed from that place. All the happenings in one place may be

regarded as the view of the world from that place. I shall call the view of the

world  from  a  given  place  a  "perspective."  A  photograph  represents  a

perspective. On the other hand, if photographs of the stars were taken in all

points throughout space, and in all such photographs a certain star, say Sirius,were picked out whenever it appeared, all the different appearances of Sirius,

taken  together,  would  represent  Sirius.  For  the  understanding  of  the

difference between psychology and physics it is vital to understand these two

ways of classifying particulars, namely:

  (1) According to the place where they occur;

  (2) According to the system of correlated particulars in different places to

which they belong, such system being defined as a physical object.

  Given a system of particulars which is a physical object, I shall define that

one of the system which is in a given place (if any) as the "appearance of that

object in that place."

  When the appearance of an object in a given place changes, it is found that

one or other of two things occurs. The two possibilities may be illustrated by

an example. You are in a room with a man, whom you see: you may cease to

see him either by shutting your eyes or by his going out of the room. In the

first case, his appearance to other people remains unchanged; in the second,

his appearance changes from all places. In the first case, you say that it is not

he  who  has  changed,  but  your  eyes;  in  the  second,  you  say  that  he  has

changed. Generalizing, we distinguish—

  (1) Cases in which only certain appearances of the object change, while

others, and especially appearances from places very near to the object, do not

change;

  (2) Cases where all, or almost all, the appearances of the object undergo a

connected change.

  In the first case, the change is attributed to the medium between the object

and the place; in the second, it is attributed to the object itself.*

* The application of this distinction to motion raises 

complications due to relativity, but we may ignore these for 

our present purposes.

  It is the frequency of the latter kind of change, and the comparatively

simple  nature  of  the  laws  governing  the  simultaneous  alterations  of

appearances  in  such  cases,  that  have  made  it  possible  to  treat  a  physical

object as one thing, and to overlook the fact that it is a system of particulars.

When a number of people at a theatre watch an actor, the changes in their

several  perspectives  are  so  similar  and  so  closely  correlated  that  all  are

popularly regarded as identical with each other and with the changes of the

actor himself. So long as all the changes in the appearances of a body are thuscorrelated there is no pressing prima facie need to break up the system of

appearances, or to realize that the body in question is not really one thing but

a set of correlated particulars. It is especially and primarily such changes that

physics deals with, i.e. it deals primarily with processes in which the unity of

a physical object need not be broken up because all its appearances change

simultaneously according to the same law—or, if not all, at any rate all from

places  sufficiently  near  to  the  object,  with  in  creasing  accuracy  as  we

approach the object.

  The changes in appearances of an object which are due to changes in the

intervening  medium  will  not  affect,  or  will  affect  only  very  slightly,  the

appearances  from  places  close  to  the  object.  If  the  appearances  from

sufficiently neighbouring places are either wholly un changed, or changed to

a diminishing extent which has zero for its limit, it is usually found that the

changes can be accounted for by changes in objects which are between the

object in question and the places from which its appearance has changed

appreciably. Thus physics is able to reduce the laws of most changes with

which  it  deals  to  changes  in  physical  objects,  and  to  state  most  of  its

fundamental laws in terms of matter. It is only in those cases in which the

unity of the system of appearances constituting a piece of matter has to be

broken  up,  that  the  statement  of  what  is  happening  cannot  be  made

exclusively in terms of matter. The whole of psychology, we shall find, is

included among such cases; hence their importance for our purposes.

  We  can  now  begin  to  understand  one  of  the  fundamental  differences

between physics and psychology. Physics treats as a unit the whole system of

appearances of a piece of matter, whereas psychology is interested in certain

of these appearances themselves. Confining ourselves for the moment to the

psychology of perceptions, we observe that perceptions are certain of the

appearances of physical objects. From the point of view that we have been

hitherto  adopting,  we  might  define  them  as  the  appearances  of  objects  at

places from which sense-organs and the suitable parts of the nervous system

form part of the intervening medium. Just as a photographic plate receives a

different  impression  of  a  cluster  of  stars  when  a  telescope  is  part  of  the

intervening medium, so a brain receives a different impression when an eye

and an optic nerve are part of the intervening medium. An impression due to

this sort of intervening medium is called a perception, and is interesting to

psychology on its own account, not merely as one of the set of correlatedparticulars which is the physical object of which (as we say) we are having a

perception.

  We spoke earlier of two ways of classifying particulars. One way collects

together the appearances commonly regarded as a given object from different

places;  this  is,  broadly  speaking,  the  way  of  physics,  leading  to  the

construction of physical objects as sets of such appearances. The other way

collects together the appearances of different objects from a given place, the

result being what we call a perspective. In the particular case where the place

concerned is a human brain, the perspective belonging to the place consists of

all the perceptions of a certain man at a given time. Thus classification by

perspectives is relevant to psychology, and is essential in defining what we

mean by one mind.

  I  do  not  wish  to  suggest  that  the  way  in  which  I  have  been  defining

perceptions is the only possible way, or even the best way. It is the way that

arose naturally out of our present topic. But when we approach psychology

from a more introspective standpoint, we have to distinguish sensations and

perceptions, if possible, from other mental occurrences, if any. We have also

to  consider  the  psychological  effects  of  sensations,  as  opposed  to  their

physical causes and correlates. These problems are quite distinct from those

with which we have been concerned in the present lecture, and I shall not

deal with them until a later stage.

  It is clear that psychology is concerned essentially with actual particulars,

not merely with systems of particulars. In this it differs from physics, which,

broadly speaking, is concerned with the cases in which all the particulars

which make up one physical object can be treated as a single causal unit, or

rather the particulars which are sufficiently near to the object of which they

are appearances can be so treated. The laws which physics seeks can, broadly

speaking, be stated by treating such systems of particulars as causal units.

The laws which psychology seeks cannot be so stated, since the particulars

themselves are what interests the psychologist. This is one of the fundamental

differences between physics and psychology; and to make it clear has been

the main purpose of this lecture.

  I will conclude with an attempt to give a more precise definition of a piece

of matter. The appearances of a piece of matter from different places change

partly  according  to  intrinsic  laws  (the  laws  of  perspective,  in  the  case  of

visual shape), partly according to the nature of the intervening medium—fog,blue spectacles, telescopes, microscopes, sense-organs, etc. As we approach

nearer to the object, the effect of the intervening medium grows less. In a

generalized  sense,  all  the  intrinsic  laws  of  change  of  appearance  may  be

called  "laws  of  perspective."  Given  any  appearance  of  an  object,  we  can

construct  hypothetically  a  certain  system  of  appearances  to  which  the

appearance in question would belong if the laws of perspective alone were

concerned. If we construct this hypothetical system for each appearance of

the object in turn, the system corresponding to a given appearance x will be

independent of any distortion due to the medium beyond x, and will only

embody such distortion as is due to the medium between x and the object.

Thus,  as  the  appearance  by  which  our  hypothetical  system  is  defined  is

moved  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  object,  the  hypothetical  system  of

appearances defined by its means embodies less and less of the effect of the

medium. The different sets of appearances resulting from moving x nearer

and nearer to the object will approach to a limiting set, and this limiting set

will be that system of appearances which the object would present if the laws

of perspective alone were operative and the medium exercised no distorting

effect.  This  limiting  set  of  appearances  may  be  defined,  for  purposes  of

physics, as the piece of matter concerned.

                        LECTURE VI. INTROSPECTION

  One of the main purposes of these lectures is to give grounds for the belief

that  the  distinction  between  mind  and  matter  is  not  so  fundamental  as  is

commonly  supposed.  In  the  preceding  lecture  I  dealt  in  outline  with  the

physical  side  of  this  problem.  I  attempted  to  show  that  what  we  call  a

material  object  is  not  itself  a  substance,  but  is  a  system  of  particulars

analogous in their nature to sensations, and in fact often including actual

sensations  among  their  number.  In  this  way  the  stuff  of  which  physical

objects are composed is brought into relation with the stuff of which part, at

least, of our mental life is composed.

  There  is,  however,  a  converse  task  which  is  equally  necessary  for  our

thesis, and that is, to show that the stuff of our mental life is devoid of many

qualities which it is commonly supposed to have, and is not possessed of any

attributes which make it incapable of forming part of the world of matter. In

the present lecture I shall begin the arguments for this view.

    Corresponding to the supposed duality of matter and mind, there are, in

orthodox psychology, two ways of knowing what exists. One of these, the

way of sensation and external perception, is supposed to furnish data for our

knowledge of matter, the other, called "introspection," is supposed to furnish

data  for  knowledge  of  our  mental  processes.  To  common  sense,  this

distinction seems clear and easy. When you see a friend coming along the

street, you acquire knowledge of an external, physical fact; when you realize

that you are glad to meet him, you acquire knowledge of a mental fact. Your

dreams and memories and thoughts, of which you are often conscious, are

mental facts, and the process by which you become aware of them SEEMS to

be different from sensation. Kant calls it the "inner sense"; sometimes it is

spoken of as "consciousness of self"; but its commonest name in modern

English psychology is "introspection." It is this supposed method of acquiring

knowledge of our mental processes that I wish to analyse and examine in this

lecture.

  I  will  state  at  the  outset  the  view  which  I  shall  aim  at  establishing.  I

believe  that  the  stuff  of  our  mental  life,  as  opposed  to  its  relations  and

structure, consists wholly of sensations and images. Sensations are connected

with matter in the way that I tried to explain in Lecture V, i.e. each is a

member of a system which is a certain physical object. Images, though theyUSUALLY  have  certain  characteristics,  especially  lack  of  vividness,  that

distinguish them from sensations, are not INVARIABLY so distinguished,

and cannot therefore be defined by these characteristics. Images, as opposed

to  sensations,  can  only  be  defined  by  their  different  causation:  they  are

caused  by  association  with  a  sensation,  not  by  a  stimulus  external  to  the

nervous system—or perhaps one should say external to the brain, where the

higher animals are concerned. The occurrence of a sensation or image does

not in itself constitute knowledge but any sensation or image may come to be

known if the conditions are suitable. When a sensation—like the hearing of a

clap of thunder—is normally correlated with closely similar sensations in our

neighbours, we regard it as giving knowledge of the external world, since we

regard the whole set of similar sensations as due to a common external cause.

But images and bodily sensations are not so correlated. Bodily sensations can

be  brought  into  a  correlation  by  physiology,  and  thus  take  their  place

ultimately among sources of knowledge of the physical world. But images

cannot  be  made  to  fit  in  with  the  simultaneous  sensations  and  images  of

others. Apart from their hypothetical causes in the brain, they have a causal

connection with physical objects, through the fact that they are copies of past

sensations; but the physical objects with which they are thus connected are in

the past, not in the present. These images remain private in a sense in which

sensations are not. A sensation SEEMS to give us knowledge of a present

physical  object,  while  an  image  does  not,  except  when  it  amounts  to  a

hallucination,  and  in  this  case  the  seeming  is  deceptive.  Thus  the  whole

context of the two occurrences is different. But in themselves they do not

differ profoundly, and there is no reason to invoke two different ways of

knowing  for  the  one  and  for  the  other.  Consequently  introspection  as  a

separate kind of knowledge disappears.

  The criticism of introspection has been in the main the work of American

psychologists. I will begin by summarizing an article which seems to me to

afford  a  good  specimen  of  their  arguments,  namely,  "The  Case  against

Introspection," by Knight Dunlap ("Psychological Review," vol xix, No. 5,

pp. 404-413, September, 1912). After a few historical quotations, he comes to

two modern defenders of introspection, Stout and James. He quotes from

Stout  such  statements  as  the  following:  "Psychical  states  as  such  become

objects only when we attend to them in an introspective way. Otherwise they

are not themselves objects, but only constituents of the process by whichobjects  are  recognized"  ("Manual,"  2nd  edition,  p.  134.  The  word

"recognized" in Dunlap's quotation should be "cognized.") "The object itself

can  never  be  identified  with  the  present  modification  of  the  individual's

consciousness by which it is cognized" (ib. p. 60). This is to be true even

when we are thinking about modifications of our own consciousness; such

modifications are to be always at least partially distinct from the conscious

experience in which we think of them.

  At this point I wish to interrupt the account of Knight Dunlap's article in

order to make some observations on my own account with reference to the

above quotations from Stout. In the first place, the conception of "psychical

states" seems to me one which demands analysis of a somewhat destructive

character. This analysis I shall give in later lectures as regards cognition; I

have already given it as regards desire. In the second place, the conception of

"objects" depends upon a certain view as to cognition which I believe to be

wholly mistaken, namely, the view which I discussed in my first lecture in

connection with Brentano. In this view a single cognitive occurrence contains

both content and object, the content being essentially mental, while the object

is  physical  except  in  introspection  and  abstract  thought.  I  have  already

criticized this view, and will not dwell upon it now, beyond saying that "the

process by which objects are cognized" appears to be a very slippery phrase.

When we "see a table," as common sense would say, the table as a physical

object is not the "object" (in the psychological sense) of our perception. Our

perception is made up of sensations, images and beliefs, but the supposed

"object" is something inferential, externally related, not logically bound up

with what is occurring in us. This question of the nature of the object also

affects  the  view  we  take  of  self-consciousness.  Obviously,  a  "conscious

experience"  is  different  from  a  physical  object;  therefore  it  is  natural  to

assume that a thought or perception whose object is a conscious experience

must be different from a thought or perception whose object is a physical

object.  But  if  the  relation  to  the  object  is  inferential  and  external,  as  I

maintain, the difference between two thoughts may bear very little relation to

the  difference  between  their  objects.  And  to  speak  of  "the  present

modification  of  the  individual's  consciousness  by  which  an  object  is

cognized"  is  to  suggest  that  the  cognition  of  objects  is  a  far  more  direct

process, far more intimately bound up with the objects, than I believe it to be.

All  these  points  will  be  amplified  when  we  come  to  the  analysis  ofknowledge, but it is necessary briefly to state them now in order to suggest

the atmosphere in which our analysis of "introspection" is to be carried on.

  Another point in which Stout's remarks seem to me to suggest what I

regard as mistakes is his use of "consciousness." There is a view which is

prevalent  among  psychologists,  to  the  effect  that  one  can  speak  of  "a

conscious experience" in a curious dual sense, meaning, on the one hand, an

experience  which  is  conscious  of  something,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  an

experience which has some intrinsic nature characteristic of what is called

"consciousness." That is to say, a "conscious experience" is characterized on

the  one  hand  by  relation  to  its  object  and  on  the  other  hand  by  being

composed of a certain peculiar stuff, the stuff of "consciousness." And in

many authors there is yet a third confusion: a "conscious experience," in this

third sense, is an experience of which we are conscious. All these, it seems to

me, need to be clearly separated. To say that one occurrence is "conscious" of

another  is,  to  my  mind,  to  assert  an  external  and  rather  remote  relation

between them. I might illustrate it by the relation of uncle and nephew a man

becomes an uncle through no effort of his own, merely through an occurrence

elsewhere. Similarly, when you are said to be "conscious" of a table, the

question whether this is really the case cannot be decided by examining only

your state of mind: it is necessary also to ascertain whether your sensation is

having  those  correlates  which  past  experience  causes  you  to  assume,  or

whether the table happens, in this case, to be a mirage. And, as I explained in

my first lecture, I do not believe that there is any "stuff" of consciousness, so

that there is no intrinsic character by which a "conscious" experience could

be distinguished from any other.

  After these preliminaries, we can return to Knight Dunlap's article. His

criticism of Stout turns on the difficulty of giving any empirical meaning to

such  notions  as  the  "mind"  or  the  "subject";  he  quotes  from  Stout  the

sentence: "The most important drawback is that the mind, in watching its own

workings, must necessarily have its attention divided between two objects,"

and he concludes: "Without question, Stout is bringing in here illicitly the

concept of a single observer, and his introspection does not provide for the

observation of this observer; for the process observed and the observer are

distinct" (p. 407). The objections to any theory which brings in the single

observer were considered in Lecture I, and were acknowledged to be cogent.

In  so  far,  therefore,  as  Stout's  theory  of  introspection  rests  upon  thisassumption,  we  are  compelled  to  reject  it.  But  it  is  perfectly  possible  to

believe in introspection without supposing that there is a single observer.

  William  James's  theory  of  introspection,  which  Dunlap  next  examines,

does not assume a single observer. It changed after the publication of his

"Psychology," in consequence of his abandoning the dualism of thought and

things. Dunlap summarizes his theory as follows:

  "The essential points in James's scheme of consciousness are SUBJECT,

OBJECT,  and  a  KNOWING  of  the  object  by  the  subject.  The  difference

between James's scheme and other schemes involving the same terms is that

James considers subject and object to be the same thing, but at different times

In  order  to  satisfy  this  requirement  James  supposes  a  realm  of  existence

which he at first called 'states of consciousness' or 'thoughts,' and later, 'pure

experience,' the latter term including both the 'thoughts' and the 'knowing.'

This scheme, with all its magnificent artificiality, James held on to until the

end, simply dropping the term consciousness and the dualism between the

thought and an external reality"(p. 409).

  He  adds:  "All  that  James's  system  really  amounts  to  is  the

acknowledgment that a succession of things are known, and that they are

known by something. This is all any one can claim, except for the fact that

the things are known together, and that the knower for the different items is

one and the same" (ib.).

  In this statement, to my mind, Dunlap concedes far more than James did in

his later theory. I see no reason to suppose that "the knower for different

items is one and the same," and I am convinced that this proposition could

not possibly be ascertained except by introspection of the sort that Dunlap

rejects. The first of these points must wait until we come to the analysis of

belief: the second must be considered now. Dunlap's view is that there is a

dualism of subject and object, but that the subject can never become object,

and therefore there is no awareness of an awareness. He says in discussing

the view that introspection reveals the occurrence of knowledge: "There can

be no denial of the existence of the thing (knowing) which is alleged to be

known  or  observed  in  this  sort  of  'introspection.'  The  allegation  that  the

knowing is observed is that which may be denied. Knowing there certainly is;

known, the knowing certainly is not"(p. 410). And again: "I am never aware

of an awareness" (ib.). And on the next page: "It may sound paradoxical to

say that one cannot observe the process (or relation) of observation, and yetmay  be  certain  that  there  is  such  a  process:  but  there  is  really  no

inconsistency in the saying. How do I know that there is awareness? By being

aware of something. There is no meaning in the term 'awareness' which is not

expressed in the statement 'I am aware of a colour (or what-not).'"

  But the paradox cannot be so lightly disposed of. The statement "I am

aware of a colour" is assumed by Knight Dunlap to be known to be true, but

he does not explain how it comes to be known. The argument against him is

not conclusive, since he may be able to show some valid way of inferring our

awareness. But he does not suggest any such way. There is nothing odd in the

hypothesis  of  beings  which  are  aware  of  objects,  but  not  of  their  own

awareness; it is, indeed, highly probable that young children and the higher

animals are such beings. But such beings cannot make the statement "I am

aware  of  a  colour,"  which  WE  can  make.  We  have,  therefore,  some

knowledge which they lack. It is necessary to Knight Dunlap's position to

maintain that this additional knowledge is purely inferential, but he makes no

attempt to show how the inference is possible. It may, of course, be possible,

but I cannot see how. To my mind the fact (which he admits) that we know

there is awareness, is ALL BUT decisive against his theory, and in favour of

the view that we can be aware of an awareness.

  Dunlap asserts (to return to James) that the real ground for James's original

belief in introspection was his belief in two sorts of objects, namely, thoughts

and things. He suggests that it was a mere inconsistency on James's part to

adhere to introspection after abandoning the dualism of thoughts and things. I

do  not  wholly  agree  with  this  view,  but  it  is  difficult  to  disentangle  the

difference as to introspection from the difference as to the nature of knowing.

Dunlap suggests (p. 411) that what is called introspection really consists of

awareness of "images," visceral sensations, and so on. This view, in essence,

seems  to  me  sound.  But  then  I  hold  that  knowing  itself  consists  of  such

constituents  suitably  related,  and  that  in  being  aware  of  them  we  are

sometimes being aware of instances of knowing. For this reason, much as I

agree with his view as to what are the objects of which there is awareness, I

cannot  wholly  agree  with  his  conclusion  as  to  the  impossibility  of

introspection.

  The  behaviourists  have  challenged  introspection  even  more  vigorously

than Knight Dunlap, and have gone so far as to deny the existence of images.

But I think that they have confused various things which are very commonlyconfused, and that it is necessary to make several distinctions before we can

arrive at what is true and what false in the criticism of introspection.

  I wish to distinguish three distinct questions, any one of which may be

meant when we ask whether introspection is a source of knowledge. The

three questions are as follows:

  (1) Can we observe anything about ourselves which we cannot observe

about other people, or is everything we can observe PUBLIC, in the sense

that another could also observe it if suitably placed?

  (2) Does everything that we can observe obey the laws of physics and

form part of the physical world, or can we observe certain things that lie

outside physics?

  (3) Can we observe anything which differs in its intrinsic nature from the

constituents  of  the  physical  world,  or  is  everything  that  we  can  observe

composed  of  elements  intrinsically  similar  to  the  constituents  of  what  is

called matter?

  Any one of these three questions may be used to define introspection. I

should favour introspection in the sense of the first question, i.e. I think that

some of the things we observe cannot, even theoretically, be observed by any

one  else.  The  second  question,  tentatively  and  for  the  present,  I  should

answer in favour of introspection; I think that images, in the actual condition

of  science,  cannot  be  brought  under  the  causal  laws  of  physics,  though

perhaps ultimately they may be. The third question I should answer adversely

to  introspection  I  think  that  observation  shows  us  nothing  that  is  not

composed of sensations and images, and that images differ from sensations in

their  causal  laws,  not  intrinsically.  I  shall  deal  with  the  three  questions

successively.

  (1) PUBLICITY OR PRIVACY OF WHAT IS OBSERVED. Confining

ourselves,  for  the  moment,  to  sensations,  we  find  that  there  are  different

degrees of publicity attaching to different sorts of sensations. If you feel a

toothache  when  the  other  people  in  the  room  do  not,  you  are  in  no  way

surprised; but if you hear a clap of thunder when they do not, you begin to be

alarmed as to your mental condition. Sight and hearing are the most public of

the senses; smell only a trifle less so; touch, again, a trifle less, since two

people can only touch the same spot successively, not simultaneously. Taste

has a sort of semi-publicity, since people seem to experience similar taste-

sensations when they eat similar foods; but the publicity is incomplete, sincetwo people cannot eat actually the same piece of food.

  But when we pass on to bodily sensations—headache, toothache, hunger,

thirst, the feeling of fatigue, and so on—we get quite away from publicity,

into a region where other people can tell us what they feel, but we cannot

directly observe their feeling. As a natural result of this state of affairs, it has

come to be thought that the public senses give us knowledge of the outer

world, while the private senses only give us knowledge as to our own bodies.

As regards privacy, all images, of whatever sort, belong with the sensations

which only give knowledge of our own bodies, i.e. each is only observable by

one observer. This is the reason why images of sight and hearing are more

obviously  different  from  sensations  of  sight  and  hearing  than  images  of

bodily sensations are from bodily sensations; and that is why the argument in

favour of images is more conclusive in such cases as sight and hearing than

in such cases as inner speech.

  The whole distinction of privacy and publicity, however, so long as we

confine ourselves to sensations, is one of degree, not of kind. No two people,

there is good empirical reason to think, ever have exactly similar sensations

related to the same physical object at the same moment; on the other hand,

even the most private sensation has correlations which would theoretically

enable another observer to infer it.

  That no sensation is ever completely public, results from differences of

point of view. Two people looking at the same table do not get the same

sensation, because of perspective and the way the light falls. They get only

correlated sensations. Two people listening to the same sound do not hear

exactly the same thing, because one is nearer to the source of the sound than

the other, one has better hearing than the other, and so on. Thus publicity in

sensations  consists,  not  in  having  PRECISELY  similar  sensations,  but  in

having more or less similar sensations correlated according to ascertainable

laws. The sensations which strike us as public are those where the correlated

sensations are very similar and the correlations are very easy to discover. But

even the most private sensations have correlations with things that others can

observe. The dentist does not observe your ache, but he can see the cavity

which causes it, and could guess that you are suffering even if you did not tell

him. This fact, however, cannot be used, as Watson would apparently wish,

to extrude from science observations which are private to one observer, since

it is by means of many such observations that correlations are established,e.g. between toothaches and cavities. Privacy, therefore does not by itself

make a datum unamenable to scientific treatment. On this point, the argument

against introspection must be rejected.

  (2)  DOES  EVERYTHING  OBSERVABLE  OBEY  THE  LAWS  OF

PHYSICS? We come now to the second ground of objection to introspection,

namely,  that  its  data  do  not  obey  the  laws  of  physics.  This,  though  less

emphasized, is, I think, an objection which is really more strongly felt than

the objection of privacy. And we obtain a definition of introspection more in

harmony with usage if we define it as observation of data not subject to

physical laws than if we define it by means of privacy. No one would regard

a man as introspective because he was conscious of having a stomach ache.

Opponents of introspection do not mean to deny the obvious fact that we can

observe bodily sensations which others cannot observe. For example, Knight

Dunlap contends that images are really muscular contractions,* and evidently

regards our awareness of muscular contractions as not coming under the head

of introspection. I think it will be found that the essential characteristic of

introspective  data,  in  the  sense  which  now  concerns  us,  has  to  do  with

LOCALIZATION: either they are not localized at all, or they are localized,

like  visual  images,  in  a  place  already  physically  occupied  by  something

which would be inconsistent with them if they were regarded as part of the

physical world. If you have a visual image of your friend sitting in a chair

which in fact is empty, you cannot locate the image in your body, because it

is visual, nor (as a physical phenomenon) in the chair, because the chair, as a

physical object, is empty. Thus it seems to follow that the physical world

does  not  include  all  that  we  are  aware  of,  and  that  images,  which  are

introspective data, have to be regarded, for the present, as not obeying the

laws of physics; this is, I think, one of the chief reasons why an attempt is

made  to  reject  them.  I  shall  try  to  show  in  Lecture  VIII  that  the  purely

empirical reasons for accepting images are overwhelming. But we cannot be

nearly so certain that they will not ultimately be brought under the laws of

physics.  Even  if  this  should  happen,  however,  they  would  still  be

distinguishable  from  sensations  by  their  proximate  causal  laws,  as  gases

remain distinguishable from solids.* "Psychological Review," 1916, "Thought-Content and 

Feeling," p. 59. See also ib., 1912, "The Nature of 

Perceived Relations," where he says: "'Introspection,' 

divested of its mythological suggestion of the observing of 

consciousness, is really the observation of bodily 

sensations (sensibles) and feelings (feelables)"(p. 427 n.).

  (3) CAN WE OBSERVE ANYTHING INTRINSICALLY DIFFERENT

FROM  SENSATIONS?  We  come  now  to  our  third  question  concerning

introspection. It is commonly thought that by looking within we can observe

all sorts of things that are radically different from the constituents of the

physical world, e.g. thoughts, beliefs, desires, pleasures, pains and emotions.

The difference between mind and matter is increased partly by emphasizing

these supposed introspective data, partly by the supposition that matter is

composed of atoms or electrons or whatever units physics may at the moment

prefer.  As  against  this  latter  supposition,  I  contend  that  the  ultimate

constituents of matter are not atoms or electrons, but sensations, and other

things similar to sensations as regards extent and duration. As against the

view  that  introspection  reveals  a  mental  world  radically  different  from

sensations, I propose to argue that thoughts, beliefs, desires, pleasures, pains

and emotions are all built up out of sensations and images alone, and that

there is reason to think that images do not differ from sensations in their

intrinsic  character.  We  thus  effect  a  mutual  rapprochement  of  mind  and

matter, and reduce the ultimate data of introspection (in our second sense) to

images alone. On this third view of the meaning of introspection, therefore,

our decision is wholly against it.

  There remain two points to be considered concerning introspection. The

first is as to how far it is trustworthy; the second is as to whether, even

granting that it reveals no radically different STUFF from that revealed by

what  might  be  called  external  perception,  it  may  not  reveal  different

RELATIONS, and thus acquire almost as much importance as is traditionally

assigned to it.

  To begin with the trustworthiness of introspection. It is common among

certain  schools  to  regard  the  knowledge  of  our  own  mental  processes  as

incomparably more certain than our knowledge of the "external" world; this

view is to be found in the British philosophy which descends from Hume,

and is present, somewhat veiled, in Kant and his followers. There seems noreason  whatever  to  accept  this  view.  Our  spontaneous,  unsophisticated

beliefs, whether as to ourselves or as to the outer world, are always extremely

rash and very liable to error. The acquisition of caution is equally necessary

and equally difficult in both directions. Not only are we often un aware of

entertaining  a  belief  or  desire  which  exists  in  us;  we  are  often  actually

mistaken. The fallibility of introspection as regards what we desire is made

evident  by  psycho-analysis;  its  fallibility  as  to  what  we  know  is  easily

demonstrated. An autobiography, when confronted by a careful editor with

documentary evidence, is usually found to be full of obviously inadvertent

errors. Any of us confronted by a forgotten letter written some years ago will

be astonished to find how much more foolish our opinions were than we had

remembered them as being. And as to the analysis of our mental operations—

believing, desiring, willing, or what not—introspection unaided gives very

little  help:  it  is  necessary  to  construct  hypotheses  and  test  them  by  their

consequences,  just  as  we  do  in  physical  science.  Introspection,  therefore,

though it is one among our sources of knowledge, is not, in isolation, in any

degree more trustworthy than "external" perception.

  I come now to our second question: Does introspection give us materials

for the knowledge of relations other than those arrived at by reflecting upon

external  perception?  It  might  be  contended  that  the  essence  of  what  is

"mental" consists of relations, such as knowing for example, and that our

knowledge concerning these essentially mental relations is entirely derived

from introspection. If "knowing" were an unanalysable relation, this view

would be incontrovertible, since clearly no such relation forms part of the

subject matter of physics. But it would seem that "knowing" is really various

relations, all of them complex. Therefore, until they have been analysed, our

present question must remain unanswered I shall return to it at the end of the

present course of lectures.

        LECTURE VII. THE DEFINITION OF PERCEPTION

  In Lecture V we found reason to think that the ultimate constituents* of

the  world  do  not  have  the  characteristics  of  either  mind  or  matter  as

ordinarily understood: they are not solid persistent objects moving through

space, nor are they fragments of "consciousness." But we found two ways of

grouping particulars, one into "things" or "pieces of matter," the other into

series of "perspectives," each series being what may be called a "biography."

Before we can define either sensations or images, it is necessary to consider

this twofold classification in somewhat greater detail, and to derive from it a

definition of perception. It should be said that, in so far as the classification

assumes the whole world of physics (including its unperceived portions), it

contains hypothetical elements. But we will not linger on the grounds for

admitting these, which belong to the philosophy of physics rather than of

psychology.

* When I speak of "ultimate constituents," I do not mean 

necessarily such as are theoretically incapable of analysis, 

but only such as, at present, we can see no means of 

analysing. I speak of such constituents as "particulars," or 

as "RELATIVE particulars" when I wish to emphasize the fact 

that they may be themselves complex.

  The physical classification of particulars collects together all those that are

aspects of one "thing." Given any one particular, it is found often (we do not

say always) that there are a number of other particulars differing from this

one in gradually increasing degrees. Those (or some of those) that differ from

it only very slightly will be found to differ approximately according to certain

laws which may be called, in a generalized sense, the laws of "perspective";

they  include  the  ordinary  laws  of  perspective  as  a  special  case.  This

approximation grows more and more nearly exact as the difference grows

less; in technical language, the laws of perspective account for the differences

to  the  first  order  of  small  quantities,  and  other  laws  are  only  required  to

account  for  second-order  differences.  That  is  to  say,  as  the  difference

diminishes, the part of the difference which is not according to the laws of

perspective diminishes much more rapidly, and bears to the total difference a

ratio which tends towards zero as both are made smaller and smaller. By this

means we can theoretically collect together a number of particulars which

may be defined as the "aspects" or "appearances" of one thing at one time. Ifthe  laws  of  perspective  were  sufficiently  known,  the  connection  between

different aspects would be expressed in differential equations.

  This gives us, so far, only those particulars which constitute one thing at

one  time.  This  set  of  particulars  may  be  called  a  "momentary  thing."  To

define that series of "momentary things" that constitute the successive states

of one thing is a problem involving the laws of dynamics. These give the

laws governing the changes of aspects from one time to a slightly later time,

with the same sort of differential approximation to exactness as we obtained

for spatially neighbouring aspects through the laws of perspective. Thus a

momentary  thing  is  a  set  of  particulars,  while  a  thing  (which  may  be

identified with the whole history of the thing) is a series of such sets of

particulars. The particulars in one set are collected together by the laws of

perspective;  the  successive  sets  are  collected  together  by  the  laws  of

dynamics. This is the view of the world which is appropriate to traditional

physics.

  The definition of a "momentary thing" involves problems concerning time,

since  the  particulars  constituting  a  momentary  thing  will  not  be  all

simultaneous, but will travel outward from the thing with the velocity of light

(in  case  the  thing  is  in  vacuo).  There  are  complications  connected  with

relativity, but for our present purpose they are not vital, and I shall ignore

them.

  Instead  of  first  collecting  together  all  the  particulars  constituting  a

momentary thing, and then forming the series of successive sets, we might

have first collected together a series of successive aspects related by the laws

of dynamics, and then have formed the set of such series related by the laws

of perspective. To illustrate by the case of an actor on the stage: our first plan

was  to  collect  together  all  the  aspects  which  he  presents  to  different

spectators at one time, and then to form the series of such sets. Our second

plan is first to collect together all the aspects which he presents successively

to a given spectator, and then to do the same thing for the other spectators,

thus forming a set of series instead of a series of sets. The first plan tells us

what he does; the second the impressions he produces. This second way of

classifying  particulars  is  one  which  obviously  has  more  relevance  to

psychology than the other. It is partly by this second method of classification

that we obtain definitions of one "experience" or "biography" or "person."

This method of classification is also essential to the definition of sensationsand images, as I shall endeavour to prove later on. But we must first amplify

the definition of perspectives and biographies.

  In our illustration of the actor, we spoke, for the moment, as though each

spectator's mind were wholly occupied by the one actor. If this were the case,

it might be possible to define the biography of one spectator as a series of

successive aspects of the actor related according to the laws of dynamics. But

in  fact  this  is  not  the  case.  We  are  at  all  times  during  our  waking  life

receiving a variety of impressions, which are aspects of a variety of things.

We have to consider what binds together two simultaneous sensations in one

person,  or,  more  generally,  any  two  occurrences  which  forte  part  of  one

experience. We might say, adhering to the standpoint of physics, that two

aspects of different things belong to the same perspective when they are in

the same place. But this would not really help us, since a "place" has not yet

been defined. Can we define what is meant by saying that two aspects are "in

the same place," without introducing anything beyond the laws of perspective

and dynamics?

  I do not feel sure whether it is possible to frame such a definition or not;

accordingly  I  shall  not  assume  that  it  is  possible,  but  shall  seek  other

characteristics by which a perspective or biography may be defined.

  When (for example) we see one man and hear another speaking at the

same time, what we see and what we hear have a relation which we can

perceive, which makes the two together form, in some sense, one experience.

It  is  when  this  relation  exists  that  two  occurrences  become  associated.

Semon's "engram" is formed by all that we experience at one time. He speaks

of two parts of this total as having the relation of "Nebeneinander" (M. 118;

M.E.  33  ff.),  which  is  reminiscent  of  Herbart's  "Zusammen."  I  think  the

relation may be called simply "simultaneity." It might be said that at any

moment all sorts of things that are not part of my experience are happening in

the world, and that therefore the relation we are seeking to define cannot be

merely simultaneity. This, however, would be an error—the sort of error that

the theory of relativity avoids. There is not one universal time, except by an

elaborate construction; there are only local times, each of which may be taken

to be the time within one biography. Accordingly, if I am (say) hearing a

sound, the only occurrences that are, in any simple sense, simultaneous with

my sensation are events in my private world, i.e. in my biography. We may

therefore define the "perspective" to which the sensation in question belongsas  the  set  of  particulars  that  are  simultaneous  with  this  sensation.  And

similarly we may define the "biography" to which the sensation belongs as

the set of particulars that are earlier or later than, or simultaneous with, the

given  sensation.  Moreover,  the  very  same  definitions  can  be  applied  to

particulars which are not sensations. They are actually required for the theory

of relativity, if we are to give a philosophical explanation of what is meant by

"local time" in that theory The relations of simultaneity and succession are

known to us in our own experience; they may be analysable, but that does not

affect their suitability for defining perspectives and biographies. Such time-

relations as can be constructed between events in different biographies are of

a  different  kind:  they  are  not  experienced,  and  are  merely  logical,  being

designed  to  afford  convenient  ways  of  stating  the  correlations  between

different biographies.

  It is not only by time-relations that the parts of one biography are collected

together  in  the  case  of  living  beings.  In  this  case  there  are  the  mnemic

phenomena which constitute the unity of one "experience," and transform

mere  occurrences  into  "experiences."  I  have  already  dwelt  upon  the

importance  of  mnemic  phenomena  for  psychology,  and  shall  not  enlarge

upon them now, beyond observing that they are what transforms a biography

(in our technical sense) into a life. It is they that give the continuity of a

"person"  or  a  "mind."  But  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  mnemic

phenomena are associated with biographies except in the case of animals and

plants.

  Our two-fold classification of particulars gives rise to the dualism of body

and biography in regard to everything in the universe, and not only in regard

to living things. This arises as follows. Every particular of the sort considered

by  physics  is  a  member  of  two  groups  (1)  The  group  of  particulars

constituting the other aspects of the same physical object; (2) The group of

particulars that have direct time-relations to the given particular.

  Each  of  these  is  associated  with  a  place.  When  I  look  at  a  star,  my

sensation is (1) A member of the group of particulars which is the star, and

which is associated with the place where the star is; (2) A member of the

group of particulars which is my biography, and which is associated with the

place where I am.*

*I have explained elsewhere the manner in which space is 

constructed on this theory, and in which the position of a perspective is brought into relation with the position of a 

physical object ("Our Knowledge of the External World," 

Lecture III, pp. 90, 91).

  The  result  is  that  every  particular  of  the  kind  relevant  to  physics  is

associated with TWO places; e.g. my sensation of the star is associated with

the place where I am and with the place where the star is. This dualism has

nothing to do with any "mind" that I may be supposed to possess; it exists in

exactly the same sense if I am replaced by a photographic plate. We may call

the two places the active and passive places respectively.* Thus in the case of

a perception or photograph of a star, the active place is the place where the

star  is,  while  the  passive  place  is  the  place  where  the  percipient  or

photographic plate is.

* I use these as mere names; I do not want to introduce any 

notion of "activity."

  We  can  thus,  without  departing  from  physics,  collect  together  all  the

particulars actively at a given place, or all the particulars passively at a given

place. In our own case, the one group is our body (or our brain), while the

other is our mind, in so far as it consists of perceptions. In the case of the

photographic plate, the first group is the plate as dealt with by physics, the

second  the  aspect  of  the  heavens  which  it  photographs.  (For  the  sake  of

schematic simplicity, I am ignoring various complications connected with

time, which require some tedious but perfectly feasible elaborations.) Thus

what  may  be  called  subjectivity  in  the  point  of  view  is  not  a  distinctive

peculiarity of mind: it is present just as much in the photographic plate. And

the  photographic  plate  has  its  biography  as  well  as  its  "matter."  But  this

biography is an affair of physics, and has none of the peculiar characteristics

by which "mental" phenomena are distinguished, with the sole exception of

subjectivity.

  Adhering, for the moment, to the standpoint of physics, we may define a

"perception" of an object as the appearance of the object from a place where

there is a brain (or, in lower animals, some suitable nervous structure), with

sense-organs  and  nerves  forming  part  of  the  intervening  medium.  Such

appearances of objects are distinguished from appearances in other places by

certain peculiarities, namely:

  (1) They give rise to mnemic phenomena;

  (2) They are themselves affected by mnemic phenomena.  That is to say, they may be remembered and associated or influence our

habits, or give rise to images, etc., and they are themselves different from

what they would have been if our past experience had been different—for

example,  the  effect  of  a  spoken  sentence  upon  the  hearer  depends  upon

whether the hearer knows the language or not, which is a question of past

experience.  It  is  these  two  characteristics,  both  connected  with  mnemic

phenomena, that distinguish perceptions from the appearances of objects in

places where there is no living being.

    Theoretically, though often not practically, we can, in our perception of an

object, separate the part which is due to past experience from the part which

proceeds without mnemic influences out of the character of the object. We

may define as "sensation" that part which proceeds in this way, while the

remainder, which is a mnemic phenomenon, will have to be added to the

sensation  to  make  up  what  is  called  the  "perception."  According  to  this

definition, the sensation is a theoretical core in the actual experience; the

actual  experience  is  the  perception.  It  is  obvious  that  there  are  grave

difficulties in carrying out these definitions, but we will not linger over them.

We have to pass, as soon as we can, from the physical standpoint, which we

have been hitherto adopting, to the standpoint of psychology, in which we

make more use of introspection in the first of the three senses discussed in the

preceding lecture.

  But before making the transition, there are two points which must be made

clear. First: Everything outside my own personal biography is outside my

experience; therefore if anything can be known by me outside my biography,

it can only be known in one of two ways:

  (1) By inference from things within my biography, or

  (2) By some a priori principle independent of experience.

  I  do  not  myself  believe  that  anything  approaching  certainty  is  to  be

attained by either of these methods, and therefore whatever lies outside my

personal  biography  must  be  regarded,  theoretically,  as  hypothesis.  The

theoretical  argument  for  adopting  the  hypothesis  is  that  it  simplifies  the

statement of the laws according to which events happen in our experience.

But there is no very good ground for supposing that a simple law is more

likely to be true than a complicated law, though there is good ground for

assuming a simple law in scientific practice, as a working hypothesis, if it

explains  the  facts  as  well  as  another  which  is  less  simple.  Belief  in  theexistence  of  things  outside  my  own  biography  exists  antecedently  to

evidence, and can only be destroyed, if at all, by a long course of philosophic

doubt. For purposes of science, it is justified practically by the simplification

which  it  introduces  into  the  laws  of  physics.  But  from  the  standpoint  of

theoretical logic it must be regarded as a prejudice, not as a well-grounded

theory. With this proviso, I propose to continue yielding to the prejudice.

  The second point concerns the relating of our point of view to that which

regards sensations as caused by stimuli external to the nervous system (or at

least to the brain), and distinguishes images as "centrally excited," i.e. due to

causes in the brain which cannot be traced back to anything affecting the

sense-organs. It is clear that, if our analysis of physical objects has been

valid, this way of defining sensations needs reinterpretation. It is also clear

that we must be able to find such a new interpretation if our theory is to be

admissible.

  To make the matter clear, we will take the simplest possible illustration.

Consider a certain star, and suppose for the moment that its size is negligible.

That is to say, we will regard it as, for practical purposes, a luminous point.

Let us further suppose that it exists only for a very brief time, say a second.

Then, according to physics, what happens is that a spherical wave of light

travels outward from the star through space, just as, when you drop a stone

into a stagnant pond, ripples travel outward from the place where the stone

hit the water. The wave of light travels with a certain very nearly constant

velocity,  roughly  300,000  kilometres  per  second.  This  velocity  may  be

ascertained by sending a flash of light to a mirror, and observing how long it

takes before the reflected flash reaches you, just as the velocity of sound may

be ascertained by means of an echo.

  What it is that happens when a wave of light reaches a given place we

cannot tell, except in the sole case when the place in question is a brain

connected with an eye which is turned in the right direction. In this one very

special case we know what happens: we have the sensation called "seeing the

star." In all other cases, though we know (more or less hypothetically) some

of the correlations and abstract properties of the appearance of the star, we do

not know the appearance itself. Now you may, for the sake of illustration,

compare the different appearances of the star to the conjugation of a Greek

verb,  except  that  the  number  of  its  parts  is  really  infinite,  and  not  only

apparently so to the despairing schoolboy. In vacuo, the parts are regular, andcan be derived from the (imaginary) root according to the laws of grammar,

i.e. of perspective. The star being situated in empty space, it may be defined,

for  purposes  of  physics,  as  consisting  of  all  those  appearances  which  it

presents  in  vacuo,  together  with  those  which,  according  to  the  laws  of

perspective, it would present elsewhere if its appearances elsewhere were

regular. This is merely the adaptation of the definition of matter which I gave

in an earlier lecture. The appearance of a star at a certain place, if it is regular,

does not require any cause or explanation beyond the existence of the star.

Every regular appearance is an actual member of the system which is the star,

and its causation is entirely internal to that system. We may express this by

saying that a regular appearance is due to the star alone, and is actually part

of the star, in the sense in which a man is part of the human race.

  But presently the light of the star reaches our atmosphere. It begins to be

refracted, and dimmed by mist, and its velocity is slightly diminished. At last

it reaches a human eye, where a complicated process takes place, ending in a

sensation  which  gives  us  our  grounds  for  believing  in  all  that  has  gone

before. Now, the irregular appearances of the star are not, strictly speaking,

members  of  the  system  which  is  the  star,  according  to  our  definition  of

matter. The irregular appearances, however, are not merely irregular: they

proceed according to laws which can be stated in terms of the matter through

which the light has passed on its way. The sources of an irregular appearance

are therefore twofold:

  (1) The object which is appearing irregularly;

  2) The intervening medium.

  It should be observed that, while the conception of a regular appearance is

perfectly precise, the conception of an irregular appearance is one capable of

any degree of vagueness. When the distorting influence of the medium is

sufficiently great, the resulting particular can no longer be regarded as an

appearance of an object, but must be treated on its own account. This happens

especially  when  the  particular  in  question  cannot  be  traced  back  to  one

object, but is a blend of two or more. This case is normal in perception: we

see as one what the microscope or telescope reveals to be many different

objects. The notion of perception is therefore not a precise one: we perceive

things more or less, but always with a very considerable amount of vagueness

and confusion.

  In  considering  irregular  appearances,  there  are  certain  very  naturalmistakes which must be avoided. In order that a particular may count as an

irregular appearance of a certain object, it is not necessary that it should bear

any resemblance to the regular appearances as regard its intrinsic qualities.

All  that  is  necessary  is  that  it  should  be  derivable  from  the  regular

appearances  by  the  laws  which  express  the  distorting  influence  of  the

medium. When it is so derivable, the particular in question may be regarded

as  caused  by  the  regular  appearances,  and  therefore  by  the  object  itself,

together with the modifications resulting from the medium. In other cases, the

particular  in  question  may,  in  the  same  sense,  be  regarded  as  caused  by

several objects together with the medium; in this case, it may be called a

confused appearance of several objects. If it happens to be in a brain, it may

be  called  a  confused  perception  of  these  objects.  All  actual  perception  is

confused to a greater or less extent.

  We can now interpret in terms of our theory the distinction between those

mental occurrences which are said to have an external stimulus, and those

which are said to be "centrally excited," i.e. to have no stimulus external to

the brain. When a mental occurrence can be regarded as an appearance of an

object  external  to  the  brain,  however  irregular,  or  even  as  a  confused

appearance of several such objects, then we may regard it as having for its

stimulus the object or objects in question, or their appearances at the sense-

organ  concerned.  When,  on  the  other  hand,  a  mental  occurrence  has  not

sufficient connection with objects external to the brain to be regarded as an

appearance of such objects, then its physical causation (if any) will have to be

sought in the brain. In the former case it can be called a perception; in the

latter it cannot be so called. But the distinction is one of degree, not of kind.

Until  this  is  realized,  no  satisfactory  theory  of  perception,  sensation,  or

imagination is possible.

              LECTURE VIII. SENSATIONS AND IMAGES

  The dualism of mind and matter, if we have been right so far, cannot be

allowed  as  metaphysically  valid.  Nevertheless,  we  seem  to  find  a  certain

dualism, perhaps not ultimate, within the world as we observe it. The dualism

is not primarily as to the stuff of the world, but as to causal laws. On this

subject we may again quote William James. He points out that when, as we

say, we merely "imagine" things, there are no such effects as would ensue if

the things were what we call "real." He takes the case of imagining a fire.

  "I make for myself an experience of blazing fire; I place it near my body;

but it does not warm me in the least. I lay a stick upon it and the stick either

burns or remains green, as I please. I call up water, and pour it on the fire,

and absolutely no difference ensues. I account for all such facts by calling

this whole train of experiences unreal, a mental train. Mental fire is what

won't  burn  real  sticks;  mental  water  is  what  won't  necessarily  (though  of

course  it  may)  put  out  even  a  mental  fire....  With  'real'  objects,  on  the

contrary,  consequences  always  accrue;  and  thus  the  real  experiences  get

sifted from the mental ones, the things from our thoughts of them, fanciful or

true, and precipitated together as the stable part of the whole experience—

chaos, under the name of the physical world."*

* "Essays in Radical Empiricism," pp. 32-3.

  In  this  passage  James  speaks,  by  mere  inadvertence,  as  though  the

phenomena which he is describing as "mental" had NO effects. This is, of

course,  not  the  case:  they  have  their  effects,  just  as  much  as  physical

phenomena do, but their effects follow different laws. For example, dreams,

as Freud has shown, are just as much subject to laws as are the motions of the

planets. But the laws are different: in a dream you may be transported from

one place to another in a moment, or one person may turn into another under

your eyes. Such differences compel you to distinguish the world of dreams

from the physical world.

  If the two sorts of causal laws could be sharply distinguished, we could

call an occurrence "physical" when it obeys causal laws appropriate to the

physical world, and "mental" when it obeys causal laws appropriate to the

mental world. Since the mental world and the physical world interact, there

would be a boundary between the two: there would be events which would

have physical causes and mental effects, while there would be others whichwould  have  mental  causes  and  physical  effects.  Those  that  have  physical

causes and mental effects we should define as "sensations." Those that have

mental causes and physical effects might perhaps be identified with what we

call voluntary movements; but they do not concern us at present.

  These definitions would have all the precision that could be desired if the

distinction  between  physical  and  psychological  causation  were  clear  and

sharp. As a matter of fact, however, this distinction is, as yet, by no means

sharp. It is possible that, with fuller knowledge, it will be found to be no

more ultimate than the distinction between the laws of gases and the laws of

rigid bodies. It also suffers from the fact that an event may be an effect of

several causes according to several causal laws we cannot, in general, point to

anything unique as THE cause of such-and-such an event. And finally it is by

no means certain that the peculiar causal laws which govern mental events

are  not  really  physiological.  The  law  of  habit,  which  is  one  of  the  most

distinctive, may be fully explicable in terms of the peculiarities of nervous

tissue,  and  these  peculiarities,  in  turn,  may  be  explicable  by  the  laws  of

physics.  It  seems,  therefore,  that  we  are  driven  to  a  different  kind  of

definition. It is for this reason that it was necessary to develop the definition

of perception. With this definition, we can define a sensation as the non-

mnemic elements in a perception.

  When, following our definition, we try to decide what elements in our

experience are of the nature of sensations, we find more difficulty than might

have been expected. Prima facie, everything is sensation that comes to us

through the senses: the sights we see, the sounds we hear, the smells we

smell, and so on; also such things as headache or the feeling of muscular

strain.  But  in  actual  fact  so  much  interpretation,  so  much  of  habitual

correlation, is mixed with all such experiences, that the core of pure sensation

is only to be extracted by careful investigation. To take a simple illustration:

if you go to the theatre in your own country, you seem to hear equally well in

the stalls or the dress circle; in either case you think you miss nothing. But if

you go in a foreign country where you have a fair knowledge of the language,

you will seem to have grown partially deaf, and you will find it necessary to

be much nearer the stage than you would need to be in your own country.

The  reason  is  that,  in  hearing  our  own  language  spoken,  we  quickly  and

unconsciously fill out what we really hear with inferences to what the man

must be saying, and we never realize that we have not heard the words wehave  merely  inferred.  In  a  foreign  language,  these  inferences  are  more

difficult,  and  we  are  more  dependent  upon  actual  sensation.  If  we  found

ourselves in a foreign world, where tables looked like cushions and cushions

like tables, we should similarly discover how much of what we think we see

is really inference. Every fairly familiar sensation is to us a sign of the things

that usually go with it, and many of these things will seem to form part of the

sensation. I remember in the early days of motor-cars being with a friend

when a tyre burst with a loud report. He thought it was a pistol, and supported

his opinion by maintaining that he had seen the flash. But of course there had

been no flash. Nowadays no one sees a flash when a tyre bursts.

  In order, therefore, to arrive at what really is sensation in an occurrence

which, at first sight, seems to contain nothing else, we have to pare away all

that is due to habit or expectation or interpretation. This is a matter for the

psychologist, and by no means an easy matter. For our purposes, it is not

important to determine what exactly is the sensational core in any case; it is

only important to notice that there certainly is a sensational core, since habit,

expectation and interpretation are diversely aroused on diverse occasions, and

the diversity is clearly due to differences in what is presented to the senses.

When  you  open  your  newspaper  in  the  morning,  the  actual  sensations  of

seeing the print form a very minute part of what goes on in you, but they are

the starting-point of all the rest, and it is through them that the newspaper is a

means of information or mis-information. Thus, although it may be difficult

to determine what exactly is sensation in any given experience, it is clear that

there is sensation, unless, like Leibniz, we deny all action of the outer world

upon us.

  Sensations  are  obviously  the  source  of  our  knowledge  of  the  world,

including our own body. It might seem natural to regard a sensation as itself a

cognition, and until lately I did so regard it. When, say, I see a person I know

coming towards me in the street, it SEEMS as though the mere seeing were

knowledge. It is of course undeniable that knowledge comes THROUGH the

seeing,  but  I  think  it  is  a  mistake  to  regard  the  mere  seeing  itself  as

knowledge. If we are so to regard it, we must distinguish the seeing from

what is seen: we must say that, when we see a patch of colour of a certain

shape, the patch of colour is one thing and our seeing of it is another. This

view, however, demands the admission of the subject, or act, in the sense

discussed in our first lecture. If there is a subject, it can have a relation to thepatch of colour, namely, the sort of relation which we might call awareness.

In that case the sensation, as a mental event, will consist of awareness of the

colour, while the colour itself will remain wholly physical, and may be called

the sense-datum, to distinguish it from the sensation. The subject, however,

appears to be a logical fiction, like mathematical points and instants. It is

introduced, not because observation reveals it, but because it is linguistically

convenient and apparently demanded by grammar. Nominal entities of this

sort may or may not exist, but there is no good ground for assuming that they

do. The functions that they appear to perform can always be performed by

classes  or  series  or  other  logical  constructions,  consisting  of  less  dubious

entities.  If  we  are  to  avoid  a  perfectly  gratuitous  assumption,  we  must

dispense with the subject as one of the actual ingredients of the world. But

when  we  do  this,  the  possibility  of  distinguishing  the  sensation  from  the

sense-datum vanishes; at least I see no way of preserving the distinction.

Accordingly the sensation that we have when we see a patch of colour simply

is that patch of colour, an actual constituent of the physical world, and part of

what physics is concerned with. A patch of colour is certainly not knowledge,

and therefore we cannot say that pure sensation is cognitive. Through its

psychological effects, it is the cause of cognitions, partly by being itself a

sign of things that are correlated with it, as e.g. sensations of sight and touch

are correlated, and partly by giving rise to images and memories after the

sensation is faded. But in itself the pure sensation is not cognitive.

  In the first lecture we considered the view of Brentano, that "we may

define  psychical  phenomena  by  saying  that  they  are  phenomena  which

intentionally  contain  an  object."  We  saw  reasons  to  reject  this  view  in

general;  we  are  now  concerned  to  show  that  it  must  be  rejected  in  the

particular case of sensations. The kind of argument which formerly made me

accept Brentano's view in this case was exceedingly simple. When I see a

patch of colour, it seemed to me that the colour is not psychical, but physical,

while my seeing is not physical, but psychical. Hence I concluded that the

colour is something other than my seeing of the colour. This argument, to me

historically, was directed against idealism: the emphatic part of it was the

assertion that the colour is physical, not psychical. I shall not trouble you now

with the grounds for holding as against Berkeley that the patch of colour is

physical; I have set them forth before, and I see no reason to modify them.

But it does not follow that the patch of colour is not also psychical, unless weassume that the physical and the psychical cannot overlap, which I no longer

consider a valid assumption. If we admit—as I think we should—that the

patch  of  colour  may  be  both  physical  and  psychical,  the  reason  for

distinguishing the sense-datum from the sensation disappears, and we may

say that the patch of colour and our sensation in seeing it are identical.

  This is the view of William James, Professor Dewey, and the American

realists.  Perceptions,  says  Professor  Dewey,  are  not  per  se  cases  of

knowledge, but simply natural events with no more knowledge status than

(say)  a  shower.  "Let  them  [the  realists]  try  the  experiment  of  conceiving

perceptions as pure natural events, not cases of awareness or apprehension,

and they will be surprised to see how little they miss."* I think he is right in

this, except in supposing that the realists will be surprised. Many of them

already hold the view he is advocating, and others are very sympathetic to it.

At any rate, it is the view which I shall adopt in these lectures.

* Dewey, "Essays in Experimental Logic," pp. 253, 262.

  The stuff of the world, so far as we have experience of it, consists, on the

view that I am advocating, of innumerable transient particulars such as occur

in seeing, hearing, etc., together with images more or less resembling these,

of  which  I  shall  speak  shortly.  If  physics  is  true,  there  are,  besides  the

particulars that we experience, others, probably equally (or almost equally)

transient, which make up that part of the material world that does not come

into the sort of contact with a living body that is required to turn it into a

sensation. But this topic belongs to the philosophy of physics, and need not

concern us in our present inquiry.

  Sensations are what is common to the mental and physical worlds; they

may be defined as the intersection of mind and matter. This is by no means a

new  view;  it  is  advocated,  not  only  by  the  American  authors  I  have

mentioned, but by Mach in his Analysis of Sensations, which was published

in 1886. The essence of sensation, according to the view I am advocating, is

its independence of past experience. It is a core in our actual experiences,

never existing in isolation except possibly in very young infants. It is not

itself knowledge, but it supplies the data for our knowledge of the physical

world, including our own bodies.

  There  are  some  who  believe  that  our  mental  life  is  built  up  out  of

sensations  alone.  This  may  be  true;  but  in  any  case  I  think  the  only

ingredients required in addition to sensations are images. What images are,and how they are to be defined, we have now to inquire.

  The distinction between images and sensations might seem at first sight by

no means difficult. When we shut our eyes and call up pictures of familiar

scenes,  we  usually  have  no  difficulty,  so  long  as  we  remain  awake,  in

discriminating between what we are imagining and what is really seen. If we

imagine some piece of music that we know, we can go through it in our mind

from beginning to end without any discoverable tendency to suppose that we

are really hearing it. But although such cases are so clear that no confusion

seems possible, there are many others that are far more difficult, and the

definition of images is by no means an easy problem.

  To begin with: we do not always know whether what we are experiencing

is a sensation or an image. The things we see in dreams when our eyes are

shut  must  count  as  images,  yet  while  we  are  dreaming  they  seem  like

sensations.  Hallucinations  often  begin  as  persistent  images,  and  only

gradually  acquire  that  influence  over  belief  that  makes  the  patient  regard

them as sensations. When we are listening for a faint sound—the striking of a

distant clock, or a horse's hoofs on the road—we think we hear it many times

before we really do, because expectation brings us the image, and we mistake

it for sensation. The distinction between images and sensations is, therefore,

by no means always obvious to inspection.*

* On the distinction between images and sensation, cf. 

Semon, "Die mnemischen Empfindungen," pp. 19-20.

  We  may  consider  three  different  ways  in  which  it  has  been  sought  to

distinguish images from sensations, namely:

  (1) By the less degree of vividness in images;

  (2) By our absence of belief in their "physical reality";

  (3) By the fact that their causes and effects are different from those of

sensations.

  I believe the third of these to be the only universally applicable criterion.

The other two are applicable in very many cases, but cannot be used for

purposes of definition because they are liable to exceptions. Nevertheless,

they both deserve to be carefully considered.

  (1) Hume, who gives the names "impressions" and "ideas" to what may,

for present purposes, be identified with our "sensations" and "images," speaks

of  impressions  as  "those  perceptions  which  enter  with  most  force  and

violence"  while  he  defines  ideas  as  "the  faint  images  of  these  (i.e.  ofimpressions)  in  thinking  and  reasoning."  His  immediately  following

observations, however, show the inadequacy of his criteria of "force" and

"faintness." He says:

  "I  believe  it  will  not  be  very  necessary  to  employ  many  words  in

explaining this distinction. Every one of himself will readily perceive the

difference betwixt feeling and thinking. The common degrees of these are

easily distinguished, though it is not impossible but in particular instances

they may very nearly approach to each other. Thus in sleep, in a fever, in

madness, or in any very violent emotions of soul, our ideas may approach to

our  impressions;  as,  on  the  other  hand,  it  sometimes  happens,  that  our

impressions are so faint and low that we cannot distinguish them from our

ideas. But notwithstanding this near resemblance in a few instances, they are

in general so very different, that no one can make a scruple to rank them

under  distinct  heads,  and  assign  to  each  a  peculiar  name  to  mark  the

difference" ("Treatise of Human Nature," Part I, Section I).

  I think Hume is right in holding that they should be ranked under distinct

heads, with a peculiar name for each. But by his own confession in the above

passage,  his  criterion  for  distinguishing  them  is  not  always  adequate.  A

definition  is  not  sound  if  it  only  applies  in  cases  where  the  difference  is

glaring: the essential purpose of a definition is to provide a mark which is

applicable even in marginal cases—except, of course, when we are dealing

with a conception, like, e.g. baldness, which is one of degree and has no

sharp  boundaries.  But  so  far  we  have  seen  no  reason  to  think  that  the

difference between sensations and images is only one of degree.

  Professor Stout, in his "Manual of Psychology," after discussing various

ways of distinguishing sensations and images, arrives at a view which is a

modification of Hume's. He says (I quote from the second edition):

  "Our  conclusion  is  that  at  bottom  the  distinction  between  image  and

percept, as respectively faint and vivid states, is based on a difference of

quality.  The  percept  has  an  aggressiveness  which  does  not  belong  to  the

image.  It  strikes  the  mind  with  varying  degrees  of  force  or  liveliness

according to the varying intensity of the stimulus. This degree of force or

liveliness is part of what we ordinarily mean by the intensity of a sensation.

But this constituent of the intensity of sensations is absent in mental imagery"

(p. 419).

  This view allows for the fact that sensations may reach any degree offaintness—e.g. in the case of a just visible star or a just audible sound—

without becoming images, and that therefore mere faintness cannot be the

characteristic mark of images. After explaining the sudden shock of a flash of

lightning or a steam-whistle, Stout says that "no mere image ever does strike

the mind in this manner"(p. 417). But I believe that this criterion fails in very

much  the  same  instances  as  those  in  which  Hume's  criterion  fails  in  its

original form. Macbeth speaks of—