regarded  space  as  a  particular  case  of  the  more  general  conception  of  a

manifold. Taking its stand on the methods of analytical metrical Geometry, it

established two non-Euclidean systems, the first that of Lobatchewsky, the

second—in which the axiom of the straight line, in Euclid's form, was also

denied—a new variety, by analogy called spherical. The leading conception

in this period is the measure of curvature, a term invented by Gauss, but

applied  by  him  only  to  surfaces.  Gauss  had  shown  that  free  mobility  on

surfaces  was  only  possible  when  the  measure  of  curvature  was  constant;

Riemann and Helmholtz extended this proposition to n dimensions, and made

it the fundamental property of space.

  In the third period, which begins with Cayley, the philosophical motive,

which had moved the first pioneers, is less apparent, and is replaced by a

more technical and mathematical spirit. This period is chiefly distinguished

from the second, in a mathematical point of view, by its method, which is

projective instead of metrical. The leading mathematical conception here is

the  Absolute  (Grundgebild),  a  figure  by  relation  to  which  all  metrical

properties  become  projective.  Cayley's  work,  which  was  very  brief,  and

attracted little attention, has been perfected and elaborated by F. Klein, and

through him has found general acceptance. Klein has added to the two kinds

of non-Euclidean Geometry already known, a third, which he calls elliptic;

this  third  kind  closely  resembles  Helmholtz's  spherical  Geometry,  but  is

distinguished by the important difference that, in it, two straight lines meet in
                [7]
only one point. The distinctive mark of the spaces represented by both is

that, like the surface of a sphere, they are finite but unbounded. The reduction

of metrical to projective properties, as will be proved hereafter, has only a

technical importance; at the same time, projective Geometry is able to deal

directly with those purely descriptive or qualitative properties of space which

are  common  to  Euclid  and  Metageometry  alike.  The  third  period  has,

therefore,  great  philosophical  importance,  while  its  method  has,

mathematically, much greater beauty and unity than that of the second; it is

able to treat all kinds of space at once, so that every symbolic proposition is,

according to the meaning given to the symbols, a proposition in whichever

Geometry we choose. This has the advantage of proving that further research

cannot lead to contradictions in non-Euclidean systems, unless it at the same

moment  reveals  contradictions  in  Euclid.  These  systems,  therefore,  arelogically as sound as that of Euclid himself.

  After this brief sketch of the characteristics of the three periods, I will

proceed to a more detailed account. It will be my aim to avoid, as far as

possible,  all  technical  mathematics,  and  bring  into  relief  only  those

fundamental points in the mathematical development, which seem of logical

or philosophical importance.

  First Period.

  12. The originator of the whole system, Gauss, does not appear, as regards

strictly non-Euclidean Geometry, in any of his hitherto published papers, to

have given more than results; his proofs remain unknown to us. Nevertheless

he was the first to investigate the consequences of denying the axiom of
        [8]
parallels, and in his letters he communicated these consequences to some of

his friends, among whom was Wolfgang Bolyai. The first mention of the

subject in his letters occurs when he was only 18; four years later, in 1799,

writing to W. Bolyai, he enunciates the important theorem that, in hyperbolic

Geometry, there is a maximum to the area of a triangle. From later writings it

appears that he had worked out a system nearly, if not quite, as complete as
                                        [9]
those of Lobatchewsky and Bolyai.

  It is important to remember, however, that Gauss's work on curvature,

which was published, laid the foundation for the whole method of the second
                                                                              [10]
period, and was undertaken, according to Riemann and Helmholtz, with a

view to an (unpublished) investigation of the foundations of Geometry. His

work in this direction will, owing to its method, be better treated of under the

second  period,  but  it  is  interesting  to  observe  that  he  stood,  like  many

pioneers, at the head of two tendencies which afterwards diverged.

  13. Lobatchewsky, a professor in the University of Kasan, first published

his results, in their native Russian, in the proceedings of that learned body for

the years 1829–1830. Owing to this double obscurity of language and place,
                                                                                  [11]
they  attracted  little  attention,  until  he  translated  them  into  French and
        [12]
German: even then, they do not appear to have obtained the notice they

deserved, until, in 1868, Beltrami unearthed the article in Crelle, and made it

the theme of a brilliant interpretation.

  In the introduction to his little German book, Lobatchewsky laments the

slight interest shown in his writings by his compatriots, and the inattention of

mathematicians, since Legendre's abortive attempt, to the difficulties in thetheory of parallels. The body of the work begins with the enunciation of

several important propositions which hold good in the system proposed as

well as in Euclid: of these, some are in any case independent of the axiom of

parallels, while others are rendered so by substituting, for the word "parallel,"

the  phrase  "not  intersecting,  however  far  produced."  Then  follows  a

definition, intentionally framed so as to contradict Euclid's: With respect to a

given straight line, all others in the same plane may be divided into two

classes, those which cut the given straight line, and those which do not cut it;

a line which is the limit between the two classes is called parallel to the given

straight line. It follows that, from any external point, two parallels can be

drawn,  one  in  each  direction.  From  this  starting-point,  by  the  Euclidean

synthetic method, a series of propositions are deduced; the most important of

these is, that in a triangle the sum of the angles is always less than, or always

equal to two right angles, while in the latter case the whole system becomes

orthodox. A certain analogy with spherical Geometry—whose meaning and

extent will appear later—is also proved, consisting roughly in the substitution

of hyperbolic for circular functions.

  14. Very similar is the system of Johann Bolyai, so similar, indeed, as to

make the independence of the two works, though a well-authenticated fact,

seem all but incredible. Johann Bolyai first published his results in 1832, in

an appendix to a work by his father Wolfgang, entitled; "Appendix, scientiam

spatii absolute veram exhibens: a veritate aut falsitate Axiomatis XI. Euclidei

(a priori haud unquam decidenda) independentem; adjecta ad casum falsitatis,

quadratura circuli geometrica." Gauss, whose bosom friend he became at 

college  and  remained  through  life,  was,  as  we  have  seen,  the  inspirer  of

Wolfgang  Bolyai,  and  used  to  say  that  the  latter  was  the  only  man  who

appreciated  his  philosophical  speculations  on  the  axioms  of  Geometry;

nevertheless, Wolfgang appears to have left to his son Johann the detailed

working out of the hyperbolic system. The works of both the Bolyai are very

rare,  and  their  method  and  results  are  known  to  me  only  through  the
                                          [13]
renderings of Frischauf and Halsted. Both as to method and as to results,

the system is very similar to Lobatchewsky's, so that neither need detain us

here.  Only  the  initial  postulates,  which  are  more  explicit  than

Lobatchewsky's, demand a brief attention. Frischauf's introduction, which has

a philosophical and Newtonian air, begins by setting forth that Geometrydeals with absolute (empty) space, obtained by abstracting from the bodies in

it, that two figures are called congruent when they differ only in position, and

that the axiom of Congruence is indispensable in all determination of spatial

magnitudes. Congruence was to refer to geometrical bodies, with none of the

properties of ordinary bodies except impenetrability (Erdmann, Axiome der

Geometrie,  p.  26).  A  straight  line  is  defined  as  determined  by  two  of  its
      [14]
points, and a plane as determined by three. These premisses, with a slight

exception as to the straight line, we shall hereafter find essential to every

Geometry. I have drawn attention to them, as it is often supposed that non-

Euclideans deny the axiom of Congruence, which, here and elsewhere, is

never the case. The stress laid on this axiom by Bolyai is probably due to the

influence  of  Gauss,  whose  work  on  the  curvature  of  surfaces  laid  the

foundation for the use made of congruence by Helmholtz.

  15. It is important to remember that, throughout the period we have just

reviewed, the purpose of hyperbolic Geometry is indirect: not the truth of the

latter, but the logical independence of the axiom of parallels from the rest, is

the guiding motive of the work. If, by denying the axiom of parallels while

retaining the rest, we can obtain a system free from logical contradictions, it

follows  that  the  axiom  of  parallels  cannot  be  implicitly  contained  in  the

others. If this be so, attempts to dispense with the axiom, like Legendre's,

cannot be successful; Euclid must stand or fall with the suspected axiom. Of

course,  it  remained  possible  that,  by  further  development,  latent

contradictions might have been revealed in these systems. This possibility,

however,  was  removed  by  the  more  direct  and  constructive  work  of  the

second period, to which we must now turn our attention.

  Second Period.

  16. The work of Lobatchewsky and Bolyai remained, for nearly a quarter

of  a  century,  without  issue—indeed,  the  investigations  of  Riemann  and

Helmholtz, when they came, appear to have been inspired, not by these men,
                        [15]
but  rather  by  Gauss  and  Herbart.  We  find,  accordingly,  very  great

difference, both of aim and method, between the first period and the second.

The  former,  beginning  with  a  criticism  of  one  point  in  Euclid's  system,

preserved his synthetic method, while it threw over one of his axioms. The

latter,  on  the  contrary,  being  guided  by  a  philosophical  rather  than  a

mathematical  spirit,  endeavoured  to  classify  the  conception  of  space  as  aspecies of a more general conception: it treated space algebraically, and the

properties it gave to space were expressed in terms, not of intuition, but of

algebra. The aim of Riemann and Helmholtz was to show, by the exhibition

of logically possible alternatives, the empirical nature of the received axioms.

For this purpose, they conceived space as a particular case of a manifold, and

showed  that  various  relations  of  magnitude  (Massverhältnisse)  were

mathematically possible in an extended manifold. Their philosophy, which

seems to me not always irreproachable, will be discussed in Chapter II.; here,

while it is important to remember the philosophical motive of Riemann and

Helmholtz, we shall confine our attention to the mathematical side of their

work. In so doing, while we shall, I fear, somewhat maim the system of their

thoughts,  we  shall  secure  a  closer  unity  of  subject,  and a  more  compact

account of the purely mathematical development. But there is, in my opinion,

a  further  reason  for  separating  their  philosophy  from  their  mathematics.

While  their  philosophical  purpose  was,  to  prove  that  all  the  axioms  of

Geometry are empirical, and that a different content of our experience might

have changed them all, the unintended result of their mathematical work was,

if  I  am  not  mistaken,  to  afford  material  for  an à priori  proof  of  certain

axioms. These axioms, though they believed them to be unnecessary, were

always introduced in their mathematical works, before laying the foundations

of non-Euclidean systems. I shall contend, in Chapter III., that this retention

was  logically  inevitable,  and  was  not  merely  due,  as  they  supposed,  to  a

desire  for  conformity  with  experience.  If  I  am  right  in  this,  there  is  a

divergence between Riemann and Helmholtz the philosophers, and Riemann

and  Helmholtz  the  mathematicians.  This  divergence  makes  it  the  more

desirable  to  trace  the  mathematical  development  apart  from  the

accompanying philosophy.

  17. Riemann's epoch-making work, "Ueber die Hypothesen, welche der
                                [16]
Geometrie zu Grande liegen", was written, and read to a small circle, in

1854; owing, however, to some changes which he desired to make in it, it

remained unpublished till 1867, when it was published by his executors. The

two  fundamental  conceptions,  on  whose  invention  rests  the  historic

importance of this dissertation, are that of a manifold, and that of the measure

of  curvature  of  a  manifold.  The  former  conception  serves  a  mainly

philosophical purpose, and is designed, principally, to exhibit space as aninstance of a more general conception. On this aspect of the manifold, I shall

have  much  to  say  in  Chapter  II.;  its  mathematical  aspect,  which  alone

concerns us here, is less complicated and less fruitful of controversy. The

latter conception also serves a double purpose, but its mathematical use is the

more prominent. We will consider these two conceptions successively.
                                          [17]
  18. (1) Conception of a manifold. The general purpose of Riemann's

dissertation is, to exhibit the axioms as successive steps in the classification

of the species space. The axioms of Geometry, like the marks of a scholastic

definition, appear as successive determinations of class-conceptions, ending

with Euclidean space. We have thus, from the analytical point of view, about

as  logical  and  precise  a  formulation  as  can  be  desired—a  formulation  in

which, from its classificatory character, we seem certain of having nothing

superfluous  or  redundant,  and  obtain  the  axioms  explicitly  in  the  most

desirable form, namely as adjectives of the conception of space. At the same

time, it is a pity that Riemann, in accordance with the metrical bias of his
                                                              [18]
time,  regarded  space  as  primarily  a  magnitude,  or  assemblage  of

magnitudes, in which the main problem consists in assigning quantities to the

different elements or points, without regard to the qualitative nature of the

quantities assigned. Considerable obscurity thus arises as to the whole nature
              [19]
of  magnitude.  This  view  of  Geometry  underlies  the  definition  of  the

manifold, as the general conception of which space forms a special case. This

definition, which is not very clear, may be rendered as follows.

  19. Conceptions of magnitude, according to Riemann, are possible there

only, where we have a general conception, capable of various determinations

(Bestimmungsweisen).  The  various  determinations  of  such  a  conception

together form a manifold, which is continuous or discrete, according as the

passage  from  one  determination  to  another  is  continuous  or  discrete.

Particular bits of a manifold, or quanta, can be compared by counting when

discrete, and by measurement when continuous. "Measurement consists in a

superposition of the magnitudes to be compared. If this be absent, magnitudes

can only be compared when one is part of another, and then only the more or

less, not the how much, can be decided" (p. 256). We thus reach the general

conception of a manifold of several dimensions, of which space and colours

are mentioned as special cases. To the absence of this conception Riemann

attributes the "obscurity" which, on the subject of the axioms, "lasted fromEuclid to Legendre" (p. 254). And Riemann certainly has succeeded, from an

algebraic  point  of  view,  in  exhibiting,  far  more  clearly  than  any  of  his

predecessors,  the  axioms  which  distinguish  spatial  quantity  from  other

quantities  with  which  mathematics  is  conversant.  But  by  the  assumption,

from the start, that space can be regarded as a quantity, he has been led to

state the problem as: What sort of magnitude is space? rather than: What

must space be in order that we may be able to regard it as a magnitude at all?

He does not realise, either—indeed in his day there were few who realized—

that an elaborate Geometry is possible which does not deal with space as a

quantity at all. His definition of space as a species of manifold, therefore,

though for analytical purposes it defines, most satisfactorily, the nature of

spatial magnitudes, leaves obscure the true ground for this nature, which lies

in  the  nature  of  space  as  a  system  of  relations,  and  is  anterior  to  the

possibility of regarding it as a system of magnitudes at all.

  But to proceed with the mathematical development of Riemann's ideas.

We have seen that he declared measurement to consist in a superposition of

the magnitudes to be compared. But in order that this may be a possible

means of determining magnitudes, he continues, these magnitudes must be

independent of their position in the manifold (p. 259). This can occur, he

says, in several ways, as the simplest of which, he assumes that the lengths of

lines are independent of their position. One would be glad to know what

other  ways  are  possible:  for  my  part,  I  am  unable  to  imagine  any  other

hypothesis on which magnitude would be independent of place. Setting this

aside, however, the problem, owing to the fact that measurement consists in

superposition, becomes identical with the determination of the most general

manifold in which magnitudes are independent of place. This brings us to

Riemann's  other  fundamental  conception,  which  seems  to  me  even  more

fruitful than that of a manifold.

  20. (2) Measure of curvature. This conception is due to Gauss, but was

applied by him only to surfaces; the novelty in Riemann's dissertation was its

extension to a manifold of n dimensions. This extension, however, is rather

briefly  and  obscurely  expressed,  and  has  been  further  obscured  by

Helmholtz's  attempts  at  popular  exposition.  The  term curvature,  also,  is

misleading, so that the phrase has been the source of more misunderstanding,

even  among  mathematicians,  than  any  other  in  Pangeometry.  It  is  often                                                            [20]
forgotten, in spite of Helmholtz's explicit statement, that the "measure of

curvature" of an n-dimensional manifold is a purely analytical expression,

which has only a symbolic affinity to ordinary curvature. As applied to three-

dimensional space, the implication of a four-dimensional "plane" space is

wholly misleading; I shall, therefore, generally use the term space-constant
      [21]
instead. Nevertheless, as the conception grew, historically, out of that of

curvature, I will give a very brief exposition of the historical development of

theories of curvature.

  Just as the notion of length was originally derived from the straight line,

and  extended  to  other  curves  by  dividing  them  into  infinitesimal  straight

lines, so the notion of curvature was derived from the circle, and extended to

other curves by dividing them into infinitesimal circular arcs. Curvature may

be regarded, originally, as a measure of the amount by which a curve departs

from a straight line; in a circle, which is similar throughout, this amount is

evidently constant, and is measured by the reciprocal of the radius. But in all

other curves, the amount of curvature varies from point to point, so that it

cannot  be  measured  without  infinitesimals.  The  measure  which  at  once

suggests itself is, the curvature of the circle most nearly coinciding with the

curve at the point considered. Since a circle is determined by three points,

this circle will pass through three consecutive points of the curve. We have

thus defined the curvature of any curve, plane or tortuous; for, since any three

points lie in a plane, such a circle can always be described.

  If we now pass to a surface, what we want is, by analogy, a measure of its

departure  from  a  plane.  The  curvature,  as  above  defined,  has  become

indeterminate, for through any point of the surface we can draw an infinite

number of arcs, which will not, in general, all have the same curvature. Let

us, then, draw all the geodesics joining the point in question to neighbouring

points of the surface in all directions. Since these arcs form a singly infinite

manifold, there will be among them, if they have not all the same curvature,
                                                              [22]
one arc of maximum, and one of minimum curvature. The product of these

maximum and minimum curvatures is called the measure of curvature of the

surface  at  the  point  under  consideration.  To  illustrate  by  a  few  simple

examples:  on  a  sphere,  the  curvatures  of  all  such  lines  are  equal  to  the

reciprocal  of  the  radius  of  the  sphere,  hence  the  measure  of  curvature

everywhere is the square of the reciprocal of the radius of the sphere. On anysurface, such as a cone or a cylinder, on which straight lines can be drawn,

these have no curvature, so that the measure of curvature is everywhere zero

—this  is  the  case,  in  particular,  with  the  plane.  In  general,  however,  the

measure of curvature of a surface varies from point to point.
                                                [23]
  Gauss, the inventor of this conception, proved that, in order that two

surfaces may be developable upon each other—i.e. may be such that one can

be  bent  into  the  shape  of  the  other  without  stretching  or  tearing—it  is

necessary that the two surfaces should have equal measures of curvature at

corresponding points. When this is the case, every figure which is possible on

the one is, in general, possible on the other, and the two have practically the
                [24]
same Geometry. As a corollary, it follows that a necessary condition, for

the free mobility of figures on any surface, is the constancy of the measure of
          [25]
curvature. This condition was proved to be sufficient, as well as necessary,
            [26]
by Minding.

  21. So far, all has been plain sailing—we have been dealing with purely

geometrical ideas in a purely geometrical manner—but we have not, as yet,

found any sense of the measure of curvature, in which it can be extended to

space,  still  less  to  an n-dimensional  manifold.  For  this  purpose,  we  must

examine  Gauss's  method,  which  enables  us  to  determine  the  measure  of

curvature of a surface at any point as an inherent property, quite independent

of any reference to the third dimension.

  The  method  of  determining  the  measure  of  curvature  from  within  is,

briefly,  as  follows:  If  any  point  on  the  surface  be  determined  by  two

coordinates, u, v, then small arcs of the surface are given by the formula
    222
  ds = Edu + 2Fdu dv + Gdv,
                                                                [27]
  where E, F, G are, in general, functions of u, v. From this formula

alone, without reference to any space outside the surface, we can determine

the measure of curvature at the point u, v, as a function of E, F, G and their

differentials with respect to u and v. Thus we may regard the measure of

curvature of a surface as an inherent property, and the above geometrical

definition,  which  involved  a  reference  to  the  third  dimension,  may  be

dropped. But at this point a caution is necessary. It will appear in Chap. III. (§

176), that it is logically impossible to set up a precise coordinate system, in

which  the  coordinates  represent  spatial  magnitudes,  without  the  axiom  of

Free Mobility, and this axiom, as we have just seen, holds on surfaces onlywhen  the  measure  of  curvature  is  constant.  Hence  our  definition  of  the

measure  of  curvature  will  only  be really  free  from  reference  to  the  third

dimension,  when  we  are  dealing  with  a  surface  of  constant  measure  of

curvature—a  point  which Riemann  entirely  overlooks.  This  caution,

however,  applies  only  in  space,  and  if  we  take  the  coordinate  system  as

presupposed in the conception of a manifold, we may neglect the caution

altogether—while remembering that the possibility of a coordinate system in

space  involves  axioms  to  be  investigated  later.  We  can  thus  see  how  a

meaning might be found, without reference to any higher dimension, for a

constant measure of curvature of three-dimensional space, or for any measure

of curvature of an n-dimensional manifold in general.

  22. Such a meaning is supplied by Riemann's dissertation, to which, after

this  long  digression,  we  can  now  return.  We  may  define  a  continuous

manifold as any continuum of elements, such that a single element is defined

by n  continuously  variable  magnitudes.  This  definition  does  not  really

include space, for coordinates in space do not define a point, but its relations

to the origin, which is itself arbitrary. It includes, however, the analytical

conception  of  space  with  which  Riemann  deals,  and  may,  therefore,  be

allowed to stand for the moment. Riemann then assumes that the difference—

or  distance,  as  it  may  be  loosely  called—between  any  two  elements  is

comparable, as regards magnitude, to the difference between any other two.

He assumes further, what it is Helmholtz's merit to have proved, that the

difference ds  between  two  consecutive  elements  can  be  expressed  as  the

square root of a quadratic function of the differences of the coordinates: i.e.
    2nn
  ds = Σ Σ a dx.dx ,
          11ikik

  where the coefficients a are, in general, functions of the coordinates x x
                              ik12
    [28]
... x.  The question is: How are we to obtain a definition of the measure of
  n

curvature out of this formula? It is noticeable, in the first place, that, just as in

a surface we found an infinite number of radii of curvature at a point, so in a

manifold of three or more dimensions we must find an infinite number of

measures of curvature at a point, one for every two-dimensional manifold

passing through the point, and contained in the higher manifold. What we

have first to do, therefore, is to define such two-dimensional manifolds. They

must consist, as we saw on the surface, of a singly infinite series of geodesics

through the point. Now a geodesic is completely determined by one point andits direction at that point, or by one point and the next consecutive point.

Hence a geodesic through the point considered is determined by the ratios of

the increments of coordinfates, dx dx ... dx. Suppose we have two such
                                        12n

geodesics, in which the i′th increments are respectively d′x and d″x. Then all
                                                                    ii

the geodesics given by

  dx = λ′d′x + λ″d″x
    iii

  form a singly infinite series, since they contain one parameter, namely λ′: 

λ″. Such a series of geodesics, therefore, must form a two-dimensional 

manifold, with a measure of curvature in the ordinary Gaussian sense. This 

measure of curvature can be determined from the above formula for the 

elementary arc, by the help of Gauss's general formula alluded to above. We 

thus obtain an infinite number of measures of curvature at a point, but from  

of these, the rest can be deduced (Riemann, Gesammelte Werke, p. 262).

When all the measures of curvature at a point are constant, and equal to all

the measures of curvature at any other point, we get what Riemann calls a

manifold of constant curvature. In such a manifold free mobility is possible,

and positions do not differ intrinsically from one another. If a be the measure

of curvature, the formula for the arc becomes, in this case,





  In  this  case  only,  as  I  pointed  out  above,  can  the  term  "measure  of

curvature"  be  properly  applied  to  space  without  reference  to  a  higher

dimension, since free mobility is logically indispensable to the existence of

quantitative or metrical Geometry.

  23. The mathematical result of Riemann's dissertation may be summed up

as  follows.  Assuming  it  possible  to  apply  magnitude  to  space, i.e.  to

determine  its  elements  and  figures  by  means  of  algebraical  quantities,  it

follows that space can be brought under the conception of a manifold, as a

system  of  quantitatively  determinable  elements.  Owing,  however,  to  the

peculiar  nature  of  spatial  measurement,  the  quantitative  determination  of

space demands that magnitudes shall be independent of place—in so far as

this is not the case, our measurement will be necessarily inaccurate. If we

now assume, as the quantitative relation of distance between two elements,

the  square  root  of  a  quadratic  function  of  the  coordinates—a  formulasubsequently  proved  by  Helmholtz  and  Lie—then  it  follows,  since

magnitudes are to be independent of place, that space must, within the limits

of observation, have a constant measure of curvature, or must, in other words,

be homogeneous in all its parts. In the infinitesimal, Riemann says (p. 267),

observation could not detect a departure from constancy on the part of the

measure of curvature; but he makes no attempt to show how Geometry could

remain possible under such circumstances, and the only Geometry he has

constructed is based entirely on Free Mobility. I shall endeavour to prove, in

Chapter III., that any metrical Geometry, which should endeavour to dispense

with this axiom, would be logically impossible. At present I will only point

out that Riemann, in spite of his desire to prove that all the axioms can be

dispensed with, has nevertheless, in his mathematical work, retained three

fundamental axioms, namely, Free Mobility, the finite integral number of

dimensions, and the axiom that two points have a unique relation, namely

distance. These, as we shall see hereafter, are retained, in actual mathematical

work, by all metrical Metageometers, even when they believe, like Riemann

and Helmholtz, that no axioms are philosophically indispensable.

  24. Helmholtz, the historically nearest follower of Riemann, was guided

by a similar empirical philosophy, and arrived independently at a very similar

method of formulating the axioms. Although Helmholtz published nothing on

the subject until after Riemann's death, he had then only just seen Riemann's

dissertation (which was published posthumously), and had worked out his

results, so far as they were then completed, in entire independence both of

Riemann and of Lobatchewsky. Helmholtz is by far the most widely read of

all  writers  on  Metageometry,  and  his  writings,  almost  alone,  represent  to

philosophers  the  modern  mathematical  standpoint  on  this  subject.  But  his

importance  is  much  greater,  in  this  domain,  as  a  philosopher  than  as  a

mathematician;  almost  his  only  original  mathematical  result,  as  regards

Geometry, is his proof of Riemann's formula for the infinitesimal arc, and

even this proof was far from rigid, until Lie reformed it by his method of

continuous groups. In this chapter, therefore, only two of his writings need

occupy us, namely the two articles in the Wissenschaftliche Abhandlungen,

Vol.  II.,  entitled  respectively  "Ueber  die  thatsächlichen  Grundlagen  der

Geometrie," 1866 (p. 610 ff.), and "Ueber die Thatsachen, die der Geometrie

zum Grunde liegen," 1868 (p. 618 ff.).

  25. In the first of these, which is chiefly philosophical, Helmholtz giveshints of his then uncompleted mathematical work, but in the main contents

himself  with  a  statement  of  results.  He  announces  that  he  will  prove

Riemann's quadratic formula for the infinitesimal arc; but for this purpose, he

says, we have to start with Congruence, since without it spatial measurement

is  impossible.  Nevertheless,  he  maintains  that  Congruence  is  proved  by

experience. How we could, without the help of measurement, discover lapses

from Congruence, is a point which he leaves undiscussed. He then enunciates

the four axioms which he considers essential to Geometry, as follows:

  (1) As regards continuity and dimensions. In a space of n dimensions, a

point is uniquely determined by the measurement of n continuous variables

(coordinates).

  (2) As regards the existence of moveable rigid bodies. Between the 2n

coordinates of any point-pair of a rigid body, there exists an equation which

is the same for all congruent point-pairs. By considering a sufficient number

of point-pairs, we get more equations than unknown quantities: this gives us a

method of determining the form of these equations, so as to make it possible

for them all to be satisfied.

  (3) As regards free mobility. Every point can pass freely and continuously

from one position to another. From (2) and (3) it follows, that if two systems

A and B can be brought into congruence in any one position, this is also

possible in every other position.

  (4) As regards independence of rotation in rigid bodies (Monodromy). If

(n – 1) points of a body remain fixed, so that every other point can only

describe a certain curve, then that curve is closed.

  These axioms, says Helmholtz, suffice to give, with the axiom of three

dimensions,  the  Euclidean  and  non-Euclidean  systems  as  the  only

alternatives. That they suffice, mathematically, cannot be denied, but they

seem, in some respects, to go too far. In the first place, there is no necessity

to  make  the  axiom  of  Congruence  apply  to  actual  rigid  bodies—on  this
                                              [29]
subject I have enlarged in Chapter II. Again, Free Mobility, as distinct

from Congruence, hardly needs to be specially formulated: what barrier could

empty  space  offer  to  a  point's  progress?  The  axiom  is  involved  in  the

homogeneity of space, which is the same thing as the axiom of Congruence.

Monodromy, also, has been severely criticized; not only is it evident that it

might have been included in Congruence, but even from the purely analytical                                                                    [30]
point of view, Sophus Lie has proved it to be superfluous. Thus the axiom

of  Congruence,  rightly  formulated,  includes  Helmholtz's  third  and  fourth

axioms and part of his second axiom. All the four, or rather, as much of them

as is relevant to Geometry, are consequences, as we shall see hereafter, of the

one fundamental principle of the relativity of position.

  26.  The  second  article,  which  is  mainly  mathematical,  supplies  the

promised  proof  of  the  arc-formula,  which  is  Helmholtz's  most  important

contribution to Geometry. Riemann had assumed this formula, as the simplest

of  a  number  of  alternatives:  Helmholtz  proved  it  to  be  a  necessary

consequence of his axioms. The present paper begins with a short repetition

of the first, including the statement of the axioms, to which, at the end of the

paper, two more are added, (5) that space has three dimensions, and (6) that

space is infinite. It is supposed in the text, as also in the first paper, that the

measure of curvature cannot be negative, and, consequently, that an infinite

space must be Euclidean. This error in both papers is corrected in notes,

added after the appearance of Beltrami's paper on negative curvature. It is a

sample  of  the  slightly  unprofessional  nature  of  Helmholtz's  mathematical
                                                                                      [31]
work  on  this  subject,  which  elicits  from  Klein  the  following  remarks:

"Helmholtz  is  not  a  mathematician  by  profession,  but  a  physicist  and

physiologist.... From this non-mathematical quality of Helmholtz, it follows

naturally that he does not treat the mathematical portion of his work with the

thoroughness which one would demand of a mathematician by trade (von

Fach)." He tells us himself that it was the physiological study of vision which

led him to the question of the axioms, and it is as a physicist that he makes

his axioms refer to actual rigid bodies. Accordingly, we find errors in his

mathematics, such as the axiom of Monodromy, and the assumption that the

measure of curvature must be positive. Nevertheless, the proof of Riemann's

arc-formula is extremely able, and has, on the whole, been substantiated by

Lie's more thorough investigations.

  27.  Helmholtz's  other  writings  on  Geometry  are  almost  wholly

philosophical, and will be discussed at length in Chapter II. For the present,

we  may  pass  to  the  only  other  important  writer  of  the  second  period,

Beltrami. As his work is purely mathematical, and contains few controverted

points, it need not, despite its great importance, detain us long.
                                                                              [32]
  The "Saggio di Interpretazione della Geometria non-Euclidea," whichis principally confined to two dimensions, interprets Lobatchewsky's results

by the characteristic method of the second period. It shows, by a development
                                            [33]
of  the  work  of  Gauss  and  Minding,  that  all  the  propositions  in  plane

Geometry,  which  Lobatchewsky  had  set  forth,  hold,  within  ordinary

Euclidean space, on surfaces of constant negative curvature. It is strange, as
                  [34]
Klein points out, that this interpretation, which was known to Riemann

and perhaps even to Gauss, should have remained so long without explicit

statement.  This  is  the  more  strange,  as  Lobatchewsky's  "Géométrie
                                                          [35]
Imaginaire"  had  appeared  in  Crelle,  Vol.  XVII., and Minding's article,

from which the interpretation follows at once, had appeared in Crelle, Vol.

XIX. Minding had shewn that the Geometry of surfaces of constant negative

curvature, in particular as regards geodesic triangles, could be deduced from
                                                                                [36]
that of the sphere by giving the radius a purely imaginary value ia. This

result, as we have seen, had also been obtained by Lobatchewsky for his

Geometry, and yet it took thirty years for the connection to be brought to

general notice.

  28.  In  Beltrami's  Saggio,  straight  lines  are,  of  course,  replaced  by

geodesics;  his  coordinates  are  obtained  through  a  point-by-point

correspondence with an auxiliary plane, in which straight lines correspond to

geodesics  on  the  surface.  Thus  geodesics  have  linear  equations,  and  are

always  uniquely  determined  by  two  points.  Distances  on  the  surface,

however, are not equal to distances on the plane; thus while the surface is

infinite, the corresponding portion of the plane is contained within a certain

finite circle. The distance of two points on the surface is a certain function of

the coordinates, not the ordinary function of elementary Geometry. These

relations  of  plane  and  surface  are  important  in  connection  with  Cayley's

theory of distance, which we shall have to consider next. If we were to define

distance on the plane as that function of the coordinates which gives the

corresponding distance on the surface, we should obtain what Klein calls "a

plane with a hyperbolic system of measurement (Massbestimmung)" in which

Cayley's  theory  of  distance  would  hold.  It  is  evident,  however,  that  the

ordinary notion of distance has been presupposed in setting up the coordinate

system, so that we do not really get alternative Geometries on one and the

same plane. The bearing of these remarks will appear more fully when we

come to consider Cayley and Klein.  29. The value of Beltrami's Saggio, in his own eyes, lies in the intelligible

Euclidean  sense  which  it  gives  to  Lobatchewsky's  planimetry:  the

corresponding  system  of  Solid  Geometry,  since  it  has  no  meaning  for
                                                                                      [37]
Euclidean  space,  is  barely  mentioned  in  this  work.  In  a  second  paper,

however, almost contemporaneous with the first, he proceeds to consider the

general theory of n-dimensional manifolds of constant negative curvature.

This paper is greatly influenced by Riemann's dissertation; it begins with the

formula for the linear element, and proves from this first, that Congruence

holds  for  such  spaces,  and  next,  that  they  have,  according  to  Riemann's

definition,  a  constant  negative  measure  of  curvature.  (It  is  instructive  to

observe, that both in this and in the former Essay, great stress is laid on the

necessity of the Axiom of Congruence.)

  This work has less philosophical interest than the former, since it does

little more than repeat, in a general form, the results which the Saggio had

obtained  for  two  dimensions—results  which  sink,  when  extended  to n

dimensions, to the level of mere mathematical constructions. Nevertheless,

the paper is important, both as a restoration of negative curvature, which had

been  overlooked  by  Helmholtz,  and  as  an  analytical  treatment  of

Lobatchewsky's results—a treatment which, together with the Saggio, at last

restored to them the prominence they deserved.

  Third Period.

  30. The third period differs radically, alike in its methods and aims, and in

the  underlying  philosophical  ideas,  from  the  period  which  it  replaced.

Whereas everything, in the second period, turned on measurement, with its

apparatus of Congruence, Free Mobility, Rigid Bodies, and the rest, these

vanish  completely  in  the  third  period,  which,  swinging  to  the  opposite

extreme, regards quantity as a perfectly irrelevant category in Geometry, and

dispenses with congruence and the method of superposition. The ideas of this

period, unfortunately, have found no exponent so philosophical as Riemann

or  Helmholtz,  but  have  been  set  forth  only  by  technical  mathematicians.

Moreover  the  change  of  fundamental  ideas,  which  is  immense,  has  not

brought about an equally great change in actual procedure; for though spatial

quantity  is  no  longer  a  part  of  projective  Geometry,  quantity  is  still

employed, and we still have equations, algebraic transformations, and so on.

This is apt to give rise to confusion, especially in the mind of the student,who fails to realise that the quantities used, so far as the propositions are

really  projective,  are  mere  names  for  points,  and  not,  as  in  metrical

Geometry, actual spatial magnitudes.

  Nevertheless,  the  fundamental  difference  between  this  period  and  the

former must strike any one at once. Whereas Riemann and Helmholtz dealt

with metrical ideas, and took, as their foundations, the measure of curvature

and  the  formula  for  the  linear  element—both  purely  metrical—the  new

method is erected on the formulae for transformation of coordinates required

to express a given collineation. It begins by reducing all so-called metrical

notions—distance, angle, etc.—to projective forms, and obtains, from this

reduction,  a  methodological  unity  and  simplicity  before  impossible.  This

reduction  depends,  however,  except  where  the  space-constant  is  negative,

upon  imaginary  figures—in  Euclid,  the  circular  points  at  infinity;  it  is

moreover  purely  symbolic  and  analytical,  and  must  be  regarded  as

philosophically  irrelevant.  As  the  question  concerning  the  import  of  this

reduction is of fundamental importance to our theory of Geometry, and as

Cayley,  in  his  Presidential  Address  to  the  British  Association  in  1883,

formally challenged philosophers to discuss the use of imaginaries, on which

it depends, I will treat this question at some length. But first let us see how, as

a matter of mathematics, the reduction is effected.

  31.  We  shall  find,  throughout  this  period,  that  almost  every  important

proposition, though misleading in its obvious interpretation, has nevertheless,

when rightly interpreted, a wide philosophical bearing. So it is with the work

of Cayley, the pioneer of the projective method.

 

  The  projective  formula  for  angles,  in  Euclidean  Geometry,  was  first

obtained  by  Laguerre,  in  1853.  This  formula  had,  however,  a  perfectly

Euclidean character, and it was left for Cayley to generalize it so as to include
                                                                                    [38]
both angles and distances in Euclidean and non-Euclidean systems alike.

  Cayley was, to the last, a staunch supporter of Euclidean space, though he

believed that non-Euclidean Geometries could be applied, within Euclidean
                                                      [39]
space, by a change in the definition of distance. He has thus, in spite of his

Euclidean  orthodoxy,  provided  the  believers  in  the  possibility  of  non-

Euclidean spaces with one of their most powerful weapons. In his "Sixth

Memoir upon Quantics" (1859), he set himself the task of "establishing the

notion of distance upon purely descriptive principles." He showed that, withthe ordinary notion of distance, it can be rendered projective by reference to

the  circular  points  and  the  line  at  infinity,  and  that  the  same  is  true  of
      [40]
angles. Not content with this, he suggested a new definition of distance, as

the inverse sine or cosine of a certain function of the coordinates; with this

definition,  the  properties  usually  known  as  metrical  become  projective

properties, having reference to a certain conic, called by Cayley the Absolute.

(The circular points are, analytically, a degenerate conic, so that ordinary

Geometry forms a particular case of the above.) He proves that, when the

Absolute  is  an imaginary  conic,  the  Geometry  so  obtained  for  two

dimensions is spherical Geometry. The correspondence with Lobatchewsky,

in the case where the Absolute is real, is not worked out: indeed there is,

throughout, no evidence of acquaintance with non-Euclidean systems. The

importance of the memoir, to Cayley, lies entirely in its proof that metrical is

only a branch of descriptive Geometry.

  32. The connection of Cayley's Theory of Distance with Metageometry
                                  [41]
was first pointed out by Klein. Klein showed in detail that, if the Absolute

be real, we get Lobatchewsky's (hyperbolic) system; if it be imaginary, we

get  either  spherical  Geometry  or  a  new  system,  analogous  to  that  of

Helmholtz, called by Klein elliptic; if the Absolute be an imaginary point-

pair, we get parabolic Geometry, and if, in particular, the point-pair be the

circular points, we get ordinary Euclid. In elliptic Geometry, two straight

lines in the same plane meet in only one point, not two as in Helmholtz's

system. The distinction between the two kinds of Geometry is difficult, and

will be discussed later.

  33. Since these systems are all obtained from a Euclidean plane, by a mere

alteration in the definition of distance, Cayley and Klein tend to regard the

whole question as one, not of the nature of space, but of the definition of

distance.  Since  this  definition,  on  their  view,  is  perfectly  arbitrary,  the

philosophical  problem  vanishes—Euclidean space  is  left  in  undisputed

possession,  and  the  only  problem  remaining  is  one  of  convention  and
                              [42]
mathematical  convenience.  This  view  has  been  forcibly  expressed  by

Poincaré:  "What  ought  one  to  think,"  he  says,  "of  this  question:  Is  the

Euclidean Geometry true? The question is nonsense." Geometrical axioms,
                                                                                      [43]
according to him, are mere conventions: they are "definitions in disguise."

Thus  Klein  blames  Beltrami  for  regarding  his  auxiliary  plane  as  merelyauxiliary, and remarks that, if he had known Cayley's Memoir, he would have

seen the relation between the plane and the pseudosphere to be far more
                              [44]
intimate than he supposed. A view which removes the problem entirely

from the arena of philosophy demands, plainly, a full discussion. To this

discussion we will now proceed.

  34.  The  view  in  question  has  arisen,  it  would  seem,  from  a  natural

confusion as to the nature of the coordinates employed. Those who hold the

view have not adequately realised, I believe, that their coordinates are not

spatial quantities, as in metrical Geometry, but mere conventional signs, by

which  different  points  can  be  distinctly  designated.  There  is  no  reason,

therefore,  until  we  already  have  metrical  Geometry, for  regarding  one

function of the coordinates as a better expression of distance than another, so
                                                    [45]
long  as  the  fundamental  addition-equation  is  preserved.  Hence,  if  our

coordinates are regarded as adequate for all Geometry, an indeterminateness

arises  in  the  expression  of  distance,  which  can  only  be  avoided  by  a

convention.  But  projective  coordinates—so  our  argument  will  contend—

though perfectly adequate for all projective properties, and entirely free from

any metrical presupposition, are inadequate to express metrical properties,

just  because  they  have  no  metrical  presupposition.  Thus  where  metrical

properties are in question, Beltrami remains justified as against Klein; the

reduction of metrical to projective properties is only apparent, though the

independence of these last, as against metrical Geometry, is perfectly real.

  35. But what are projective coordinates, and how are they introduced?

This  question  was  not  touched  upon  in  Cayley's  Memoir,  and  it  seemed,

therefore, as if a logical error were involved in using coordinates to define

distance. For coordinates, in all previous systems, had been deduced from

distance;  to  use  any  existing  coordinate  system  in  defining  distance  was,

accordingly, to incur a vicious circle. Cayley mentions this difficulty in a

note, where he only remarks, however, that he had regarded his coordinates

as numbers arbitrarily assigned, on some system not further investigated, to

different  points.  The  difficulty  has  been  treated  at  length  by  Sir  R.  Ball

(Theory of the Content, Trans. R. I. A. 1889), who urges that if the values of

our coordinates already involve the usual measure of distance, then to give a

new  definition,  while  retaining  the  usual  coordinates,  is  to  incur  a

contradiction.  He  says  (op.  cit.  p.  1):  "In  the  study  of  non-EuclideanGeometry I have often felt a difficulty which has, I know, been shared by

others. In that theory it seems as if we try to replace our ordinary notion of

distance  between  two  points  by  the  logarithm  of  a  certain  anharmonic
    [46]
ratio. But this ratio itself involves the notion of distance measured in the

ordinary way. How, then, can we supersede our old notion of distance by the

non-Euclidean notion, inasmuch as the very definition of the latter involves

the former?"

  36. This objection is valid, we must admit, so long as anharmonic ratio is

defined  in  the  ordinary  metrical  manner.  It  would  be  valid,  for  example,

against  any  attempt  to  found  a  new  definition  of  distance  on  Cremona's
                                [47]
account of anharmonic ratio, in which it appears as a metrical property

unaltered by projective transformation. If a logical error is to be avoided, in

fact, all reference to spatial magnitude of any kind must be avoided; for all
                                                      [48]
spatial magnitude, as will be shown hereafter, is logically dependent on

the fundamental magnitude of distance. Anharmonic ratio and coordinates

must alike be defined by purely descriptive properties, if the use afterwards

made of them is to be free from metrical presuppositions, and therefore from

the objections of Sir R. Ball.
                                                                      [49]
  Such a definition has been satisfactorily given by Klein, who appeals,
                                                                          [50]
for  the  purpose,  to  v.  Staudt's  quadrilateral  construction.  By  this

construction, which I have reproduced in outline in Chapter III. Section A, §

112 ff., we obtain a purely descriptive definition of harmonic and anharmonic

ratio, and, given a pair of points, we can obtain the harmonic conjugate to any

third point on the same straight line. On this construction, the introduction of

projective coordinates is based. Starting with any three points on a straight

line, we assign to them arbitrarily the numbers 0, 1, ∞. We then find the

harmonic conjugate to the first with respect to 1, ∞, and assign to it the

number 2. The object of assigning this number rather than any other, is to

obtain  the  value  –1  for  the  anharmonic  ratio  of  the  four  numbers
                                    [51]
corresponding to the four points. We then find the harmonic conjugate to

the point 1, with respect to 2, ∞, and assign to it the number 3; and so on.

Klein  has  shown  that  by  this  construction,  we  can  obtain  any  number  of

points,  and can  construct  a  point  corresponding  to  any  given  number,

fractional or negative. Moreover, when two sets of four points have the same
                                              [52]
anharmonic ratio, descriptively defined, the corresponding numbers alsohave the same anharmonic ratio. By introducing such a numerical system on

two straight lines, or on three, we obtain the coordinates of any point in a

plane, or in space. By this construction, which is of fundamental importance

to projective Geometry, the logical error, upon which Sir R. Ball bases his

criticism, is satisfactorily avoided. Our coordinates are introduced by a purely

descriptive  method,  and  involve  no  presupposition  whatever  as  to  the

measurement of distance.

  37.  With  this  coordinate  system,  then,  to  define  distance  as  a  certain

function of the coordinates is not to be guilty of a vicious circle. But it by no

means follows that the definition of distance is arbitrary. All reference to

distance  has  been  hitherto  excluded,  to  avoid  metrical  ideas;  but  when

distance is introduced, metrical ideas inevitably reappear, and we have to

remember that our coordinates give no information, primâ facie, as to any of

these metrical ideas. It is open to us, of course, if we choose, to continue to

exclude distance in the ordinary sense, as the quantity of a finite straight line,

and to define the word distance in any way we please. But the conception, for

which the word has hitherto stood, will then require a new name, and the only

result will be a confusion between the apparent meaning of our propositions,

to those who retain the associations belonging to the old sense of the word,

and the real meaning, resulting from the new sense in which the word is

used.

  This confusion, I believe, has actually occurred, in the case of those who

regard  the  question  between  Euclid  and  Metageometry  as  one  of  the

definition  of  distance.  Distance  is  a  quantitative  relation,  and  as  such

presupposes  identity  of  quality.  But  projective  Geometry  deals  only  with

quality—for  which  reason  it  is  called  descriptive—and  cannot  distinguish

between  two  figures  which  are  qualitatively  alike.  Now  the  meaning  of

qualitative likeness, in Geometry, is the possibility of mutual transformation
                    [53]
by  a  collineation.  Any  two  pairs  of  points  on  the  same  straight  line,

therefore, are qualitatively alike; their only qualitative relation is the straight

line,  which  both  pairs  have  in  common;  and  it  is  exactly  the  qualitative

identity of the relations of the two pairs, which enables the difference of their

relations to be exhaustively dealt with by quantity, as a difference of distance.

But where quantity is excluded, any two pairs of points on the same straight

line appear as alike, and even any two sets of three: for any three points on astraight line can be projectively transformed into any other three. It is only

with four points in a line that we acquire a projective property distinguishing

them  from  other  sets  of  four,  and  this  property  is  anharmonic  ratio,

descriptively defined. The projective Geometer, therefore, sees no reason to

give a name to the relation between two points, in so far as this relation is

anything over and above the unlimited straight line on which they lie; and

when he introduces the notion of distance, he defines it, in the only way in

which projective principles allow him to define it, as a relation between four

points.  As  he  nevertheless  wishes  the  word  to  give  him  the  power  of

distinguishing between different pairs of points, he agrees to take two out of

the four points as fixed. In this way, the only variables in distance are the two

remaining  points,  and  distance  appears,  therefore,  as  a  function  of two

variables, namely the coordinates of the two variable points. When we have

further  defined  our  function  so  that  distance  may  be  additive,  we  have  a

function with many of the properties of distance in the ordinary sense. This

function,  therefore,  the  projective  Geometer  regards  as  the  only  proper

definition of distance.

  We can see, in fact, from the manner in which our projective coordinates

were  introduced,  that some  function  of  these  coordinates  must  express

distance in the ordinary sense. For they were introduced serially, so that, as

we proceeded from the zero-point towards the infinity-point, our coordinates

continually grew. To every point, a definite coordinate corresponded: to the

distance between two variable points, therefore, as a function dependent on

no  other  variables,  must  correspond  some  definite  function  of  the

coordinates, since these are themselves functions of their points. The function

discussed above, therefore, must certainly include distance in the ordinary

sense.

  But the arbitrary and conventional nature of distance, as maintained by

Poincaré and Klein, arises from the fact that the two fixed points, required to

determine our distance in the projective sense, may be arbitrarily chosen, and

although,  when  our  choice  is  once  made,  any  two  points  have  a  definite

distance,  yet,  according  as  we  make  that  choice,  distance  will  become  a

different function of the two variable points. The ambiguity thus introduced

is unavoidable on projective principles; but are we to conclude, from this,

that it is really unavoidable? Must we not rather conclude that projective

Geometry cannot adequately deal with distance? If A, B, C, be three differentpoints on a line, there must be some difference between the relation of A to B

and of A to C, for otherwise, owing to the qualitative identity of all points, B

and C could not be distinguished. But such a difference involves a relation,

between A and B, which is independent of other points on the line; for unless

we have such a relation, the other points cannot be distinguished as different.

Before we can distinguish the two fixed points, therefore, from which the

projective definition starts, we must already suppose some relation, between

any two points on our line, in which they are independent of other points; and
                                                      [54]
this relation is distance in the ordinary sense. When we have measured

this quantitative relation by the ordinary methods of metrical Geometry, we

can proceed to decide what base-points must be chosen, on our line, in order

that  the  projective  function  discussed  above  may  have  the  same  value  as

ordinary  distance.  But  the  choice  of  these  base-points,  when  we  are

discussing  distance  in  the  ordinary  sense,  is  not  arbitrary,  and  their

introduction  is  only  a  technical  device.  Distance,  in  the  ordinary  sense,

remains a relation between two points, not between four; and it is the failure

to perceive that the projective sense differs from, and cannot supersede, the

ordinary sense, which has given rise to the views of Klein and Poincaré. The

question is not one of convention, but of the irreducible metrical properties of

space. To sum up: Quantities, as used in projective Geometry, do not stand

for spatial magnitudes, but are conventional symbols for purely qualitative

spatial relations. But distance, quâ quantity, presupposes identity of quality,

as the condition of quantitative comparison. Distance in the ordinary sense is,

in short, that quantitative relation, between two points on a line, by which

their difference from other points can be defined. The projective definition,

however, being unable to distinguish a collection of less than four points

from any other on the same straight line, makes distance depend on two other

points besides those whose relation it defines. No name remains, therefore,

for distance in the ordinary sense, and many projective Geometers, having

abolished the name, believe the thing to be abolished also, and are inclined to

deny  that two  points  have  a  unique  relation  at  all.  This  confusion,  in

projective Geometry, shows the importance of a name, and should make us

chary of allowing new meanings to obscure one of the fundamental properties

of space.

  38. It remains to discuss the manner in which non-Euclidean Geometriesresult from the projective definition of distance, as also the true interpretation

to  be  given  to  this  view  of  Metageometry.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the

projective methods which follow Cayley deal throughout with a Euclidean

plane, on which they introduce different measures of distance. Hence arises,

in any interpretation of these methods, an apparent subordination of the non-

Euclidean spaces, as though these were less self-subsistent than Euclid's. This

subordination is not intended in what follows; on the contrary, the correlation

with Euclidean space is regarded as valuable, first, because Euclidean space

has  been  longer  studied  and  is  more  familiar,  but  secondly,  because  this

correlation  proves,  when  truly  interpreted,  that  the  other  spaces  are  self-

subsistent.  We  may  confine  ourselves  chiefly,  in  discussing  this

interpretation, to distances measured along a single straight line. But we must

be  careful  to  remember  that  the  metrical  definition  of  distance—which,

according to the view here advocated, is the only adequate definition—is the

same in Euclidean and in non-Euclidean spaces; to argue in its favour is not,

therefore, to argue in favour of Euclid.

  The projective scheme of coordinates consists of a series of numbers, of

which each represents a certain anharmonic ratio and denotes one and only

one  point,  and  which  increase  uniformly  with  the  distance  from  a  fixed

origin, until they become infinite on reaching a certain point. Now Cayley

showed that, in Euclidean Geometry, distance may be expressed as the limit

of  the  logarithm  of  the  anharmonic  ratio  of  the  two  points  and  the

(coincident) points at infinity on their straight line; while, if we assumed that

the points at infinity were distinct, we obtained the formula for distance in

hyperbolic  or  spherical  Geometry,  according  as  these  points  were  real  or

imaginary. Hence it follows that, with the projective definition of distance,

we shall obtain precisely the formulae of hyperbolic, parabolic or spherical

Geometry,  according  as  we  choose  the  point,  to  which  the  value  +∞  is

assigned, at a finite, infinite or imaginary distance (in the ordinary sense)

from the point to which we assign the value 0. Our straight line remains, all

the while, an ordinary Euclidean straight line. But we have seen that the

projective definition of distance fits with the true definition only when the

two fixed points to which it refers are suitably chosen. Now the ordinary

meaning of distance is required in non-Euclidean as in Euclidean Geometries

—indeed, it is only in metrical properties that these Geometries differ. Hence

our Euclidean straight line, though it may serve to illustrate other Geometriesthan Euclid's, can only be dealt with correctly by Euclid. Where we give a

different definition of distance from Euclid's, we are still in the domain of

purely  projective  properties,  and  derive  no  information  as  to  the  metrical

properties of our straight line. But the importance, to Metageometry, of this

new interpretation, lies in the fact that, having independently established the

metrical formulae of non-Euclidean spaces, we find, as in Beltrami's Saggio,

that these spaces can be related, by a homographic correspondence, with the

points of Euclidean space; and that this can be effected in such a manner as to

give, for the distance between two points of our non-Euclidean space, the

hyperbolic or spherical measure of distance for the corresponding points of

Euclidean space.

  39. On the whole, then, a modification of Sir R. Ball's view, which is

practically  a  generalized  statement  of  Beltrami's  method,  seems  the  most

tenable.  He  imagines  what,  with  Grassmann,  he  calls  a  Content, i.e.  a

perfectly  general  three-dimensional  manifold,  and  then  correlates  its

elements, one by one, with points in Euclidean space. Thus every element of

the Content acquires, as its coordinates, the ordinary Euclidean coordinates of

the corresponding point in Euclidean space. By means of this correlation, our

calculations, though they refer to the Content, are carried on, as in Beltrami's

Saggio, in ordinary Euclidean space. Thus the confusion disappears, but with

it,  the  supposed  Euclidean  interpretation  also  disappears.  Sir  R.  Ball's

Content, if it is to be a space at all, must be a space radically different from
        [55]
Euclid's; to speak, as Klein does, of ordinary planes with hyperbolic or

elliptic measures of distance, is either to incur a contradiction, or to forego

any  metrical  meaning  of  distance.  Instead  of  ordinary  planes,  we  have

surfaces like Beltrami's, of constant measure of curvature; instead of Euclid's

space, we have hyperbolic or spherical space. At the same time, it remains

true  that  we  can,  by  Klein's  method,  give  a  Euclidean  meaning  to  every

symbolic  proposition  in  non-Euclidean  Geometry.  For  by  substituting,  for

distance, the logarithm above alluded to, we obtain, from the non-Euclidean

result,  a  result  which  follows  from  the  ordinary  Euclidean  axioms.  This

correspondence  removes,  once  for  all,  the  possibility  of  a  lurking

contradiction  in  Metageometry,  since,  to  a  proposition  in  the  one,

corresponds  one  and  only  one  proposition  in  the  other,  and  contradictory

results in one system, therefore, would correspond to contradictory results inthe  other.  Hence  Metageometry  cannot  lead  to  contradictions,  unless

Euclidean  Geometry,  at  the  same  moment,  leads  to  corresponding

contradictions. Thus the Euclidean plane with hyperbolic or elliptic measure

of distance, though either contradictory or not metrical as an independent

notion, has, as a help in the interpretation of non-Euclidean results, a very

high degree of utility.

  40. We have still to discuss Klein's third kind of non-Euclidean Geometry,

which he calls elliptic. The difference between this and spherical Geometry is

difficult to grasp, but it may be illustrated by a simpler example. A plane, as

every one knows, can be wrapped, without stretching, on a cylinder, and

straight  lines  in  the  plane  become,  by  this  operation,  geodesics  on  the

cylinder. The Geometries of the plane and the cylinder, therefore, have much

in common. But since the generating circle of the cylinder, which is one of its

geodesics, is finite, only a portion of the plane is used up in wrapping it once

round  the  cylinder.  Hence,  if  we  endeavour  to  establish  a  point-to-point

correspondence between the plane and the cylinder, we shall find an infinite

series  of  points  on  the  plane  for  a  single  point  on  the  cylinder.  Thus  it

happens  that  geodesics,  though  on  the  plane  they  have  only  one  point  in

common,  may  on  the  cylinder  have  an  infinite  number  of  intersections.

Somewhat similar to this is the relation between the spherical and elliptic

Geometries.  To  any  one  point  in  elliptic  space,  two  points  correspond  in

spherical  space.  Thus  geodesics,  which  in  spherical  space  may  have  two

points  in  common,  can  never,  in  elliptic  space,  have  more  than  one

intersection.

  But Klein's method can only prove that elliptic Geometry holds of the

ordinary Euclidean plane with elliptic measure of distance. Klein has made

great endeavours to enforce the distinction between the spherical and elliptic
            [56]
Geometries, but it is not immediately evident that the latter, as distinct

from the former, is valid.

  In the first place, Klein's elliptic Geometry, which arises as one of the

alternative metrical systems on a Euclidean plane or in a Euclidean space,

does not by itself suffice, if the above discussion has been correct, to prove

the possibility of an elliptic space, i.e. of a space having a point-to-point

correspondence with the Euclidean space, and having as the ordinary distance

between  two  of  its  points  the  elliptic  definition  of  the  distance  betweencorresponding points of the Euclidean space. To prove this possibility, we

must adopt the direct method of Newcomb (Crelle's Journal, Vol. 83). Now in

the first place Newcomb has not proved that his postulates are self-consistent;
                                                                [57]
he has only failed to prove that they are contradictory. This would leave

elliptic space in the same position in which Lobatchewsky and Bolyai left

hyperbolic  space.  But  further  there  seems  to  be,  at  first  sight,  in two-

dimensional elliptic space, a positive contradiction. To explain this, however,

some account of the peculiarities of the elliptic plane will be necessary.

  The elliptic plane, regarded as a figure in three-dimensional elliptic space,
                                      [58]
is what is called a double surface, i.e. as Newcomb says (loc. cit. p. 298):

"The  two  sides  of  a  complete  plane  are  not  distinct,  as  in  a  Euclidean

surface.... If ... a being should travel to distance 2D, he would, on his return,

find himself on the opposite surface to that on which he started, and would

have to repeat his journey in order to return to his original position without

leaving the surface." Now if we imagine a two-dimensional elliptic space, the

distinction between the sides of a plane becomes unmeaning, since it only

acquires significance by reference to the third dimension. Nevertheless, some

such distinction would be forced upon us. Suppose, for example, that we took

a small circle provided with an arrow, as in the figure, and moved this circle

once round the universe. Then the sense of the arrow would be reversed. We

should thus be forced, either to regard the new position as distinct from the

former, which transforms our plane into a spherical plane, or to attribute the

reversal of the arrow to the action of a motion which restores our circle to its

original place. It is to be observed that nothing short of moving round the

universe would suffice to reverse the sense of the arrow. This reversal seems

like an action of empty space, which would force us to regard the points

which,  from  a  three-dimensional  point  of  view,  are  coincident  though

opposite, as really distinct, and so reduce the elliptic to the spherical plane.

But  motion,  not  space,  really  causes  the  change,  and  the  elliptic  plane  is

therefore not proved to be impossible. The question is not, however, of any

great philosophic importance.

  41. In connection with the reduction of metrical to projective Geometry,

we  have  one  more  topic  for  discussion.  This  is  the  geometrical  use  of

imaginaries, by means of which, except in the case of hyperbolic space, the

reduction is effected. I have already contended, on other grounds, that thisreduction, in spite of its immense technical importance, and in spite of the

complete  logical  freedom  of  projective  Geometry  from  metrical  ideas,  is

purely technical, and is not philosophically valid. The same conclusion will

appear, if we take up Cayley's challenge at the British Association, in his

Presidential Address of 1883.

  In  this  address,  Professor  Cayley  devoted  most  of  his  time  to  non-

Euclidean  systems.  Non-Euclidean spaces,  he  declared,  seemed  to  him
                      [59]
mistaken à  priori;  but  non-Euclidean Geometries,  here  as  in  his

mathematical  works,  were  accepted  as  flowing  from  a  change  in  the

definition of distance. This view has been already discussed, and need not,

therefore,  be  further  criticised  here.  What  I  wish  to  speak  about,  is  the

question  with  which  Cayley  himself  opened  his  address,  namely,  the

geometrical use and meaning of imaginary quantities. From the manner in

which he spoke of this question, it becomes imperative to treat it somewhat at

length. For he said (pp. 8–9):

  "...  The  notion  which  is  the  really  fundamental  one  (and  I  cannot  too

strongly emphasize the assertion) underlying and pervading the whole notion

of  modern  analysis  and  Geometry,  [is]  that  of  imaginary  magnitude  in

analysis, and of imaginary space (or space as the locus in quo of imaginary

points and figures) in Geometry: I use in each case the word imaginary as

including real.... Say even the conclusion were that the notion belongs to

mere  technical  mathematics,  or  has  reference  to  nonentities  in  regard  to

which  no  science  is  possible,  still  it  seems  to  me  that  (as  a  subject  of

philosophical discussion) the notion ought not to be thus ignored; it should at

least be shown that there is a right to ignore it."

  42. This right it is now my purpose to demonstrate. But for fear non-

mathematicians  should  miss  the  point  of  Cayley's  remark  (which  has

sometimes been erroneously supposed to refer to non-Euclidean spaces), I

may as well explain, at the outset, that this question is radically distinct from,

and only indirectly connected with, the validity or import of Metageometry.

An imaginary quantity is one which involves √–1 : its most general form is a

+ √–1 b where a and b are real; Cayley uses the word imaginary so as to

include  real,  in  order  to  cover  the  special  case  where b  =  0.  It  will  be

convenient, in what follows, to exclude this wider meaning, and assume that

b is not zero. An imaginary point is one whose coordinates involve √–1, i.e.whose  coordinates  are  imaginary  quantities.  An  imaginary  curve  is  one

whose points are imaginary—or, in some special uses, one whose equation

contains imaginary coefficients. The mathematical subtleties to which this

notion leads need not be here discussed; the reader who is interested in them

will find an excellent elementary account of their geometrical uses in Klein's

Nicht-Euklid, II. pp. 38–46. But for our present purpose, we may confine

ourselves to imaginary points. If these are found to have a merely technical

import, and to be destitute of any philosophical meaning, then the same will

hold of any collection of imaginary points, i.e. of any imaginary curve or

surface.

  That  the  notion  of  imaginary  points  is  of  supreme  importance  in

Geometry, will be seen by any one who reflects that the circular points are

imaginary, and that the reduction of metrical to projective Geometry, which

is one of Cayley's greatest achievements, depends on these points. But to

discuss adequately their philosophical import is difficult to me, since I am

unacquainted  with  any  satisfactory  philosophy  of  imaginaries  in  pure

Algebra. I will therefore adopt the most favourable hypothesis, and assume

that no objection can be successfully urged against this use. Even on this

hypothesis,  I  think,  no  case  can  be  made  out  for  imaginary  points  in

Geometry.

  In the first place, we must exclude, from the imaginary points considered,

those whose coordinates are only imaginary with certain special systems of

coordinates. For example, if one of a point's coordinates be the tangent from

it  to  a  sphere,  this  coordinate  will  be  imaginary  for  any  point  inside  the

sphere, and yet the point is perfectly real. A point, then, is only to be called

imaginary, when, whatever real system of coordinates we adopt, one or more

of the quantities expressing these coordinates remains imaginary. For this

purpose, it is mathematically sufficient to suppose our coordinates Cartesian

—a point whose Cartesian coordinates are imaginary, is a true imaginary

point in the above sense.

  To discuss the meaning of such a point, it is necessary to consider briefly

the  fundamental  nature  of  the  correspondence  between  a  point  and  its

coordinates. Assuming that elementary Geometry has proved—what I think it

does satisfactorily prove—that spatial relations are susceptible of quantitative

measurement,  then  a  given  point  will  have,  with  a  suitable  system  of

coordinates, in a space of n dimensions, n quantitative relations to the fixedspatial  figure  forming  the  axes  of  coordinates,  and  these n  quantitative

relations will, under certain reservations, be unique—i.e., no other point will

have  the  same  quantities  assigned  to  it.  (With  many  possible  coordinate

systems, this latter condition is not realized: but for that very reason they are

inconvenient,  and  employed  only  in  special  problems.)  Thus  given  a

coordinate system, and given any set of quantities, these quantities, if they

determine a point at all, determine it uniquely. But, by a natural extension of

the method, the above reservation is dropped, and it is assumed that to every

set  of  quantities  some  point  must  correspond.  For  this  assumption  there

seems to me no vestige of evidence. As well might a postman assume that,

because  every  house  in  a  street  is  uniquely  determined  by  its  number,

therefore  there  must  be  a  house  for  every  imaginable  number.  We  must

know, in fact, that a given set of quantities can be the coordinates of some

point in space, before it is legitimate to give any spatial significance to these

quantities: and this knowledge, obviously, cannot be derived from operations

with coordinates alone, on pain of a vicious circle. We must, to return to the

above analogy, know the number of houses in Piccadilly, before we know

whether a given number has a corresponding house or not; and arithmetic

alone, however subtly employed, will never give us this information.

  Thus the distinction which is important is, not the distinction between real

and imaginary quantities, but between quantities to which points correspond

and quantities to which no points correspond. We can conventionally agree to

denote real points by imaginary coordinates, as in the Gaussian method of

denoting  by  the  single  quantity  (a  +  √–1 b)  the  point  whose  ordinary

coordinates are a, b. But this does not touch Cayley's meaning. Cayley means

that  it  is  of  great  utility  in  mathematics  to  regard,  as  points  with  a  real

existence in space, the assumed spatial correlates of quantities which, with

the coordinate system employed, have no correlates in every-day space; and

that this utility is supposed, by many mathematicians, to indicate the validity

of so fruitful an assumption. To fix our ideas, let us consider Cartesian axes

in three-dimensional Euclidean space. Then it appears, by inspection, that a

point may be situated at any distance to right or left of any of the three

coordinate planes; taking this distance as a coordinate, therefore, it appears

that real points correspond to all quantities from -∞ to +∞. The same appears

for the other two coordinates; and since elementary Geometry proves their

variations mutually independent, we know that one and only one real pointcorresponds  to  any  three  real  quantities.  But  we  also  know,  from  the

exhaustive method pursued, that all space is covered by the range of these

three  variable  quantities:  a  fresh  set  of  quantities,  therefore,  such  as  is

introduced by the use of imaginaries, possesses no spatial correlate, and can

be supposed to possess one only by a convenient fiction.

  43. The fact that the fiction is convenient, however, may be thought to

indicate that it is more than a fiction. But this presumption, I think, can be

easily explained away. For all the fruitful uses of imaginaries, in Geometry,

are those which begin and end with real quantities, and use imaginaries only

for  the  intermediate  steps.  Now  in  all  such  cases,  we  have  a  real  spatial

interpretation at the beginning and end of our argument, where alone the

spatial interpretation is important: in the intermediate links, we are dealing in

a  purely  algebraical  manner  with  purely  algebraical  quantities,  and  may

perform any operations which are algebraically permissible. If the quantities

with which we end are capable of spatial interpretation, then, and only then,

our result may be regarded as geometrical. To use geometrical language, in

any other case, is only a convenient help to the imagination. To speak, for

example, of projective properties which refer to the circular points, is a mere

memoria technica for purely algebraical properties; the circular points are not

to  be  found  in  space,  but  only  in  the  auxiliary  quantities  by  which

geometrical equations are transformed. That no contradictions arise from the

geometrical  interpretation  of  imaginaries,  is  not  wonderful:  for  they  are

interpreted solely by the rules of Algebra, which we may admit as valid in

their application to imaginaries. The perception of space being wholly absent,

Algebra  rules  supreme,  and  no  inconsistency  can  arise.  Wherever,  for  a

moment,  we  allow  our  ordinary  spatial  notions  to  intrude,  the  grossest

absurdities do arise—every one can see that a circle, being a closed curve,

cannot get to infinity. The metaphysician, who should invent anything so

preposterous as the circular points, would be hooted from the field. But the

mathematician may steal the horse with impunity.

  Finally, then, only a knowledge of space, not a knowledge of Algebra, can

assure us that any given set of quantities will have a spatial correlate, and in

the  absence  of  such  a  correlate,  operations  with  these  quantities  have  no

geometrical import. This is the case with imaginaries in Cayley's sense, and

their use in Geometry, great as are its technical advantages, and rigid as is its

technical validity, is wholly destitute of philosophical importance.  44. We have now, I think, discussed most of the questions concerning the

scope  and  validity  of  the  projective  method.  We  have  seen  that  it  is

independent of all metrical presuppositions, and that its use of coordinates

does  not  involve  the  assumption  that  spatial  magnitudes  are  measured  or

expressed by them. We have seen that it is able to deal, by its own methods

alone, with the question of the qualitative likeness of geometrical figures,

which  is  logically  prior  to  any  comparison  as  to  quantity,  since  quantity

presupposes  qualitative  likeness.  We  have  seen  also  that,  so  far  as  its

legitimate use extends, it applies equally to all homogeneous spaces, and that

its  criterion  of  an  independently  possible  space—the  determination  of  a
                                [60]
straight  line  by  two  points—is  not  subject  to  the  qualifications  and

limitations which belong, as we have seen in the case of the cylinder, to the

metrical criterion of constant curvature. But we have also seen that, when

projective Geometry endeavours to grapple with spatial magnitude, and bring

distance and the measurement of angles beneath its sway, its success, though

technically valid and important, is philosophically an apparent success only.

Metrical  Geometry,  therefore,  if  quantity  is  to  be  applied  to  space  at  all,

remains a separate, though logically subsequent branch of Mathematics.

  45.  It  only  remains  to  say  a  few  words  about Sophus  Lie.  As  a

mathematician, as the inventor of a new and immensely powerful method of

analysis,  he  cannot  be  too  highly  praised.  Geometry  is  only  one  of  the

numerous subjects to which his theory of continuous groups applies, but its

application to Geometry has made a revolution in method, and has rendered

possible, in such problems as Helmholtz's, a treatment infinitely more precise

and exhaustive than any which was possible before.

  The general definition of a group is as follows: If we have any number of

independent variables x x...x, and any series of transformations of these
                            12n

into  new  variables—the  transformations  being  defined  by  equations  of

specified forms, with parameters varying from one transformation to another

—then  the  series  of  transformations  form  a group,  if  the  successive

application of any two is equivalent to a single member of the original series

of  transformations.  The  group  is continuous,  when  we  can  pass,  by

infinitesimal  gradations  within  the  group,  from  any  one  of  the

transformations to any other.

  Now, in Geometry, the result of two successive motions or collineations ofa figure can always be obtained by a single motion or collineation, and any

motion or collineation can be built up of a series of infinitesimal motions or

collineations.  Moreover  the  analytical  expression  of  either  is  a  certain
                                                                          [61]
transformation of the coordinates of all the points of the figure. Hence the

transformations determining a motion or a collineation are such as to form a

continuous  group.  But  the  question  of  the  projective  equivalence  of  two

figures, to which all projective Geometry is reducible, must always be dealt

with by a collineation; and the question of the equality of two figures, to

which  all  metrical  Geometry  is  reducible,  must  always  be  decided  by  a

motion such as to cause superposition; hence the whole subject of Geometry

may  be  regarded  as  a  theory  of  the  continuous  groups  which  define  all

possible collineations and motions.

  Now  Sophus  Lie  has  developed,  at  great  length,  the  purely  analytical

theory  of  groups;  he  has  therefore,  by  this  method  of  formulating  the

problem, a very powerful weapon ready for the attack. In two papers "On the
                            [62]
foundations of Geometry," undertaken at Klein's urgent request, he takes

premisses  which  roughly  correspond  to  those  of  Helmholtz,  omitting

Monodromy,  and  applies  the  theory  of  groups  to  the  deduction  of  their
              [63]
consequences. Helmholtz's work, he says, can hardly be looked upon as

proving its conclusions, and indeed the more searching analysis of the group-

theory reveals several possibilities unknown to Helmholtz. Nevertheless, as a

pioneer, devoid of Lie's machinery, Helmholtz deserves, I think, more praise
                                  [64]
than Lie is willing to give him.

  Lie's method is perfectly exhaustive; omitting the premiss of Monodromy,

the others show that a body has six degrees of freedom, i.e. that the group

giving all possible motions of a body will have six independent members; if

we keep one point fixed, the number of independent members is reduced to

three.  He  then,  from  his  general  theory,  enumerates  all  the  groups  which

satisfy  this  condition.  In  order  that  such  a  group  should give  possible

motions, it is necessary, by Helmholtz's second axiom, that it should leave

invariant some function of the coordinates of any two points. This eliminates

several of the groups previously enumerated, each of which he discusses in

turn. He is thus led to the following results:

  I. In two dimensions, if free mobility is to hold universally, there are no

groups satisfying Helmholtz's first three axioms, except those which give theordinary Euclidean and non-Euclidean motions; but if it is to hold only within

a certain region, there is also a possible group in which the curve described

by any point in a rotation is not closed, but an equiangular spiral. To exclude

this possibility, Helmholtz's axiom of Monodromy is required.

  II. In  three  dimensions,  the  results  go  still  more  against  Helmholtz.

Assuming free mobility only within a certain region, we have to distinguish

two cases: Either free mobility holds, within that region, absolutely without

exception, i.e. when one point is held fast, every other point within the region

can move freely over a surface: in this case the axiom of Monodromy is

unnecessary, and the first three axioms suffice to define our group as that of

Euclidean and non-Euclidean motions. Or free mobility, within the specified

region, holds only of every point of general position, while the points of a

certain line, when one point is fixed, are only able to move on that line, not

on a surface: when this is the case, other groups are possible, and can only be

excluded by Helmholtz's fourth axiom.

  Having now stated the purely mathematical results of Lie's investigations,

we may return to philosophical considerations, by which Helmholtz's work

was mainly motived. It becomes obvious, not only that exceptions within a

certain region, but also that limitation to a certain region, of the axiom of Free

Mobility, are philosophically quite impossible and inconceivable. How can a

certain line, or a certain surface, form an impassable barrier in space, or have

any mobility different in kind from that of all other lines or surfaces? The

notion cannot, in philosophy, be permitted for a moment, since it destroys

that most fundamental of all the axioms, the homogeneity of space. We not

only may, therefore, but must take Helmholtz's axiom of Free Mobility in its

very strictest sense; the axiom of Monodromy thus becomes mathematically,

as  well  as  philosophically,  superfluous.  This  is,  from  a  philosophical

standpoint, the most important of Lie's results.

  46. I have now come to the end of my history of Metageometry. It has not

been my aim to give an exhaustive account of even the important works on

the subject—in the third period, especially, the names of Poincaré, Pasch,

Cremona, Veronese, and others who might be mentioned, would have cried

shame upon me, had I had any such object. But I have tried to set forth, as

clearly as I could, the principles at work in the various periods, the motives

and  results  of  successive  theories.  We  have  seen  how  the  philosophical

motive,  at  first  predominant,  has  been  gradually  extruded  by  the  purelymathematical  and  technical  spirit  of  most  recent  Geometers.  At  first,  to

discredit  the  Transcendental  Aesthetic  seemed,  to  Metageometers,  as

important as to advance their science; but from the works of Cayley, Klein or

Lie, no reader could gather that Kant had ever lived. We have also seen,

however, that as the interest in philosophy waned, the interest for philosophy

increased:  as  the  mathematical  results  shook  themselves  free  from

philosophical  controversies,  they  assumed  gradually  a  stable  form,  from

which further development, we may reasonably hope, will take the form of

growth, rather than transformation. The same gradual development out of

philosophy might, I believe, be traced in the infancy of most branches of

mathematics; when philosophical motives cease to operate, this is, in general,

a sign that the stage of uncertainty as to premisses is past, so that the future

belongs entirely to mathematical technique. When this stable stage has been

attained, it is time for Philosophy to borrow of Science, accepting its final

premisses as those imposed by a real necessity of fact or logic.

  47. Now in discussing the systems of Metageometry, we have found two

kinds, radically distinct and subject to different axioms. The historically prior

kind, which deals with metrical ideas, discusses, to begin with, the conditions

of Free Mobility, which is essential to all measurement of space. It finds the

analytical expression of these conditions in the existence of a space-constant,

or constant measure of curvature, which is equivalent to the homogeneity of

space. This is its first axiom.

  Its  second  axiom  states  that  space  has  a  finite  integral  number  of

dimensions, i.e. in metrical terms, that the position of a point, relative to any

other figure in space, is uniquely determined by a finite number of spatial

magnitudes, called coordinates.

  The third axiom of metrical Geometry may be called, to distinguish it

from the corresponding projective axiom, the axiom of distance. There exists

one  relation,  it  says,  between  any  two  points,  which  can  be  preserved

unaltered in a combined motion of both points, and which, in any motion of a

system as one rigid body, is always unaltered. This relation we call distance.

  The above statement of the three essential axioms of metrical Geometry is

taken from Helmholtz as amended by Lie. Lie's own statement of the axioms,

as quoted above, has been too much influenced by projective methods to give

a historically correct rendering of the spirit of the second period; Helmholtz's

statement, on the other hand, requires, as Lie has shewn, very considerablemodifications. The above compromise may, therefore, I hope be taken as

accepting Lie's corrections while retaining Helmholtz's spirit.

  48.  But  metrical  Geometry,  though  it  is  historically  prior,  is  logically

subsequent to projective Geometry. For projective Geometry deals directly

with that qualitative likeness, which the judgment of quantitative comparison

requires as its basis. Now the above three axioms of metrical Geometry, as

we shall see in Chapter III. Section B, do not presuppose measurement, but

are, on the contrary, the conditions presupposed by measurement. Without

these axioms, which are common to all three spaces, measurement would be

impossible; with them, so I shall contend, measurement is able, though only

empirically, to decide approximately which of the three spaces is valid of our

actual world. But if these three axioms themselves express, not results, but

conditions, of measurement, must they not be equivalent to the statement of

that qualitative likeness on which quantitative comparison depends? And if

so, must we not expect to find the same axioms, though perhaps under a

different form, in projective Geometry?

  49. This expectation will not be disappointed. The above three axioms, as

we  shall  see  hereafter,  are  one  and  all  philosophically  equivalent  to  the

homogeneity  of  space,  and  this  in  turn  is  equivalent  to  the  axioms  of

projective Geometry. The axioms of projective Geometry, in fact, may be

roughly stated thus:

  I.  Space  is  continuous  and  infinitely  divisible;  the  zero  of  extension,

resulting from infinite division, is called a Point. All points are qualitatively

similar, and distinguished by the mere fact that they lie outside one another.

  II. Any two points determine a unique figure, the straight line; two straight

lines, like two points, are qualitatively similar, and distinguished by the mere

fact that they are mutually external.

  III. Three points not in one straight line determine a unique figure, the

plane,  and  four  points  not  in  one  plane  determine  a  figure  of  three

dimensions. This process may, so far as can be seen à priori, be continued,

without in any way interfering with the possibility of projective Geometry, to

five or to n points. But projective Geometry requires, as an axiom, that the

process  should  stop  with  some  positive  integral  number  of  points,  after

which, any fresh point is contained in the figure determined by those already

given. If the process stops with (n + 1) points, our space is said to have n

dimensions.  These three axioms, it will be seen, are the equivalents of the three axioms
                        [65]
of metrical Geometry, expressed without reference to quantity. We shall

find them to be deducible, as before, from the homogeneity of space, or, more

generally  still,  from  the  possibility  of  experiencing  externality.  They  will

therefore appear as à priori, as essential to the existence of any Geometry and

to experience of an external world as such.

  50. That some logical necessity is involved in these axioms might, I think,

be  inferred  as  probable,  from  their  historical  development  alone.  For  the

systems of Metageometry have not, in general, been set up as more likely to

fit facts than the system of Euclid; with the exception of Zöllner, for example,

I  know  of  no  one  who  has  regarded  the  fourth  dimension  as  required  to

explain  phenomena.  As  regards  the  space-constant  again,  though  a small

space-constant is regarded as empirically possible, it is not usually regarded

as  probable;  and  the  finite  space-constants,  with  which  Metageometry  is

equally conversant, are not usually thought even possible, as explanations of
              [66]
empirical fact. Thus the motive has been throughout not one of fact, but

one  of  logic.  Does  not  this  give  a  strong  presumption,  that  those  axioms

which are retained, are retained because they are logically indispensable? If

this be so, the axioms common to Euclid and Metageometry will be à priori,

while those peculiar to Euclid will be empirical. After a criticism of some

differing theories of Geometry, I shall proceed, in Chapters III. and IV., to

the proof and consequences of this thesis, which will form the remainder of

the present work.

  FOOTNOTES:

  [5] V. Mémoires de l'Académie royale des Sciences de l'lnstitut de France,

T. XII. 1833, for a full statement of his results, with references to former

writings.

  [6] This bolder method, it appears, had been suggested, nearly a century

earlier, by an Italian, Saccheri. His work, which seems to have remained

completely  unknown  until  Beltrami  rediscovered  it  in  1889,  is  called

"Euclides ab omni naevo vindicatus, etc." Mediolani, 1733. (See Veronese,

Grundzüge der Geometrie, German translation, Leipzig, 1894, p. 636.) His

results included spherical as well as hyperbolic space; but they alarmed him

to such an extent that he devoted the last half of his book to disproving them.

  [7]  Klein's  first  account  of  elliptic  Geometry,  as  a  result  of  Cayley'sprojective theory of distance, appeared in two articles entitled "Ueber die

sogenannte Nicht-Euklidische Geometrie, I, II," Math. Annalen 4, 6 (1871–

2). It was afterwards independently discovered by Newcomb, in an article

entitled "Elementary Theorems relating to the geometry of a space of three

dimensions,  and  of  uniform  positive  curvature  in  the  fourth  dimension,"

Crelle's Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik, Vol. 83 (1877).

For  an  account  of  the  mathematical  controversies  concerning  elliptic

Geometry,  see  Klein's  "Vorlesungen  über  Nicht-Euklidische  Geometrie,"

Göttingen 1893, I. p. 284 ff. A bibliography of the relevant literature up to

the year 1878 was given by Halsted in the American Journal of Mathematics,

Vols. 1, 2.

  [8] Veronese (op. cit. p. 638) denies the priority of Gauss in the invention

of a non-Euclidean system, though he admits him to have been the first to

regard the axiom of parallels as indemonstrable. His grounds for the former

assertion seem scarcely adequate: on the evidence against it, see Klein, Nicht-

Euklid, I. pp. 171–174.

  [9] V. Briefwechsel mit Schumacher, Bd. II. p. 268.

  [10] f. Helmholtz, Wiss. Abh. II. p. 611.

  [11] Crelle's Journal, 1837.

  [12] Theorie der Parallellinien, Berlin, 1840. Republished, Berlin, 1887.

Translated by Halsted, Austin, Texas, U.S.A. 4th edition, 1892.

  [13] Frischauf, Absolute Geometrie, nach Johann Bolyai, Leipzig, 1872.

Halsted,  The  Science  Absolute  of  Space,  translated  from  the  Latin,  4th

edition, Austin, Texas, U.S.A. 1896.

  [14] Both Lobatchewsky and Bolyai, as Veronese remarks, start rather

from the point-pair than from distance. See Frischauf, Absolute Geometrie,

Anhang.

  [15] Compare Stallo, Concepts of Modern Physics, p. 248.

  [16] Gesammelte Werke, pp. 255–268.

  [17] On the history of this word, see Stallo, Concepts of Modern Physics,

p. 258. It was used by Kant, and adapted by Herbart to almost the same

meaning  as  it  bears  in  Riemann.  Herbart,  however,  also  uses  the  word

Reihenform to express a similar idea. See Psychologie als Wissenschaft, I. §

100 and II. § 139, where Riemann's analogy with colours is also suggested.

  [18] Compare Erdmann's "Grössenbegriff vom Raum."

  [19] Compare Veronese, op. cit. p. 642: "Riemann ist in seiner Definitiondes Begriffs Grösse dunkel." See also Veronese's whole following criticism.

  [20] Vorträge und Reden, Vol. II. p. 18.

  [21] Cf. Klein, Nicht-Euklid, I. p. 160.

  [22]  Since  we  are  considering  the  curvature  at  a  point,  we  are  only

concerned with the first infinitesimal elements of the geodesics that start from

such a point.

  [23] Disquisitiones generales circa superficies curvas, Werke, Bd. IV. SS.

219–258, 1827.

  [24] Nevertheless, the Geometries of different surfaces of equal curvature

are liable to important differences. For example, the cylinder is a surface of

zero curvature, but since its lines of curvature in one direction are finite, its

Geometry coincides with that of the plane only for lengths smaller than the

circumference of its generating circle (see Veronese, op. cit. p. 644). Two

geodesics  on  a  cylinder  may  meet  in  many  points.  For  surfaces  of  zero

curvature on which this is not possible, the identity with the plane may be

allowed to stand. Otherwise, the identity extends only to the properties of

figures not exceeding a certain size.

  [25]  For  we  may  consider  two  different  parts  of  the  same  surface  as

corresponding parts of different surfaces; the above proposition then shows

that a figure can be reproduced in one part when it has been drawn in another,

if the measures of curvature correspond in the two parts.

  [26] Crelle, Vols, XIX., XX., 1839–40.

  [27] In this formula, u, v may be the lengths of lines, or the angles between

lines, drawn on the surface, and having thus no necessary reference to a third

dimension.

  [28] In what follows, I have given rather Klein's exposition of Riemann,

than Riemann's own account. The former is much clearer and fuller, and not

substantially different in any way. V. Klein, Nicht-Euklid, I. pp. 206 ff.

  [29] See §§ 69–73.

  [30] Grundlagen der Geometrie, I. and II., Leipziger Berichte, 1890; v.

end of present chapter, § 45.

  [31] Nicht-Euklid, I. pp. 258–9.

  [32] Giornale di Matematiche, Vol. VI., 1868. Translated into French by J.

Hoüel in the "Annales Scientifiques de l'École Normale Supérieure," Vol. VI.

1869.

  [33] Crelle's Journal, Vols. XIX. XX., 1839–40.  [34] Nicht-Euklid, I. p. 190.

  [35] This article is more trigonometrical and analytical than the German

book, and therefore makes the above interpretation peculiarly evident.

  [36] Such surfaces are by no means particularly remote. One of them, for

example, is formed by the revolution of the common Tractrix

  x = a sin φ,   y = a log tan  
                        (

  φ

  2

  + cos φ.
          )

  [37] "Teoria fondamentale degli spazii di curvatura costanta," Annali di

Matematica, II. Vol. 2, 1868–9. Also translated by J. Hoüel, loc. cit.

  [38] See Klein, Nicht-Euklid, I. p. 47 ff., and the references there given.

  [39] See quotation below, from his British Association Address.

  [40] Compare the opening sentence, due to Cayley, of Salmon's Higher

Plane Curves.

  [41] V. Nicht-Euklid, I. Chaps. I. and II.

  [42] See p. 9 of Cayley's address to the Brit. Ass. 1883. Also a quotation

from Klein in Erdmann's Axiome der Geometrie, p. 124 note.

  [43] Nature, Vol. XLV. p. 407.

  [44] Nicht-Euklid, I. p. 200.

  [45] I.e. the equation AB + BC = AC, for three points in one straight line.

  [46] The formula substituted by Klein for Cayley's inverse sine or cosine.

The  two  are  equivalent,  but  Klein's  is  mathematically  much  the  more

convenient.

  [47]  Elements  of  Projective  Geometry,  Second  Edition,  Oxford,  1893,

Chap. IX.

  [48] Chap. III. Section B.

  [49] See Nicht-Euklid, I. p. 338 ff.

  [50] See his Geometrie der Lage, § 8, Harmonische Gebilde.

  [51] The anharmonic ratio of four numbers, p, q, r, s, is defined as

  (p - q).(r - s)  (p - r).(q - s).
                /

  [52] I.e. as transformable into each other by a collineation. See Chap. III.

Sec. A, § 110.

  [53] See Chap. III. Sec. A.

  [54]  It  follows  from  this,  that  the  reduction  of  metrical  to  projectiveproperties, even when, as in hyperbolic Geometry, the Absolute is real, is

only apparent, and has a merely technical validity.

  [55] Sir R. Ball does not regard his non-Euclidean content as a possible

space  (v.  op.  cit.  p.  151).  In  this  important  point  I  disagree  with  his

interpretation, holding such a content to be a space as possible, à priori, as

Euclid's,  and  perhaps  actually  true  within  the  margin  due  to  errors  of

observation.

  [56] See Nicht-Euklid, I. p. 97 ff. and p. 292 ff.

  [57]  Newcomb  says  (loc.  cit.  p.  293):  "The  system  here  set  forth  is

founded on the following three postulates.

  "1. I assume that space is triply extended, unbounded, without properties

dependent either on position or direction, and possessing such planeness in its

smallest parts that both the postulates of the Euclidean Geometry, and our

common conceptions of the relations of the parts of space are true for every

indefinitely small region in space.

  "2. I assume that this space is affected with such curvature that a right line

shall  always  return  into  itself  at  the  end  of  a  finite  and  real  distance  2D

without losing, in any part of its course, that symmetry with respect to space

on  all  sides  of  it  which  constitutes  the  fundamental  property  of  our

conception of it.

  "3. I assume that if two right lines emanate from the same point, making

the  indefinitely  small  angle a  with  each  other,  their  distance  apart  at  the

distance r from the point of intersection will be given by the equation

  s =  

  2aD

  π

 sin  

  rπ

  2D

  .

  The right line thus has this property in common with the Euclidean right

line that two such lines intersect only in a single point. It may be that the

number  of  points  in  which  two  such  lines  can  intersect  admit  of  being

determined from the laws of curvature, but not being able so to determine it, I

assume as a postulate the fundamental property of the Euclidean right line."

  It  is  plain  that  in  the  absence  of  the  determination  spoken  of,  thepossibility  of  elliptic  space  is  not  established.  It  may  be  possible,  for

example, to prove that, in a space where there is a maximum to distance,

there  must  be  an  infinite  number  of  straight  lines  joining  two  points  of

maximum distance. In this event, elliptic space would become impossible.

  [58] For an elucidation of this term, see Klein, Nicht-Euklid, I. p. 99 ff.

  [59] Cf. p. 9 of Report: "My own view is that Euclid's twelfth axiom, in

Playfair's form of it, does not need demonstration, but is part of our notion of

space, of the physical space of our experience, but which is the representation

lying at the bottom of all external experience."

  [60] The exception to this axiom, in spherical space, presupposes metrical

Geometry,  and  does  not  destroy  the  validity  of  the  axiom  for  projective

Geometry. See Chap. III. Sec. B, § 171.

  [61]  Mathematicians  of  Lie's  school  have  a  habit,  at  first  somewhat

confusing, of speaking of motions of space instead of motions of bodies, as

though space as a whole could move. All that is meant is, of course, the

equivalent motion of the coordinate axes, i.e. a change of axes in the usual

elementary sense.

  [62]  "Ueber  die  Grundlagen  der  Geometrie,"  Leipziger  Berichte,  1890.

The problem of these two papers is really metrical, since it is concerned, not

with collineations in general, but with motions. The problem, however, is

dealt with by the projective method, motions being regarded as collineations

which  leave  the  Absolute  unchanged.  It  seemed  impossible,  therefore,  to

discuss  Lie's  work,  until  some  account  had  been  given  of  the  projective

method.

  [63] Lie's premisses, to be accurate, are the following:

  Let

  x = f (x, y, z, a, a...)
  112

x = φ (x, y, z, a, a...)
212

x = ψ (x, y, z, a, a...)
312

  give an infinite family of real transformations of space, as to which we

make the following hypotheses:

  A. The functions f, φ, ψ, are analytical functions of

  x, y, z, a, a....
            12

  B. Two points xyz, xyz possess an invariant, i.e.
                      111222

  Ω(x, y, z, x, y, z) = Ω(x′, y′, z′, x′, y′, z′)
        111222111222  where x′..., x′..., are the transformed coordinates of the two points.
          12

  C. Free Mobility: i.e., any point can be moved into any other position;
                                                                                          2
when one point is fixed, any other point of general position can take up ∞

positions; when two points are fixed, any other of general position can take
    1
up ∞ positions; when three, no motion is possible—these limitations being

results of the equations given by the invariant Ω.

  [64] On this point, cf. Klein, Höhere Geometrie, Göttingen, 1893, II. pp.

225–244, especially pp. 230–1.

  [65]  Axiom  II.  of  the  metrical  triad  corresponds  to  Axiom  III.  of  the

projective, and vice versâ.

  [66] Cf. Helmholtz, Wiss. Abh. Vol. II. p. 640, note: "Die Bearbeiter der

Nicht-Euklidischen  Geometrie  (haben)  deren  objective  Wahrheit  nie

behauptet."

 
 
 

                                     CHAPTER II.


          CRITICAL ACCOUNT OF SOME PREVIOUS

        PHILOSOPHICAL THEORIES OF GEOMETRY.

  51. We have now traced the mathematical development of the theory of

geometrical axioms, from the first revolt against Euclid to the present day.

We may hope, therefore, to have at our command the technical knowledge

required for the philosophy of the subject. The importance of Geometry, in

the theories of knowledge which have arisen in the past, can scarcely be

exaggerated. In Descartes, we find the whole theory of method dominated by

analytical Geometry, of whose fruitfulness he was justly proud. In Spinoza,

the paramount influence of Geometry is too obvious to require comment.

Among mathematicians, Newton's belief in absolute space was long supreme,

and is still responsible for the current formulation of the laws of motion.

Against this belief on the one hand, and against Leibnitz's theory of space on
                                                    [67]
the other, and not, as Caird has pointed out, against Hume's empiricism,

was directed that keystone of the Critical Philosophy, the Kantian doctrine of

space. Thus Geometry has been, throughout, of supreme importance in the

theory of knowledge.

  But in a criticism of representative modern theories of Geometry, which is

designed  to  be,  not  a  history  of  the  subject,  but  an  introduction  to,  and

defence of, the views of the author, it will not be necessary to discuss any

more ancient theory than that of Kant. Kant's views on this subject, true or

false,  have  so  dominated  subsequent  thought,  that  whether  they  were

accepted or rejected, they seemed equally potent in forming the opinions, and

the manner of exposition, of almost all later writers.

 

  Kant.

  52. It is not my purpose, in this chapter, to add to the voluminous literature

of Kantian criticism, but only to discuss the bearing of Metageometry on the

argument of the Transcendental Aesthetic, and the aspect under which this
                                                                    [68]
argument  must  be  viewed  in  a  discussion  of  Geometry.  On  this  point

several misunderstandings seem to me to have had wide prevalence, both

among friends and foes, and these misunderstandings I shall endeavour, if I

can, to remove.  In  the  first  place,  what  does  Kant's  doctrine  mean  for  Geometry?

Obviously  not  the  aspect  of  the  doctrine  which  has  been  attacked  by

psychologists, the "Kantian machine-shop" as James calls it—at any rate, if

this can be clearly separated from the logical aspect. The question whether

space is given in sensation, or whether, as Kant maintained, it is given by an

intuition to which no external matter corresponds, may for the present be

disregarded. If, indeed, we held the view which seems crudely to sum up the

standpoint  of  the  Critique,  the  view  that  all  certain  knowledge  is  self-

knowledge, then we should be committed, if we had decided that Geometry

was  apodeictic,  to  the  view  that  space  is  subjective.  But  even  then,  the

psychological question could only arise when the epistemological question

had been solved, and could not, therefore, be taken into account in our first

investigation. The question before us is precisely the question whether, or

how  far,  Geometry  is  apodeictic,  and  for  the  moment  we  have  only  to

investigate this question, without fear of psychological consequences.

  53. Now on this question, as on almost all questions in the Aesthetic or the

Analytic, Kant's argument is twofold. On the one hand, he says, Geometry is

known to have apodeictic certainty: therefore space must be à priori and

subjective.  On  the  other  hand,  it  follows,  from  grounds  independent  of

Geometry, that space is subjective and à priori; therefore Geometry must

have apodeictic certainty. These two arguments are not clearly distinguished

in the Aesthetic, but a little analysis, I think, will disentangle them. Thus in

the  first  edition,  the  first  two  arguments  deduce,  from  non-geometrical

grounds, the apriority of space; the third deduces the apodeictic certainty of

Geometry, and maintains, conversely, that no other view can account for this
        [69]
certainty; the last two arguments only maintain that space is an intuition,

not  a  concept.  In  the  second  edition,  the  double  argument  is  clearer,  the

apriority  of  space  being  proved  independently  of  Geometry  in  the

metaphysical deduction, and deduced from the certainty of Geometry, as the

only  possible  explanation  of  this,  in  the  transcendental  deduction.  In  the

Prolegomena, the latter argument alone is used, but in the Critique both are

employed.

  54. Now it must be admitted, I think, that Metageometry has destroyed the

legitimacy of the argument from Geometry to space; we can no longer affirm,

on purely geometrical grounds, the apodeictic certainty of Euclid. But unlessMetageometry has done more than this—unless it has proved, what I believe

it alone cannot prove, that Euclid has not apodeictic certainty—then Kant's

other line of argument retains what force it may ever have had. The actual

space we know, it may say, is admittedly Euclidean, and is proved, without

any  reference  to  Geometry,  to  be à  priori; hence  Euclid  has  apodeictic

certainty, and non-Euclid stands condemned. To this it is no answer to urge,

with  the  Metageometers,  that  non-Euclidean  systems  are logically  self-

consistent; for Kant is careful to argue that geometrical reasoning, by virtue

of our intuition of space, is synthetic, and cannot, though à priori, be upheld
                                            [70]
by the principle of contradiction alone. Unless non-Euclideans can prove,

what they have certainly failed to prove up to the present, that we can frame

an intuition  of  non-Euclidean  spaces, Kant's  position  cannot  be  upset  by

Metageometry alone, but must also be attacked, if it is to be successfully

attacked, on its purely philosophical side.

  55. For such an attack, two roads lie open: either we may disprove the first

two arguments of the Aesthetic, or we may criticize, from the standpoint of

general logic, the Kantian doctrine of synthetic à priori judgments and their

connection  with  subjectivity.  Both  these  attacks,  I  believe,  could  be

conducted  with  some  success;  but  if  we  are  to  disprove  the  apodeictic

certainty of Geometry, one or other is essential, and both, I believe, will be

found only partially successful. It will be my aim to prove, in discussing

these two lines of attack, (1) that the distinction of synthetic and analytic

judgments is untenable, and further, that the principle of contradiction can

only give fruitful results on the assumption that experience in general, or, in a

particular  science,  some  special  branch  of  experience,  is  to  be  formally

possible;  (2)  that  the  first  two  arguments  of  the  Transcendental  Aesthetic

suffice to prove, not Euclidean space, but some form of externality—which

may be sensational or intuitional, but not merely conceptual—a necessary

prerequisite  of  experience  of  an  external  world.  In  the  third  and  fourth

chapters, I shall contend, as a result of these conclusions, that those axioms,

which  Euclid  and  Metageometry  have  in  common,  coincide  with  those

properties of any form of externality which are deducible, by the principle of

contradiction, from the possibility of experience of an external world. These

properties, then, may be said, though not quite in the Kantian sense, to be à

priori  properties  of  space,  and  as  to  these,  I  think,  a  modified  Kantianposition may be maintained. But the question of the subjective or objective

nature of space may be left wholly out of account during the course of this

discussion, which will gain by dealing exclusively with logical, as opposed to

psychological points of view.

  56.  (1) Kant's  logical  position.  The  doctrine  of  synthetic  and  analytic

judgments—at any rate if this is taken as the corner-stone of Epistemology—
                                                                      [71]
has been so completely rejected by most modern logicians, that it would

demand  little  attention  here,  but  for  the  fact  that  an  enthusiastic  French

Kantian, M. Renouvier, has recently appealed to it, with perfect confidence,
                                          [72]
on  the  very  question  of  Geometry.  And  it  must  be  owned,  with  M.

Renouvier,  that  if  such  judgments  existed,  in  the  Kantian  sense,  non-

Euclidean Geometry, which makes no appeal to intuition, could have nothing

to say against them. M. Renouvier's contention, therefore, forces us briefly to

review the arguments against Kant's doctrine, and briefly to discuss what

logical canon is to replace it.

  Every  judgment—so  modern  logic  contends—is  both  synthetic  and
                                                                                    [73]
analytic; it combines parts into a whole, and analyses a whole into parts. If

this  be  so,  the  distinction  of  analysis  and  synthesis,  whatever  may  be  its

importance in pure Logic, can have no value in Epistemology. But such a

doctrine,  it  must  be  observed,  allows  full  scope  to  the  principle  of

contradiction: this criterion, since all judgments, in one aspect at least, are

analytic, is applicable to all judgments alike. On the other hand, the whole

which is analysed must be supposed already given, before the parts can be

mutually contradictory: for only by connection in a given whole can two

parts  or  adjectives  be  incompatible.  Thus  the  principle  of  contradiction

remains  barren  until  we  already  have  some  judgments,  and  even  some

inference: for the parts may be regarded, to some extent, as an inference from

the whole, or vice versâ. When once the arch of knowledge is constructed,

the  parts  support  one  another,  and  the  principle  of  contradiction  is  the

keystone:  but  until  the  arch  is  built,  the  keystone  remains  suspended,

unsupported and unsupporting, in the empty air. In other words, knowledge

once  existent  can  be  analysed,  but  knowledge  which  should  have  to  win

every inch of the way against a critical scepticism, could never begin, and

could never attain that circular condition in which alone it can stand.

  But Kant's doctrine, if true, is designed to restrain a critical scepticismeven where it might be effective. Certain fundamental propositions, he says,

are  not  deducible  from  logic, i.e.  their  contradictories  are  not  self-

contradictory; they combine a subject and predicate which cannot, in any

purely  logical  way,  be  shewn  to  have  any  connection,  and  yet  these

judgments have apodeictic certainty. But concerning such judgments, Kant is

generally careful not to rely upon the mere subjective conviction that they are

undeniable: he proves, with every precaution, that without them experience

would be impossible. Experience consists in the combination of terms which

formal logic leaves apart, and presupposes, therefore, certain judgments by

which a framework is made for bringing such terms together. Without these

judgments—so  Kant  contends—all  synthesis  and  all  experience  would  be

impossible. If, therefore, the detail of the Kantian reasoning be sound, his

results may be obtained by the principle of contradiction plus the possibility

of  experience,  as  well  as  by  his  distinction  of  synthetic  and  analytic

judgments.

  Logic, at the present day, arrogates to itself at once a wider and a narrower

sphere than Kant allowed to it. Wider, because it believes itself capable of

condemning any false principle or postulate; narrower, because it believes

that its law of contradiction, without a given whole or a given hypothesis, is

powerless, and that two terms, per se, though they may be different, cannot

be contradictories, but acquire this relation only by combination in a whole

about which something is known, or by connection with a postulate which,

for  some  reason,  must  be  preserved.  Thus  no  judgment, per se,  is  either

analytic or synthetic, for the severance of a judgment from its context robs it

of its vitality, and makes it not truly a judgment at all. But in its proper

context it is neither purely synthetic nor purely analytic; for while it is the

further determination of a given whole, and thus in so far analytic, it also

involves  the  emergence  of new  relations  within  this  whole,  and  is  so  far

synthetic.

  57. We may retain, however, a distinction roughly corresponding to the

Kantian à priori and à posteriori, though less rigid, and more liable to change

with the degree of organisation of knowledge. Kant usually endeavoured to

prove,  as  observed  above,  that  his  synthetic à  priori  propositions  were

necessary  prerequisites  of  experience;  now  although  we  cannot  retain  the

term synthetic, we can retain the term à priori, for those assumptions, or

those  postulates,  from  which  alone  the  possibility  of  experience  follows.Whatever can be deduced from these postulates, without the aid of the matter

of experience, will also, of course, be à priori. From the standpoint of general

logic,  the  laws  of  thought  and  the  categories,  with  the  indispensable

conditions  of  their  applicability,  will  be  alone à  priori;  but  from  the

standpoint  of  any  special  science,  we  may  call à priori whatever renders

possible the experience which forms the subject-matter of our science. In

Geometry, to particularize, we may call à priori whatever renders possible

experience of externality as such.

  It is to be observed that this use of the term is at once more rationalistic

and less precise than that of Kant. Kant would seem to have supposed himself

immediately aware, by inspection, that some knowledge was apodeictic, and

its  subject-matter,  therefore, à  priori:  but  he  did  not  always  deduce  its

apriority from any further principle. Here, however, it is to be shown, before

admitting apriority, that the falsehood of the judgment in question would not

be effected by a mere change in the matter of experience, but only by a

change which should render some branch of experience formally impossible,

i.e.  inaccessible  to  our  methods  of  cognition.  The  above  use  is  also  less

precise, for it varies according to the specialization of the experience we are

assuming  possible,  and  with  every  progress  of  knowledge  some  new

connection is perceived, two previously isolated judgments are brought into

logical relation, and the à priori may thus, at any moment, enlarge its sphere,

as more is found deducible from fundamental postulates.

  58. (2) Kant's arguments for the apriority of space. Having now discussed

the logical canon to be used as regards the à priori, we may proceed to test

Kant's  arguments  as  regards  space.  The  argument  from  Geometry,  as

remarked above, is upset by Metageometry, at least so far as those properties

are concerned, which belong to Euclid but not to non-Euclidean spaces; as

regards the common properties of both kinds of space, we cannot decide on

their  apriority  till  we  have  discussed  the  consequences  of  denying  them,

which will be done in Chapter III. As regards the two arguments which prove

that space is an intuition, not a concept, they would call for much discussion

in  a  special  criticism  of  Kant,  but  here  they  may  be  passed  by  with  the

obvious comment that infinite homogeneous Euclidean space is a concept,

not an intuition—a concept invented to explain an intuition, it is true, but still
                [74]
a pure concept. And it is this pure concept which, in all discussions ofGeometry, is primarily to be dealt with; the intuition need only be referred to

where  it  throws  light  on  the  functions  or  the  nature  of  the  concept.  The

second of Kant's arguments, that we can imagine empty space, though not the

absence of space, is false if it means a space without matter anywhere, and

irrelevant  if  it  merely  means  a  space  between  matters  and  regarded  as
      [75]
empty. The only argument of importance, then, is the first argument. But I

must  insist,  at  the  outset,  that  our  problem  is  purely  logical,  and  that  all

psychological implications must be excluded to the utmost possible extent.

Moreover, as will be proved in Chapter IV., the proper function of space is to

distinguish between different presented things, not between the Self and the

object of sensation or perception. The argument then becomes the following:

consciousness  of  a  world  of  mutually  external  things  demands,  in

presentations,  a  cognitive  but  non-inferential  element  leading  to  the

discrimination of the objects presented. This element must be non-inferential,

for from whatever number or combination of presentations, which did not of

themselves demand diversity in their objects, I could never be led to infer the

mutual externality of their objects. Kant says: "In order that sensations may

be ascribed to something external to me ... and similarly in order that I may

be able to present them as outside and beside one another, ... the presentation

of space must be already present." But this goes rather too far: in the first

place, the question should be only as to the mutual externality of presented
                                                      [76]
things, not as to their externality to the Self; and in the second place,

things will appear mutually external if I have the presentation of any form of

externality, whether Euclidean or non-Euclidean. Whatever may be true of

the psychological scope of this argument—whose validity is here irrelevant—

the logical scope extends, not to Euclidean space, but only to any form of

externality which could exist intuitively, and permit knowledge, in beings

with our laws of thought, of a world of diverse but interrelated things.

  Moreover externality, to render the scope of the argument wholly logical,

must not be left with a sensational or intuitional meaning, though it must be

supposed given in sensation or intuition. It must mean, in this argument, the
                    [77]
fact of Otherness, the fact of being different from some other thing: it

must  involve  the  distinction  between  different  things,  and  must  be  that

element, in a cognitive state, which leads us to discriminate constituent parts

in its object. So much, then, would appear to result from Kant's argument,that experience of diverse but interrelated things demands, as a necessary

prerequisite, some sensational or intuitional element, in perception, by which
                                                                          [78]
we  are  led  to  attribute  complexity  to  objects  of  perception;  that  this

element, in its isolation may be called a form of externality; and that those

properties of this form, if any such be found, which can be deduced from its

mere function of rendering experience of interrelated diversity possible, are

to be regarded as à priori. What these properties are, and how the various

lines of argument here suggested converge to a single result, we shall see in

Chapters III. and IV.

  59. In the philosophers who followed Kant, Metaphysics, for the most

part, so predominated over Epistemology, that little was added to the theory

of Geometry. What was added, came indirectly from the one philosopher who

stood  out  against  the  purely  ontological  speculations  of  his  time,  namely

Herbart. Herbart's actual views on Geometry, which are to be found chiefly

in the first section of his Synechologie, are not of any great value, and have

borne no great fruit in the development of the subject. But his psychological

theory  of  space,  his  construction  of  extension  out  of  series  of  points,  his

comparison of space with the tone and colour-series, his general preference

for  the  discrete  above  the  continuous,  and  finally  his  belief  in  the  great
                                                                                      [79]
importance of classifying space with other forms of series (Reihenformen),

gave rise to many of Riemann's epoch-making speculations, and encouraged

the attempt to explain the nature of space by its analytical and quantitative
            [80]
aspect alone. Through his influence on Riemann, he acquired, indirectly, a

great  importance  in  geometrical  philosophy.  To  Riemann's  dissertation,

which we have already discussed in its mathematical aspect, we must now

return, considering, this time, only its philosophical views.

 

  Riemann.

  60. The aim of Riemann's dissertation, as we saw in Chapter I., was to

define space as a species of manifold, i.e. as a particular kind of collection of

magnitudes. It was thus assumed, to begin with, that spatial figures could be

regarded  as  magnitudes,  and  the  axioms  which  emerged,  accordingly,

determined only the particular place of these among the many algebraically

possible varieties of magnitudes. The resulting formulation of the axioms—

while, from the mathematical standpoint of metrical Geometry, it was almost

wholly laudable—must, from the standpoint of philosophy, be regarded, inmy opinion, as a petitio principii. For when we have arrived at regarding

spatial figures as magnitudes, we have already traversed the most difficult

part  of  the  ground.  The  axioms  of  metrical  Geometry—and  it  is  metrical

Geometry,  exclusively,  which  is  considered  in  Riemann's  Essay—will

appear, in Chapter III., to be divisible into two classes. Of these, the first

class—which contains the axioms common to Euclid and Metageometry, the

only  axioms  seriously  discussed  by  Riemann—are  not  the  results  of

measurement, nor of any conception of magnitude, but are conditions to be

fulfilled  before  measurement  becomes  possible.  The  second  class  only—

those  which  express  the  difference  between  Euclidean  and  non-Euclidean

spaces—can  be  deduced  as  results  of  measurement  or  of  conceptions  of

magnitude. As regards the first class, on the contrary, we shall see that the

relativity of position—by which space is distinguished from all other known

manifolds, except time—leads logically to the necessity of three of the most

distinctive axioms of Geometry, and yet this relativity cannot be called a

deduction from conceptions of magnitude. In analytical Geometry, owing to

the fact that coordinate systems start from points, and hence build up lines

and surfaces, it is easy to suppose that points can be given independently of

lines and of each other, and thus the relativity of position is lost sight of. The

error thus suggested by mathematics was probably reinforced by Herbart's

theory of space, which, by its serial character, as we have seen, appeared to

him  to  facilitate  a  construction  out  of  successive  points,  and  to  which

Riemann  acknowledges  his  indebtedness  both  in  his  Dissertation  and

elsewhere. The same error reappears in Helmholtz, in whom it is probably

due wholly to the methods of analytical Geometry. It is a striking fact that,

throughout the writings of these two men, there is not, so far as I know, one

allusion to the relativity of position, that property of space from which, as our

next chapter will shew, the richest quarry of consequences can be extracted.

This is not a result of any conception of magnitude, but follows from the

nature of our space-intuition; yet no one, surely, could call it empirical, since

it is bound up in the very possibility of locating things there as opposed to

here.

  61. Indeed we can see, from a purely logical consideration of the judgment

of quantity, that Riemann's manner of approaching the problem can never, by

legitimate  methods,  attain  to  a  philosophically  sound  formulation  of  the

axioms. For quantity is a result of comparison of two qualitatively similarobjects,  and  the  judgment  of  quantity  neglects  altogether  the  qualitative

aspect of the objects compared. Hence a knowledge of the essential properties

of space can never be obtained from judgments of quantity, which neglect

these properties, while they yet presuppose them. As well might one hope to

learn the nature of man from a census. Moreover, the judgment of quantity is

the  result  of  comparison,  and  therefore  presupposes  the  possibility  of

comparison. To know whether, or by what means, comparison is possible, we

must know the qualities of the things compared and of the medium in which

comparison  is  effected;  while  to  know  that quantitative  comparison  is

possible, we must know that there is a qualitative identity between the things

compared,  which  again  involves  a  previous  qualitative  knowledge.  When

spatial figures have once been reduced to quantity, their quality has already

been neglected, as known and similar to the quality of other figures. To hope,

therefore, for the qualities of space, from a comparison of its expression as

pure quantity with other pure quantities, is an error natural to an analytical

geometer, but an error, none the less, from which there is no return to the

qualitative basis of spatial quantity.

  62.  We  must  entirely  dissent,  therefore,  from  the  disjunction  which

underlies  Riemann's  philosophy  of  space.  Either  the  axioms  must  be

consequences of general conceptions of magnitude, he thinks, or else they

can only be proved by experience (p. 255). Whatever can be derived from

general  conceptions  of  magnitude,  we  may  retort,  cannot  be  an à  priori

adjective of space: for all the necessary adjectives of space are presupposed

in any judgment of spatial quantity, and cannot, therefore, be consequences

of  such  a  judgment.  Riemann's  disjunction,  accordingly,  since  one  of  its

alternatives is obviously impossible, really begs the question. In formulating

the axioms of metrical Geometry, our question should be: What axioms, i.e.

what  adjectives  of  space,  must  be  presupposed,  in  order  that  quantitative

comparison of the parts of space may be possible at all? And only when we

have  determined  these  conditions,  which  are à  priori  necessary  to  any

quantitative science of space, does the second question arise: what inferences

can  we  draw,  as  to  space,  from  the  observed  results  of  this  quantitative

science, i.e.  of  this  measurement  of  spatial  figures?  The  conditions  of

measurement themselves, though not results of any conception of magnitude,

will  be à  priori,  if  it  can  be  shown  that,  without  them,  experience  of

externality would be impossible.  After this initial protest against Riemann's general philosophical position,

let us proceed to examine, in detail, his use of the notion of a manifold.

 

  63. In the first place there is, if I am not mistaken, considerable obscurity

in the definition of a manifold, of which an almost verbal rendering was

given in Chapter I. What is meant, to begin with, by a general conception

capable  of  various  determinations?  Does  not  this  property  belong  to  all

conceptions?  It  affords,  certainly,  a  basis  for  counting,  but  if  continuous

quantity is to arise, we must, surely, have some less discrete formulation. It

might afford a basis, for example, for the distinction of points in projective

Geometry,  but  projective  Geometry  has  nothing  to  do  with  quantity.

Something more fluid and flexible than a conception, one would think, is

necessary as the basis of continua. Then, again, what is meant by a quantum

of a manifold? In space, the answer is obvious: what is meant is a piece of

volume. But how about Riemann's other continuous manifold, colour? Does a

quantum of colour mean a single line in the spectrum, or a band of finite

thickness? In either case, what are the magnitudes to be compared? And how

is superposition necessary, or even possible? A colour is fixed by its position

in the spectrum: two lines in the same spectrum cannot be superposed, and

two lines in different spectra need not be—their positions in their respective

spectra suffice, or even, roughly, their immediate sense-quality. The fact is,

Riemann had space in his mind from the start, and many of the properties,

which he enunciates as belonging to all manifolds, belong, as a matter of fact,

only to space. It is far from clear what the magnitudes are which the various

determinations make possible. Do these magnitudes measure the elements of

the  manifold,  or  the  relations  between  elements?  This  is  surely  a  very

fundamental point, but it is one which Riemann never touches on. In the

former  case,  the  superposition  which  he  speaks  of  becomes  unnecessary,

since the magnitude is inherent in the element considered. We do not require

superposition  to  measure  quantities  corresponding  to  different  tones  or

colours; these can be discovered by analysis of single tones or colours. With

space, on the other hand, if we seek for elements, we can find none except

points, and no analysis of a point will find magnitudes inherent in it—such

magnitudes  are  a  fiction  of  coordinate  Geometry.  The  magnitudes  which

space deals with, as we shall see in Chapter III., are relations between points,

and it is for this reason that superposition is essential to space-measurement.There is no inherent quality in a single point, as there is in a single colour, by

which  it  can  be  quantitatively  distinguished  from  another.  Thus  the

conception of a manifold, as defined by Riemann, either does not include

colours, or does not involve superposition as the only means of measurement.

From this dilemma there is no escape.

  64. But if "measurement consists in a superposition of the magnitudes

compared"  (p.  256),  does  it  not  follow  immediately  that  measurement  is

logically  possible only  where  such  superposition  leaves  the  magnitudes

unchanged? And therefore that measurement, as above defined, involves, as

an à  priori  condition,  that  magnitudes  are  unchanged  by  motion?  This

consequence is not drawn by Riemann; indeed he proceeds immediately (pp.

256–7)  to  consider  what  he  calls  a  general  portion  of  the  doctrine  of

magnitude  (Grössenlehre),  independent  of  measurement.  But  how  is  any

doctrine  of  magnitude  possible,  in  which  the  magnitudes  cannot  be

measured?  The  reason  of  the  confusion  is,  that  Riemann's  definition  of

measurement  is  applicable  to  no  single  manifold  except  space,  since  it

depends on the noteworthy property that what we measure in Geometry is not

points, but relations between points, and the latter, though not the former,

may of course be unaltered by motion. Let us try, in illustration, to apply

Riemann's  definition  of  measurement  to  colours.  We  must  remember  that

motion, in dealing with the colour manifold, means—not motion in space but

—motion in the colour manifold itself. Now since every point of the colour

manifold is completely determined by three magnitudes, which are given in

fact,  and  cannot  be  arbitrarily  chosen,  it  is  plain  that  measurement  by

superposition—involving, as it does, motion, and therefore change in these

determining magnitudes—is totally out of the question. The superposition of

one colour on another, as a means of measurement, is sheer nonsense. And

yet measurement is possible in the colour-manifold, by means of Helmholtz's

law of mixture (Mischungsgesetz); but the measurement is of every separate

element, not of the relations between elements, and is thus radically different
                            [81]
from  space-measurement.  The  elements  are  not,  like  points  in  space,

qualitatively  alike,  and  distinguished  by  the  mere  fact  of  their  mutual

externality.  What  we  have,  in  colours,  is  three  fundamental  qualitatively

distinct elements, out of certain proportions of which we can build up all the

other elements of the manifold—each of the resulting elements having thesame combination of qualitative diversity and similarity as the three original

elements. But in space, what could we make of such a procedure? Given

three points, how are we to combine them in certain proportions? The phrase

is  meaningless.  If  some  one  makes  the  obvious  retort,  that  we  have  to

combine lines, not points, my rejoinder is equally obvious. To begin with,

lines are not elements. Metaphysically, space has no elements, being, as the

sequel  will  show,  mere  relations  between  non-spatial  elements.

Mathematically, this fact exhibits itself in the self-contradictory notion of the

point, or zero magnitude in space, as the limit in our vain search for spatial

elements. But even if we allow the line to pass as the spatial element, what

does the combination of three lines in definite proportions give us? It gives

us, simply, the coordinates of a point. Here again we see a great difference

between  the  colour  and  space-manifolds.  In  colours,  the  combination  of

magnitudes gives a new magnitude of the same kind; in space, it defines, not

a  magnitude  at  all,  but  a  would-be  element  of  a  different  kind  from  the

defining  magnitudes.  In  the  tone-manifold,  we  should  find  still  different

conditions. Here, no one of the measuring magnitudes can vanish without the

tone  vanishing  too,  and  all  three  are  so  bound  up  together,  in  the  single

resulting sensation, that none can exist without a finite quantity of the others.

They  are  all  qualitatively  different,  both  from  each  other,  and  from  any

possible tone, being constituents of it, as mass and velocity are constituents

of momentum. All these different conditions require to be examined, before a

manifold can be completely defined; and until we have conducted such an

examination in detail, we cannot pronounce as to the à priori or empirical

nature of the laws of the manifold. As regards space, I have attempted such

an examination in the third and fourth chapters of this Essay.

 

  65. I do not wish to deny, however, the great value of the conception of

space as a manifold. On the contrary, this conception seems to have become

essential to any treatment of the question. I only wish to urge that the purely

algebraical treatment of any manifold, important as it may be in deducing

fresh consequences from known premisses, tends rather to conceal than to

make clear the basis of the premisses themselves, and is therefore misleading

in  a  philosophical  investigation.  For  mathematics,  where  quantity  reigns

supreme,  Riemann's  conception  has  proved  itself  abundantly  fruitful;  for

philosophy,  on  the  contrary,  where  quantity  appears  rather  as  a  cloak  toconceal  the  qualities  it  abstracts  from,  the  conception  seems  to  me  more

productive of error and confusion than of sound doctrine.

  We are thus brought back to the point from which we started, namely, the

falsity  of  Riemann's  initial  disjunction,  and  the  consequent  fallacy  in  his

proof  of  the  empirical  nature  of  the  axioms.  His  philosophy  is  chiefly

vitiated, to my mind, by this fallacy, and by the uncritical assumption that a

metrical coordinate system can be set up independently of any axioms as to
                      [82]
space-measurement.  Riemann  has  failed  to  observe,  what  I  have

endeavoured to prove in the next chapter, that, unless space had a strictly

constant measure of curvature, Geometry would become impossible; also that

the  absence  of  constant  measure  of  curvature  involves  absolute  position,

which is an absurdity. Hence he is led to the conclusion that all geometrical

axioms  are  empirical,  and  may  not  hold  in  the  infinitesimal,  where

observation  is  impossible.  Thus  he  says  (p.  267):  "Now  the  empirical

conceptions, on which spatial measurements are based, the conceptions of the

rigid body and the light-ray, appear to lose their validity in the infinitesimal:

it is therefore quite conceivable that the relations of spatial magnitudes in the

infinitesimal do not correspond to the presuppositions of Geometry, and this

would, in fact, have to be assumed, as soon as it would enable us to explain

the phenomena more simply." From this conclusion I must entirely dissent. In

very large spaces, there might be a departure from Euclid; for they depend

upon the axiom of parallels, which is not contained in the axiom of Free

Mobility; but in the infinitesimal, departures from Euclid could only be due

to the absence of Free Mobility, which, as I hope my third chapter will show,

is once for all impossible.

 

  Helmholtz.

  66. Helmholtz, like Riemann, was important both in the mathematics and

in the philosophy of Geometry. From the mathematical point of view, his

work  has  been  already  considered  in  Chapter  I.;  the  consideration  of  his

philosophy, which must occupy us here, will be a more serious task. Like

Riemann, he endeavoured to prove that all the axioms are empirical, and like

Riemann, he based his proof chiefly on Metageometry. He had an additional

resource, however, in the physiology of the senses, which first led him to

reject the Transcendental Aesthetic, and enabled him to attack Kant from the
                                                      [83]
psychological as well as the mathematical side.  The  principal  topics,  for  a  criticism  of  Helmholtz,  are  three:  First,  his

criterion  of  the à  priori;  second,  his  discussion  with  Land  as  to  the

"imaginability" of non-Euclidean spaces; third—and this is by far the most

important  of  the  three—his  theory  of  the  dependence  of  Geometry  on

Mechanics. Let us discuss these three points successively.

  67. Helmholtz's criterion of apriority is difficult to discover, as he never,

to my knowledge, gives a precise statement of it. From his discussion of
                                            [84]
physical and transcendental Geometry, however, it would appear that he

regards  as  empirical  whatever  applies  to  empirical  matter.  For  he  there

maintains, that even if space were an à priori form, yet any Geometry, which

aimed at an application to Physics, would, since the actual places of bodies
                                                              [85]
are  not  known à  priori,  be  necessarily  empirical.  It  seems  the  more

probable that he regards this as a possible criterion, as it is adopted, in several
                                        [86]
passages, by his disciple Erdmann, and so strange a test could hardly be

accepted by a philosopher, unless he had found it in his master. I have called

this a strange test, because it seems to me completely to ignore the work of

the  Critical  Philosophy.  For  if  there  is  one  thing  which,  one  might  have

hoped, had been made sufficiently clear by Kant's Critique, it is this, that

knowledge  which  is à  priori,  being  itself  the  condition  of  possible

experience, applies—and in Kant's view, applies only—to empirical matter.

Helmholtz and Erdmann, therefore, in setting up this test without discussion,

simply ignore the existence of Kant and the possibility of a transcendental

argument.  Helmholtz  assumes  always  that  empirical  knowledge  must  be

wholly empirical, that there can be no à priori conditions of the experience in

question, that experience will always be possible, and may give any kind of

result.  Thus  in  discussing  "physical"  Geometry,  he  assumes  that  the

possibility of empirical measurement involves no à priori axioms, and that no

à priori element can be contained in the process. This assumption, as we shall

see in Chapter III., is quite unwarrantable: certain properties of space, in fact,

are  involved  in  the  possibility  of  measuring matter.  In  spite  of  the  fact,

therefore, that we apply measurement to empirical matter, and that our results

are  therefore  empirical,  there may  well  be  an à  priori  element  in

measurement,  which  is  presupposed  in  its  possibility.  Such  a  criterion,

therefore,  must  pronounce  everything  empirical,  but  must  itself  be

pronounced worthless.  Another and a better criterion, it is true, is also to be found in Helmholtz,

and  has  also  been  adopted  by  Erdmann.  Whatever  might,  by  a  different

experience, have been rendered different—so this criterion contends—must

itself  be  dependent  on  experience,  and  so  empirical.  This  criterion  seems

perfectly sound, but Helmholtz's use of it is usually vitiated by his neglecting

to prove the possibility of the different experience in question. He says, for

example, that if our experience showed us only bodies which changed their

shapes in motion, we should not arrive at the axiom of Congruence, which he

pronounces accordingly to be empirical. But I shall endeavour to prove, in

Chapter  III.,  that  without  the  axiom  of  Congruence,  experience  of  spatial

magnitude would be impossible. If my proof be correct, it follows that no

experience can ever reveal spatial magnitudes which contradict this axiom—a

possibility which Helmholtz nowhere discusses, in setting up his hypothetical

experience.  Thus  this  second  criterion,  though  perfectly  sound,  requires

always an accompanying transcendental argument, as to the conditions of

possible  experience.  But  this  accompaniment  is  seldom  to  be  found  in

Helmholtz.

  68.  One  of  the  few  cases,  in  which  Helmholtz  has  attempted  such  an

accompaniment,  occurs  in  connection  with  our  second  point,  the

imaginability  of  non-Euclidean  spaces.  The  argument  on  this  point  was

elicited by Helmholtz's Kantian opponents, who maintained that the merely

logical possibility of these spaces was irrelevant, since the basis of Geometry

was not logic, but intuition. The axioms, they said, are synthetic propositions,

and  their  contraries  are,  therefore,  not  self-contradictory;  they  are

nevertheless  apodeictic  propositions,  since  no  other intuition  than  the
                              [87]
Euclidean is possible to us. I have already criticized this line of argument

in the beginning of the present chapter. Helmholtz's criticism, however, was

different: admitting the internal consistency of the argument, he denied one of

its premisses. We can imagine non-Euclidean spaces, he said, though their

unfamiliarity makes this difficult. From this view it followed, of course, that

Kant's argument, even if it were formally valid, could not prove the apriority

of  Euclidean  space  in  particular,  but  only  of  that  general  space  which
                                          [88]
included Euclid and non-Euclid alike.

  Although  I  agree  with  Helmholtz  in  thinking  the  distinction  between

Euclidean and non-Euclidean spaces empirical, I cannot think his argumenton the "imaginability" of the latter a very happy one. The validity of any

proof must turn, obviously, on the definition of imaginability. The definition

which Helmholtz gives in his answer to Land is as follows: Imaginability

requires "die vollständige Vorstellbarkeit derjenigen Sinneseindrücke, welche

das  betreffende  Object  in  uns  nach  den  bekannten  Gesetzen  unserer

Sinnesorgane unter allen denkbaren Bedingungen der Beobachtung erregen,

und wodurch es sich von anderen ähnlichen Objecten unterscheiden würde"

(Wiss.  Abh.  II.  p.  644).  This  definition  is  not  very  clear,  owing  to  the

ambiguity of the word "Vorstellbarkeit." The following definition seems less

ambiguous: "Wenn die Reihe der Sinneseindrücke vollständig und eindeutig

angegeben  werden  kann,  muss  man  m.  E.  die  Sache  für anschaulich

vorstellbar  erklären"  (Vorträge  und  Reden,  II.  p.  234).  This  makes  clear,

what  also  appears  from  his  manner  of  proof,  that  he  regards  things  as

imaginable  which  can  be described  in  conceptual  terms.  Such,  as  Land

remarks (Mind, Vol. II. p. 45), "is not the sense required for argumentation in

this case." That Land's criticism is just, is shown by Helmholtz's proof for

non-Euclidean spaces, for it consists only in an analogy to the volume inside

a  sphere,  which  is  mathematically  obtained  thus:  We  take  the  symbols

representing magnitudes in "pseudo-spherical" (hyperbolic) space, and give

them a new Euclidean meaning; thus all our symbolic propositions become

capable of two interpretations, one for pseudo-spherical space, and one for

the  volume  inside  a  sphere.  It  is,  however,  sufficiently  obvious  that  this

procedure, though it enables us to describe our new space, does not enable us

to imagine it, in the sense of calling up images of the way things would look

in it. We really derive, from this analogy, no more knowledge than a man

born blind may derive, as to light, from an analogy with heat. The dictum

"Nihil est in intellectu quod non fuerit ante in sensu," would unquestionably

be true, if for intellect we were to substitute imagination; it is vain, therefore,

if our actual space be Euclidean, to hope for a power of imagining a non-

Euclidean space. What Helmholtz might, I believe with perfect truth, have

urged  against  Land,  is  that  the  image  we  actually  have  of  space  is  not

sufficiently accurate to exclude, in the actual space we know, all possibility

of a slight departure from the Euclidean type. But in maintaining that we

cannot imagine, though we can conceive and describe, a space different from

that we actually have, Land is, in my opinion, unquestionably in the right. For

a pure Kantian, who maintains, with Land, that none of the axioms can beproved, this question is of great importance. But if, as I have maintained,

some of the axioms are susceptible of a transcendental proof, while the others

can  be  verified  empirically,  the  question  is  freed  from  psychological

implications, and the imaginability or non-imaginability of metageometrical

spaces becomes unimportant.

  69. We come now to the third and most important question, the relation of

Geometry to Mechanics. There are three senses in which Helmholtz's appeal

to  rigid  bodies  may  be  taken:  the  first,  I  think,  is  the  sense  in  which  he

originally intended it; the second seems to be the sense which he adopted in

his defence against Land; while the third is admitted by Land, and will be

admitted in the following argument. These three senses are as follows:

  (1)  It  may  be  asserted  that  the  actual  meaning  of  the  axiom  of  Free

Mobility  lies  in  the  assertion  of  empirical  rigid  bodies,  and  that  the  two

propositions are equivalent to one another. This is certainly false.

  (2) The axiom of Free Mobility, it may be said, is logically distinguishable

from the assertion of rigid bodies, and may even be not empirical; but it is

barren, even for pure Geometry, without the aid of measures, which must

themselves be empirical rigid bodies. This sense is more plausible than the

first, but I believe we can show that, in this sense also, the proposition is

false.

  (3) For pure Geometry and the abstract study of space, it may be said, Free

Mobility,  as  applied  to  an  abstract  geometrical  matter,  gives  a  sufficient

possibility of quantitative comparison; but the moment we extend our results

to  mixed  mathematics,  and  apply  them  to  empirically  given  matter,  we

require also, as measures, empirically given rigid bodies, or bodies, at least,

whose departures from rigidity are empirically known. In this sense, I admit,
                            [89]
the proposition is correct.

  In discussing these three meanings, I shall not confine myself strictly to

the text of Helmholtz or Land: if I endeavoured to do so, I should be met by

the difficulty that neither of them defines the à priori, and that each is too

much inclined, in my opinion, to test it by psychological criteria. I shall,

therefore,  take  the  three  meanings  in  turn,  without  laying  stress  on  their

historical adequacy to the views of Land or Helmholtz.

  70. (1) Congruence may be taken to mean—as Helmholtz would certainly

seem to desire—that we find actual bodies, in our mechanical experience, topreserve their shapes with approximate constancy, and that we infer, from

this  experience,  the  homogeneity  of  space.  This  view,  in  my  opinion,

radically  misconceives  the  nature  of  measurement,  and  of  the  axioms

involved in it. For what is meant by the non-rigidity of a body? We mean,

simply,  that  it  has  changed  its  shape.  But  this  involves  the  possibility  of

comparison with its former shape, in other words, of measurement. In order,

therefore,  that  there  may  be  any  question  of  rigidity  or  non-rigidity,  the

measurement of spatial magnitudes must be already possible. It follows that

measurement  cannot,  without  a  vicious  circle,  be  itself  derived  from

experience  of  rigid  bodies.  Geometrical  measurement,  in  fact,  is  the

comparison of spatial magnitudes, and such comparison involves, as will be

proved at length in Chapter III., the homogeneity of space. This is, therefore,

the logical prerequisite of all experience of rigid bodies, and cannot be the

result of such experience. Without the homogeneity of space, the very notion

of rigidity or non-rigidity could not exist, since these mean, respectively, the

constancy or inconstancy of spatial magnitude in pieces of matter, and both

alike, therefore, presuppose the possibility of spatial measurement. From the

homogeneity of space, we learn that a body, when it moves, will not change

its shape without some physical cause; that it actually does not change its

shape,  is  never  asserted,  and  is  indeed  known  to  be  false.  As  soon  as

measurement is possible, actual changes of shape can be estimated, and their

empirical  causes  can  be  sought.  But  if  space  were  not  homogeneous,

measurement would be impossible, constant shape would be a meaningless

phrase, and rigidity could never be experienced. Congruence asserts, in short,

that a body can, so far as mere space is concerned, move without change of

shape;  rigidity  asserts  that  it  actually  does  so  move—a  very  different

proposition, involving obviously, as its logical prius, the former geometrical

proposition.

  This argument may be summed up by the following disjunction: If bodies

change  their  shapes  in  motion—and  to  some  extent,  since  no  body  is

perfectly rigid, they must all do so—then one of two cases must occur. Either

the  changes  of  shape,  as  bodies  move  from  place  to  place,  follow  no

geometrical law, are not, for instance, functions of the amount or direction of

motion; in which case the law of causation requires that they should not be

effects of the change of place, but of some simultaneous non-geometrical

change, such as temperature. Or the changes are regular, and the shape Sbecomes, in a new position p, Sf(p). In this case, the law of concomitant

variations leads us to attribute the change of shape to the mere motion, and

shape thus becomes a function of absolute position. But this is absurd, for

position means  merely  a  relation  or  set  of  relations;  it  is  impossible,

therefore,  that  mere  position  should  be  able  to  effect  changes  in  a  body.

Position is one term in a relation, not a thing per se; it cannot, therefore, act

on a thing, nor exist by itself, apart from the other terms of the relation. Thus

Helmholtz's view, that Congruence depends on the existence of rigid bodies,

must, since it involves absolute position, be condemned as a logical fallacy.

Congruence, in fact, as I shall prove more fully in Chapter III., is an à priori

deduction from the relativity of position.

  71.  (2)  The  above  argument  seems  to  me  to  answer  satisfactorily

Helmholtz's contention in the precise form which he first gave it. The axiom

of Congruence, we must agree, is logically distinguishable from the existence

of rigid bodies. Nevertheless some reference to matter is logically involved in
          [90]
Geometry, but whether this reference makes Geometry empirical, or does

not, rather, show an à priori element in dynamics, is a further question.

  The  reference  to  matter  is  necessitated  by  the  homogeneity  of  empty

space. For so long as we leave matter out of account, one position is perfectly

indistinguishable from another, and a science of the relations of positions is

impossible. Indeed, before spatial relations can arise at all, the homogeneity

of empty space must be destroyed, and this destruction must be effected by

matter.  The  blank  page  is  useless  to  the  geometer  until  he  defaces  its

homogeneity  by  lines  in  ink  or  pencil.  No  spatial  figures,  in  short,  are

conceivable,  without  a  reference  to  a  not  purely  spatial  matter.  Again,  if

Congruence  is  ever  to  be  used,  there  must  be  motion:  but  a  purely

geometrical point, being defined solely by its spatial attributes, cannot be

supposed to move without a contradiction in terms. What moves, therefore,

must be matter. Hence, in order that motion may afford a test of equality, we

must  have  some matter  which  is  known  to  be  unaffected  throughout  the

motion, that is, we must have some rigid bodies. And the difficulty is, that

these bodies must not only undergo no change due solely to the nature of

space, but must, further, be unchanged by their changing relation to other

bodies.  And  here  we  have  a  requisite  which  can  no  longer  be  fulfilled à

priori: which, indeed, we know to be, in strictness, untrue. For the forcesacting  on  a  body  depend  upon  its  spatial  relations  to  other  bodies,  and

changing  forces  are  liable  to  produce  changing  configuration.  Hence,  it

would seem, actual measurement must be purely empirical, and must depend

on the degree of rigidity to be obtained, during the process of measurement,

in the bodies with which we are conversant.

  This  conclusion,  I  believe,  is  valid  of  all  actual  measurement.  But  the

possibility of such empirical and approximate rigidity, I must insist, depends

on the à priori law that mere motion, apart from the action of other matter,

cannot effect a change of shape. For without this law, the effect of other

matter would not be discoverable; the laws of motion would be absurd, and

Physics would be impossible. Consider the second law, for example: How

could we measure the change of motion, if motion itself produced a change in

our measures? Or consider the law of gravitation: How could we establish the

inverse square, unless we were able, independently of Dynamics, to measure

distances?  The  whole  science  of  Dynamics,  in  short,  is  fundamentally

dependent on Geometry, and but for the independent possibility of measuring

spatial magnitudes, none of the magnitudes of Dynamics could be measured.

Time,  force,  and  mass  are  alike  measured  by  spatial  correlates:  these

correlates are given, for time, by the first law, for force and mass, by the

second  and  third.  It  is  true,  then,  that  an  empirical  element  appears

unavoidably  in  all  actual  measurement,  inasmuch  as  we  can  only  know

empirically that a given piece of matter preserves its shape throughout the

necessary change of dynamical relations to other matter involved in motion;

but  it  is  further  true  that,  for  Geometry—which  regards  matter  simply  as

supplying  the  necessary  breach  in  the  homogeneity  of  space,  and  the

necessary term for spatial relations, not as the bearer of forces which change

the configuration of other material systems—for Geometry, which deals with

this abstract and merely kinematical matter, rigidity is à priori, in so far as

the  only  changes  with  which  it  is  cognizant—changes  of  mere  position,

namely—are incapable of affecting the shapes of the imaginary and abstract

bodies with which it deals. To use a scholastic distinction, we may say that

matter is the causa essendi of space, but Geometry is the causa cognoscendi

of Physics. Without a Geometry independent of Physics, Physics itself, which

necessarily assumes the results of Geometry, could never arise; but when

Geometry  is  used  in  Physics,  it  loses  some  of  its à priori  certainty,  and

acquires  the  empirical  and  approximate  character  which  belongs  to  allaccounts of actual phenomena.

  72.  (3)  This  argument  leads  us  to  Land's  distinction  of  physical  and

geometrical  rigidity.  The  distinction  may  be  expressed—and  I  think  it  is

better  expressed—by  distinguishing  between  the  conceptions  of  matter

proper  to  Dynamics  and  to  Geometry  respectively.  In  Dynamics,  we  are

concerned with matter as subject to and as causing motion, as affected by and

as exerting force. We are therefore concerned with the changes of spatial

configuration  to  which  material  systems  are  liable:  the  description  and

explanation of these changes is the proper subject-matter of all Dynamics.

But in order that such a science may exist, it is obviously necessary that

spatial configuration should be already measurable. If this were not the case,

motion,  acceleration  and  force  would  remain  perfectly  indeterminate.

Geometry, therefore, must already exist before Dynamics becomes possible:

to make Geometry dependent for its possibility on the laws of motion or any

of their consequences, is a gross ὕστερον πρότερον. Nevertheless, as we have

seen,  some  sort  of  matter  is  essential  to  Geometry.  But  this  geometrical

matter is a more abstract and wholly different matter from that of Dynamics.

In order to study space by itself, we reduce the properties of matter to a bare

minimum:  we  avoid  entirely  the  category  of  causation,  so  essential  to
                                                                                  [91]
Dynamics, and retain nothing, in our matter, but its spatial adjectives. The

kind of rigidity affirmed of this abstract matter—a kind which suffices for the

theory of our science, though not for its application to the objects of daily life

—is purely geometrical, and asserts no more than this: That since our matter

is devoid, ex hypothesi, of causal properties, there remains nothing, in mere

empty  space,  which  is  capable  of  changing  the  configuration  of  any

geometrical  system.  A  change  of  absolute  position,  it  asserts,  is  nothing;

therefore the only real change involved in motion is a change of relation to

other  matter;  but  such  other  matter,  for  the  purposes  of  our  science,  is

regarded as destitute of causal powers; hence no change can occur, in the

configuration of our system, by the mere effect of motion through empty

space. The necessity of such a principle may be shown by a simple reductio

ad absurdum, as follows. A motion of translation of the universe as a whole,

with constant direction and velocity, is dynamically negligeable; indeed it is,

philosophically, no motion at all, for it involves no change in the condition or

mutual relations of the things in the universe. But if our geometrical rigiditywere denied, the change in the parameter of space might cause all bodies to

change their shapes owing to the mere change of absolute position, which is

obviously absurd.

  To  make  quite  plain  the  function  of  rigid  bodies  in  Geometry,  let  us

suppose a liquid geometer in a liquid world. We cannot suppose the liquid

perfectly homogeneous and undifferentiated, in the first place because such a

liquid  would  be  indistinguishable  from  empty  space,  in  the  second  place

because our geometer's body—unless he be a disembodied spirit—will itself

constitute a differentiation for him. We may therefore assume

  "dim beams,

  Which amid the streams

  Weave a network of coloured light,"

  and we may suppose this network to form the occasion for our geometer's

reflections. Then he will be able to imagine a network in which the lines are

straight, or circular, or parabolic, or any other shape, and he will be able to

infer that such a network, if it can be woven in one part of the fluid, can be

woven in another. This will form sufficient basis for his deductions. The

superposition he is concerned with—since not actual equality, but only the

formal conditions of equality, are the subject-matter of Geometry—is purely

ideal,  and  is  unaffected  by  the  impossibility  of  congealing  any  actual

network. But in order to apply his Geometry to the exigencies of life, he

would need some standard of comparison between actual networks, and here,

it is true, he would need either a rigid body, or a knowledge of the conditions

under  which  similar  networks  arose.  Moreover  these  conditions,  being

necessarily  empirical,  could  hardly  be  known  apart  from  previous

measurement. Hence for applied, though not for pure Geometry, one rigid

body at least seems essential.

  73.  The  utility,  for  Dynamics,  of  our  abstract  geometrical  matter,  is

sufficiently evident. For having, by its means, a power of determining the

configurations of material systems in whatever part of space, and knowing

that changes of configuration are not due to mere change of place, we are

able  to  attribute  these  changes  to  the  action  of  other  matter,  and  thus  to

establish the notion of force, which would be impossible if change of shape

might be due to empty space.

 

  Thus, to conclude: Geometry requires, if it is to be practically possible,some  body  or  bodies  which  are  either  rigid  (in  the  dynamical  sense),  or

known to undergo some definite changes of shape according to some definite

law. (These changes, we may suppose, are known by the laws of Physics,

which have been experimentally established, and which throughout assume

the truth of Geometry.) One or more such bodies are necessary to applied

Geometry—but  only  in  the  sense  in  which  rulers  and  compasses  are

necessary.  They  are  necessary  as,  in  making  the  Ordnance  Survey,  an

elaborate apparatus was necessary for measuring the base line on Salisbury

Plain.  But  for  the theory  of  Geometry,  geometrical  rigidity  suffices,  and

geometrical rigidity means only that a shape, which is possible in one part of

space, is possible in any other. The empirical element in practice, arising

from the purely empirical nature of physical rigidity, is comparable to the

empirical inaccuracies arising from the failure to find straight lines or circles

in the world—which no one but Mill has regarded as rendering Geometry

itself empirical or inaccurate. But to make Geometry await the perfection of

Physics, is to make Physics, which depends throughout on Geometry, forever

impossible. As well might we leave the formation of numbers until we had

counted the houses in Piccadilly.

 

  Erdmann.

  74. In connection with Riemann and Helmholtz, it is natural to consider
                                                        [92]
Erdmann's philosophical work on their theories. This is certainly the most

important book on the subject which has appeared from the philosophical

side, and in spite of the fact that, like the whole theory of Riemann and

Helmholtz, it is inapplicable to projective Geometry, it still deserves a very

full discussion.

  Erdmann  agrees  throughout  with  the  conclusions  of  Riemann  and

Helmholtz, except on a few points of minor importance; and his views, as this

agreement would lead one to expect, are ultra-empirical. Indeed his logic

seems—though  I  say  this  with  hesitation—to  be  incompatible  with  any

system but that of Mill: there is apparently no distinction, to him, between the

general and the universal, and consequently no concept not embodied in a

series of instances. Such a theory of logic, to my mind, vitiates most of his
                                                [93]
work, as it vitiated Riemann's philosophy. This general criticism will find

abundant illustration in the course of our account of Erdmann's views.

  75. After a general introduction, and a short history of the development ofMetageometry, Erdmann proceeds, in his second chapter, to discuss what are

the  axioms  of  Euclidean  Geometry.  The  arithmetical  axioms,  as  they  are

called, he leaves aside, as applying to magnitude in general; what we want

here, he says, is a definition of space, for which the geometrical axioms are

alone  relevant.  But  a  definition  of  space,  he  says—following  Riemann—

demands a genus of which space shall be a species, and this, since our space

is psychologically unique, can only be furnished by analytical mathematics

(p. 36). Now the space-forms dealt with by Geometry are magnitudes, and

conceptions of magnitude are everywhere applied in Geometry. But before

Riemann,  only  particular  determinations  of  space  could  be  exhibited  as

magnitudes, and thus the desired definition was impossible to obtain. Now,

however, we can subsume space as a whole under a general conception of

magnitude,  and  thus  obtain,  besides  the  space-intuition  and  the  space-

conception, a third form, namely, the conception of space as a magnitude

(Grössenbegriff vom Raum, pp. 38–39). The definition of this will give us the

complete, but not redundant, system of axioms, which could not be obtained

by transforming the general intuition of space into the space-conception, for

want of a plurality of instances (p. 40).

  76. Before considering the subsequent method of definition, let us reflect

on the theories involved in the above account of the conception of space as a

magnitude. In the first place, it is assumed that conceptions cannot be formed

unless we have a series of separate objects from which to abstract a common

property—in other words, that the universal is always the general. In the

second place, it is assumed that all definition is classification under a genus.

In  the  third  place,  the  conception  of  magnitude,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  is

fundamentally misunderstood when it is supposed applicable to space as a

whole. But in the fourth place, even if such a conception existed, it could give

none of the essential properties of space. Let us consider these four points

successively.

  77. As regards the first point, it is to be observed that people certainly had

some conception of space before Riemann invented the notion of a manifold,

and  that  this  conception  was  certainly  something  other  than  the  common

qualities  of  all  the  points,  lines  or  figures  in  space.  In  the  second  place,

Erdmann's view would make it impossible to conceive God, unless one were

a polytheist, or the universe—unless, like Leibnitz, one imagined a series of

possible worlds, set over against God, and none of them, therefore, a trueUniverse—or, to take an instance more likely to appeal to an empiricist, the

necessarily unique centre of mass of the material universe. Any universal, in

short, which is a bond or unity between things, and not merely a common

property  among  independent  objects,  becomes  impossible  on  Erdmann's

view. We cannot, therefore, unless we adopt Mill's philosophy intact, regard

the conception of space as demanding a series of instances from which to

abstract. But even if we did so regard it, Riemann's manifolds would leave us

without resources. For Euclidean space still appears as unique, at the end of

his  series  of  determinations.  We  have  instances  of  manifolds,  but  not

instances of Euclidean space. Thus if Erdmann's theory of conceptions were

correct,  he  would  still  be  left  searching  in  vain  for  the  conception  of

Euclidean space.

  78.  The  second  point,  the  view  that  all  definition  is  classification,  is

closely allied to the first, and the two together plunge us into the depths of

scholastic formal logic. The same instances of things which could not, on

Erdmann's view, be conceived, may now be adduced as things which cannot

be defined. Whatever was said above applies here also, and the point need
                                        [94]
not, therefore, be further discussed.

 

  79. As regards the third point, the impossibility of applying conceptions of

magnitude to space as a whole, a longer argument will be necessary, for we

are  concerned,  here,  with  the  whole  question  of  the  logical  nature  of

judgments of magnitude. As we had before too much comparison for our

needs, so we have now too little. I will endeavour to explain this point, which

is  of  great  importance,  and  underlies,  I  think,  most  of  the  philosophical

fallacies of Riemann's school.

  A judgment of magnitude is always a judgment of comparison, and what

is  more,  the  comparison  is  never  concerned  with  quality,  but  only  with

quantity. Quality, in the judgment of magnitude, is supposed identical, in the

object whose magnitude is stated, and in the unit with which it is compared.

But quality, except in pure number, and in pure quantity as dealt with by the

Calculus,  is  always  present,  and  is  partly  absorbed  into  quantity,  partly

untouched by the judgment of magnitude. As Bosanquet says (Logic, Vol. I.

p.  124);  "Quantitative  comparison  is  not prima  facie  coordinate  with

qualitative,  but  rather  stands  in  its  place  as  the effect  of  comparison  on

quality,  which  so  far  as  comparable becomes  quantity,  and  so  far  asincomparable furnishes the distinction of parts essential to the quantitative

whole"  (italics  in  the  original).  Thus,  if  we  are  to  regard  space  as  a

magnitude, we must be able to adduce all those series of instances of which

Erdmann speaks, and which, for the conception of space, seemed irrelevant.

But  it  remains  to  be  proved  that  the  comparison,  which  we can institute

between  various  spaces,  is  capable  of  expression  in  a  quantitative  form.

Rather it would seem that the difference of quality is such as to preclude

quantitative  comparison  between  different  spaces,  and  therefore  also  to

preclude  all  judgments  of  magnitude  about  space  as  a  whole.  Here  an

exception  might  seem  to  be  demanded  by  non-Euclidean  spaces,  whose

space-constants give a definite magnitude, inherent in space as a whole, and

therefore, one might think, characterizing space as a magnitude. But this is a

mistake. For the space-constant, in such spaces, is the ultimate unit, the fixed

term in all quantitative comparison; it is itself, therefore, destitute of quantity,

since there is no independently given magnitude with which to compare it. A

non-Euclidean world, in which the space-constant and all lines and figures

were suddenly multiplied in a constant ratio, would be wholly unchanged; the

lines,  as  measured  against  the  space-constant,  would  have  the  same

magnitude as before, and the space-constant itself, having no outside standard

of comparison, would be destitute of quantity, and therefore not subject to

change of quantity. Such an enlargement of a non-Euclidean world, in other

words,  is  unmeaning;  and  this  proves  how  inapplicable  is  the  notion  of

quantity to space as a whole.

  It  might  be  objected  that  this  only  proves  the  absence  of  quantitative

difference between different spaces of positive space-constant, or between

those of negative space-constant: the quantitative difference persists, it might

be said, between those of positive curvature in general and those of negative

curvature in general, or between both together and Euclidean space. This I

entirely deny. There is no qualitatively similar unit, in the three kinds of

space, by which quantitative comparison could be effected. The straight lines

of one space cannot be put into the other: the two straight lines, in one space,

whose  product  is  the  reciprocal  of  the  measure  of  curvature,  have  no

corresponding  curves  in  the  other  space,  and  the  measures  of  curvature

cannot, therefore, be quantitatively compared with each other. That the one

may be regarded as positive, the other negative, I admit, but their values are

indeterminate, and the units in the two cases are qualitatively different. Adebt of £300 may be represented as the asset of -£300, and the height of the

Eiffel  Tower  is  +300  metres;  but  it  does  not  follow  that  the  two  are

quantitatively  comparable.  So  with  space-constants:  the  space-constant  is

itself the unit for magnitudes in its own space, and differs qualitatively from

the space-constant of another kind of space.

  Again, to proceed to a more philosophical argument, two different spaces

cannot co-exist in the same world: we may be unable to decide between the

alternatives  of  the  disjunction,  but  they  remain,  none  the  less,  absolutely

incompatible  alternatives.  Hence  we  cannot  get  that  coexistence  of  two

spaces which is essential to comparison. The fact seems to be that Erdmann,

in  his  admiration  for  Riemann  and  Helmholtz,  has  fallen  in  with  their

mathematical bias, and assumed, as mathematicians naturally tend to assume,

that quantity is everywhere and always applicable and adequate, and can deal

with more than the mere comparison of things whose qualities are already
                  [95]
known as similar.

  80. This suggests the fourth and last of the above points, that the qualities

of space, even if space could be successfully regarded as a magnitude, would

have  to  be  entirely  omitted  in  such  a  manner  of  regarding  it,  and  that,

therefore, none of its important or essential properties would emerge from

such treatment. For to regard space as a magnitude involves, as we saw, a

comparison with something qualitatively similar, and an abstraction from the

similar  qualities.  To  some  extent  and  by  the  help  of  certain  doubtful

arguments, such a comparison is instituted by Riemann and Erdmann; but

when they have instituted it, they forget all about the common qualities on

which  its  possibility  depends.  But  these  are  precisely  the  fundamental

properties of space, and those from which, as I shall endeavour to prove in

Chapter  III.,  the  axioms  common  to  Euclid  and  Metageometry  follow à

priori. Such are the dangers of the quantitative bias.

  81.  After  this  protest  against  the  initial  assumptions  in  Erdmann's

deduction  of  space,  let  us  return  to  consider  the  manner,  in  which  this

deduction is carried out. Here there will be less ground for criticism, as the

deduction, given its presuppositions, is, I think, as good as such a deduction

can be. To define space as a magnitude, he says, let us start with two of its

most  obvious  properties,  continuity  and  the  three  dimensions.  Tones  and

colours afford other instances of a manifold with these two properties, butdiffer  from  space  in  that  their  dimensions  are  not  homogeneous  and

interchangeable. To designate this difference, Erdmann introduces a useful

pair  of  terms:  in  the  general  case,  he  calls  a  manifold n-determined  (n-

bestimmt); in the case where, as in space, the dimensions are homogeneous,

he calls the manifold n-extended (n-ausgedehnt). Manifolds of the latter sort

he  calls  extents  (Ausgedehntheiten). That  the  difference  between  the  two

kinds is one of quality, not of quantity, he seems not to perceive; he also

overlooks the fact that, in the second kind, from its very definition, the axiom

of Congruence must hold, on account of the qualitative similarity of different

parts. In spite of this fact, he defines space as an extent, and then regards

Congruence as empirical, and as possibly false in the infinitesimal. This is the

more strange, as he actually proves (p. 50) that measurement is impossible, in

an extent, unless the parts are independent of their place, and can be carried

about unaltered as measures. In spite of this, he proceeds immediately to

discuss  whether  the  measure  of  curvature  is  constant  or  variable,  without

investigating how, in the latter case, Geometry could exist. We cannot know,

he  says,  from  geometrical  superposition,  that  geometrical  bodies  are

independent of place, for if their dimensions altered in motion according to

any fixed law, two bodies which could be superposed in one place could be

superposed in any other. That such a hypothesis involves absolute position,

and denies the qualitative similarity of the parts of space, which he declares

(p. 171) to be the principle of his theory of Geometry, is nowhere perceived.

But  what  is  more,  his  notion  that  magnitude  is  something  absolute,

independent  of  comparison,  has  prevented  him  from  seeing  that  such  a

hypothesis is unmeaning. He says himself that, even on this hypothesis, a

geometrical  body  can  be  defined  as  one  whose  points  retain  constant

distances  from  each  other,  for,  since  we  have  no  absolute  measure,

measurement could not reveal to us the change of absolute magnitude (p. 60).

But is not this a reductio ad absurdum? For magnitude is nothing apart from

comparison, and the comparison here can only be effected by superposition;

if, then, as on the above hypothesis, superposition always gives the same

result, by whatever motion it is effected, there is no sense in speaking of

magnitudes  as  no  longer  equal  when  separated:  absolute  magnitude  is  an

absurdity, and the magnitude resulting from comparison does not differ from

that  which  would  result  if  the  dimensions  of  bodies  were  unchanged  in

motion.  Therefore,  since  magnitude  is  only  intelligible  as  the  result  ofcomparison,  the  dimensions  of  bodies are  unchanged  in  motion,  and  the

suggested hypothesis is unmeaning. On this subject I shall have more to say
              [96]
in Chapter III.

  82. This hypothesis, however, is not introduced for its own sake, but only

to usher in the Helmholtzian deus ex machina, Mechanics. For Mechanics

proves—so  Erdmann  confidently  continues—that  rigidity  must  hold,  not

merely  as  to  ratios,  in  the  above  restricted  geometrical  sense,  but  as  to

absolute magnitudes (p. 62). Hence we get at last true Congruence, empirical

as Mechanics is empirical, and impossible to prove apart from Mechanics. I

have already criticized Helmholtz's view of the dependence of Geometry on

Mechanics, and need not here speak of it at length. It is a pity that Erdmann

has  in  no  way  specified  the  procedure  by  which  Mechanics  decides  the

geometrical  alternatives—indeed  he  seems  to  rely  on  the ipse  dixit  of

Helmholtz. How, if Geometry would be totally unable to discover a change in

dimensions of the kind suggested, the Laws of Motion, which throughout

depend on Geometry, should be able to discover it if it existed, I am wholly at

a  loss  to  understand.  Uniform  motion  in  a  straight  line,  for  example,

presupposes geometrical measurement; if this measurement is mistaken, what

Mechanics imagines to be uniform motion is not really such, but Mechanics

can never discover the discrepancy. If the Laws of Motion had been regarded

as à priori, Geometry might possibly have been reinforced by them; but so

long as they are empirical, they presuppose geometrical measurement, and

cannot therefore condition or affect it.

  Erdmann's  conclusion,  in  the  second  chapter,  is  that  Congruence  is

probable, but cannot be verified in the infinitesimal; that its truth involves the

actual existence of rigid bodies (though, by the way, we know these to be,

strictly speaking, non-existent), that rigid bodies are freely moveable, and do

not alter their size in rotation (Helmholtz's Monodromy); that the axiom of

three dimensions is certain, since small errors are impossible; and that the

remaining axioms of Euclid—those of the straight line and of parallels—are

approximately, if not accurately, true of our actual space (pp. 78, 83). He

does not discuss how Congruence, on the above view, is compatible with the

atomic theory, or even with the observed deformations of approximately rigid

bodies; nor how, if space, as he assumes, is homogeneous, rigid bodies can

fail to be freely moveable through space. The axioms are all lumped togetheras empirical, and it appears, in the following chapters, that Erdmann regards

their empirical nature as sufficiently proved by their applicability to empirical

material (cf. pp. 159, 165)—a strange criterion, which would prove the same

conclusion, with equal facility, of Arithmetic and of the laws of thought.

  83.  The  third  chapter,  on  the  philosophical  consequences  of

Metageometry, need not be discussed at length, since it deals rather with

space than with Geometry. At the same time, it will be worth while to treat

briefly of Erdmann's criterion of apriority. On this subject it is very difficult

to discover his meaning, since it seems to vary with the topic he is discussing.

Thus  at  one  time  (p.  147)  he  rejects  most  emphatically  the  Kantian
                                                    [97]
connection of the à priori and the subjective, and yet at another time (p.

96) he regards every presentation of external things as partly à priori, partly

empirical,  merely  because  such  a  presentation  is  due  to  an  interaction

between  ourselves  and  things,  and  is  therefore  partly  due  to  subjective

activity, partly due to outside objects. Hence, he says, the distinction is not

between different presentations, but between different aspects of one and the

same presentation. This seems to return wholly to the Kantian psychological

criterion  of  subjectivity,  with  the  added  disadvantage  that  it  makes  the

distinction, like that of analytic and synthetic, epistemologically worthless.

And yet he never hesitates to pronounce every piece of knowledge in turn

empirical. The fact seems to be, that where he wants a more logical criterion,

he adopts a modification of Helmholtz's criterion for sensations. If space be

an à priori form, he says, no experience could possibly change it (p. 108); but

this Metageometry has proved not to be the case, since we can intuit the

perceptions  which  non-Euclidean  space  would  give  us  (p.  115). I  have

criticised this argument in discussing Helmholtz; at present we are concerned

with Erdmann's criterion of apriority. The subjectivity-criterion—though he

certainly uses it in discussing the apriority of space, and solemnly decides, by

its means, that space is both à priori and empirical since a change either in us

or in the outer world could change it (p. 97)—would seem, like several of his

other tests, to be a lapse on his part: the criterion which he means to use is

Helmholtz's. This criterion, I think, with a slight change of wording, might be

accepted; it seems to me a necessary, but not a sufficient condition. The à

priori, we may say, is not only that which no experience can change, but that

without which experience would become impossible. It is the omission todiscuss the conditions which render geometrical (and mechanical) experience

possible, to my mind, which vitiates the empirical conclusions of Helmholtz

and Erdmann. Why certain conditions should be necessary for experience—

whether on account of the constitution of the mind, or for some other reason

—is a further question, which introduces the relation of the à priori to the

subjective. But in discussing the question as to what knowledge is à priori, as

opposed to the question concerning the further consequences of apriority, it is

well to keep to the purely logical criterion, and so preserve our independence

of psychological controversies. The fact, if it be a fact, that the world might

be such as to defy our attempts to know it, will not, with the above criterion,

invalidate the conclusion that certain elements in knowledge are à priori; for

whether fulfilled or not, they remain necessary conditions for the existence of

any knowledge at all.

  84. With this caution as to the meaning of apriority, we shall find, I think,

that the conclusions of Erdmann's final chapter, on the principles of a theory

of Geometry, are largely invalidated by the diversity and inadequacy of his

tests  of  the à  priori.  He  begins  by  asserting,  in  conformity  with  the

quantitative  bias  noticed  above,  that  the  question  as  to  the  nature  of

geometrical axioms is completely analogous to the corresponding question of

the foundations of pure mathematics (p. 138). This is, I think, a radical error:

for the function of the axioms seems to be, to establish that qualitative basis

on  which,  as  we  saw,  all  qualitative  comparison  must  rest.  But  in  pure

mathematics, this qualitative basis is irrelevant, for we deal there with pure

quantity, i.e. with the merely quantitative result of quantitative comparison,

wherever  it  is  possible,  independently  of  the  qualities  underlying  the
                                                    [98]
comparison. Geometry, as Grassmann insists, ought not to be classed with

pure mathematics, for it deals with a matter which is given to the intellect, not

created  by  it.  The  axioms  give  the  means  by  which  this  matter  is  made

amenable  to  quantity,  and  cannot,  therefore,  be  themselves  deduced  from

purely quantitative considerations.

  Leaving  this  point  aside,  however,  let  us  return  to  Erdmann.  He

distinguishes, within space, a form and a matter: the form is to contain the

properties common to all extents, the matter the properties which distinguish

space from other extents. This distinction, he says, is purely logical, and does

not  correspond  with  Kant's:  matter  and  form,  for  Erdmann,  are  alikeempirical. The axioms and definitions of Geometry, he says, deal exclusively

with the matter of space. It seems a pity, having made this distinction, to put

it to so little use: after a few pages, it is dropped, and no epistemological

consequences are drawn from it. The reason is, I think, that Erdmann has not

perceived how much can be deduced from his definition of an extent, as a

manifold in which the dimensions are homogeneous and interchangeable. For

this property suffices to prove the complete homogeneity of an extent, and

hence—from  the  absence  of  qualitative  differences  among  elements—the

relativity of position and the axiom of Congruence. This deduction will be
                                [99]
made at length in the sequel; at present, I have only to observe that every

extent, on this view, possesses all the properties (except the three dimensions)

common to Euclidean and non-Euclidean spaces. The axioms which express

these  properties,  therefore,  apply  to  the  form  of  space,  and  follow  from

homogeneity alone, which Erdmann allows (p. 171) as the principle of any

theory  of  space.  The  above  distinction  of  form  and  matter,  therefore,

corresponds,  when  its  full  consequences  are  deduced,  to  the  distinction

between the axioms which follow from the homogeneity of space and those

which  do  not.  Since,  then,  homogeneity  is  equivalent  to  the  relativity  of

position, and the relativity of position is of the very essence of a form of

externality, it would seem that his distinction of form and matter can also be

made  coextensive  with  the  distinction  of  the à  priori  and  empirical  in

Geometry. On this subject, I shall have more to say in Chapter III.

  In the remainder of the chapter, Erdmann insists that the straight line, etc.,

though not abstracted from experience, which nowhere presents straight lines,

must yet, as applicable to admittedly empirical sciences, be empirical (p. 159)

—a criterion which he appears to employ only when all other grounds for an

empirical opinion fail, and one which, obviously, can never refuse to do its

work,  since  all  elements  of  knowledge  are  susceptible  of  employment  on

some empirical material. He also defines the straight line (p. 155) as a line of

constant  curvature  zero,  as  though  curvature  could  be  measured

independently of the straight line. Even the arithmetical axioms are declared

empirical (p. 165), since in a world where things were all hopelessly different

from one another, these axioms could not be applied. After this reminder of

Mill, we are not surprised, a few pages later (p. 172), at a vague appeal to

"English logicians" as having proved Geometry to be an inductive science.Nevertheless, Erdmann declares, almost on the last page of his book (p. 173),

that Geometry is distinguished from all other sciences by the homogeneity of

its material: a principle of which no single application occurs throughout his

book,  and  which,  as  we  shall  see  in  Chapter  III.,  flatly  contradicts  the

philosophical theories advocated throughout his preceding pages.

  On the whole, then, it cannot be said that Erdmann has done much to

strengthen  the  philosophical  position  of  Riemann  and  Helmholtz.  I  have

criticized  him  at  length,  because  his  book  has  the  appearance  of  great

thoroughness, and because it is undoubtedly the best defence extant of the

position which it takes up. We shall now have the opposite task to perform, in

defending Metageometry, on its mathematical side, from the attacks of Lotze

and others, and in vindicating for it that measure of philosophical importance

—far inferior, indeed, to the hopes of Erdmann—which it seems really to

possess.

 
 

  Lotze.
                                                            [100]
  85.  Lotze's  argument  as  regards  Geometry—which  follows  a

metaphysical argument as to the ontological nature of space, and assumes the

results of this argument—consists of two parts: the first discusses the various

meanings  logically  assignable  (pp.  233–247)  to  the  proposition  that  other

spaces  than  Euclid's  are  possible,  and  the  second  criticizes,  in  detail,  the

procedure of Metageometry. The first of these questions is very important,

and demands considerable care as to the logical import of a judgment of

possibility.  Although  Lotze's  discussion  is  excellent  in  many  respects,  I

cannot persuade myself that he has hit on the only true sense in which non-

Euclidean spaces are possible. I shall endeavour to make good this statement

in the following pages.

  86.  Lotze  opens  with  a  somewhat  startling  statement,  which,  though

philosophically worthy to be true, does not appear to be historically borne

out. Euclidean Geometry has been chiefly shaken, he says, by the Kantian

notion of the exclusive subjectivity of space—if space is only our private

form of intuition, to which there exists no analogue in the objective world,

then other beings may have other spaces, without supposing any difference in

the world which they arrange in these spaces (p. 233). This certainly seems a

legitimate  deduction  from  the  subjectivity  of  space,  which,  so  far  fromestablishing the universal validity of Euclid, establishes his validity only after

an empirical investigation of the nature of space as intuited by Tom, Dick or

Harry. But as a matter of fact, those who have done most to further non-

Euclidean Geometry—with the exception of Riemann, who was a disciple of

Herbart—have  usually  inherited  from  Newton  a  naïve  realism  as  regards

absolute space. I might instance the passage quoted from Bolyai in Chapter I.,

or Clifford, who seems to have thought that we actually see the images of
                      [101]
things on the retina, or again Helmholtz's belief in the dependence of

Geometry on the behaviour of rigid bodies. This belief led to the view that

Geometry, like Physics, is an experimental science, in which objective truth

can be attained, it is true, but only by empirical methods. However, Lotze's

ground for uncertainty about Euclid is a philosophically tenable ground, and

it will be instructive to observe the various possibilities which arise from it.

  If space is only a subjective form—so Lotze opens his argument—other

beings may have a different form. If this corresponds to a different world, the

difference, he says, is uninteresting: for our world alone is relevant to any

metaphysical discussion. But if this different space corresponds to the same

world which we know under the Euclidean form, then, in his opinion, we get

a question of genuine philosophic interest. And here he distinguishes two

cases: either  the  relations  between  things,  which  are  presented  to  these

hypothetical  beings  under  the  form  of  some  different  space,  are  relations

which do not appear to us, or at any rate do not appear spatial; or they are the

same relations which appear to us as figures in Euclidean space (p. 235). The

first possibility would be illustrated, he says, by beings to whom the tone or

colour-manifolds appeared extended; but we cannot, in his opinion, imagine a

manifold,  such  as  is  required  for  this  case,  to  have  its  dimensions

homogeneous  and  comparable inter se,  and  therefore  the  contents  of  the

various presentations constituting such a manifold could not be combined

into  a  single  content  containing  them  all.  But  the  possibility  of  such  a

combination is of the essence of anything worth calling a space: therefore the

first  of  the  above  possibilities  is  unmotived  and  uninteresting.  Lotze's

conclusion  on  this  point,  I  think,  is  undeniable,  but  I  doubt  whether  his

argument is very cogent. However, as this possibility has no connection with

that  contemplated  by  non-Euclideans,  it  is  not  worth  while  to  discuss  it

further.  The second possibility also, Lotze thinks, is not that of Metageometry, but

in truth it comes nearer to it than any of the other possibilities discussed. If a

non-Euclidean were at the same time a believer in the subjectivity of space,

he would have to be an adherent of this view. Let us see more precisely what

the view is. In Book II., Chapter I., Lotze has accepted the argument of the

Transcendental Aesthetic, but rejected that of the mathematical antinomies:

he  has  decided  that  space  is,  as  Kant  believed,  subjective,  but  possesses

nevertheless, what Kant denied it, an objective counterpart. The relation of

presented space to its objective counterpart, as conceived by Lotze, is rather

hard to understand. It seems scarcely to resemble the relation of sensation to

its object—e.g. of light to ether-vibrations—for if it did, space would not be

in any peculiar sense subjective. It seems rather to resemble the relation of a

perceived bodily motion to the state of mind of the person willing the motion.

However  this  may  be,  the  objective  counterpart  of  space  is  supposed  to

consist  of  certain  immediate  interactions  of  monads,  who  experience  the

interactions as modifications of their internal states. Such interactions, it is

plain, do not form the subject-matter of Geometry, which deals only with our

resulting perceptions of spatial figures. Now if Lotze's construction of space

be correct, there seems certainly no reason why these resulting perceptions

should  not,  for  one  and  the  same  interaction  between  monads,  be  very

different in beings differently constituted from ourselves. But if they were

different, says Lotze, they would have to be utterly different—as different,

for example, as the interval between two notes is from a straight line. The

possibility  is,  therefore,  in  his  opinion,  one  about  which  we  can  know

nothing, and one which must remain always a mere empty idea. This seems

to  me  to  go  too  far:  for  whatever  the  objective  counterpart  may  be,  any

argument which gives us information about it must, when reversed, give us

information about any possible form of intuition in which this counterpart is

presented. The argument which Lotze has used in his former chapter, for

example,  deducing,  from  the  relativity  of  position,  the  merely  relational

nature of the objective counterpart, allows us, conversely, to infer, from this

relational nature, the complete relativity of position in any possible space-

intuition—unless,  indeed,  it  bore  a  wholly  deceitful  relation  to  those

interactions  of  monads  which  form  its  objective  counterpart.  But  the

complete relativity of position, as I shall endeavour to establish in Chapter

III., suffices to prove that our Geometry must be Euclidean, elliptic, sphericalor pseudo-spherical. We have, therefore, it would seem, very considerable

knowledge, on Lotze's theory of space, of the manner in which what appears

to us as space must appear to any beings with our laws of thought. We cannot

know, it is true, what psychological theory of space-perception would apply

to such beings: they might have a sense different from any of ours, and they

might have no sense in any way resembling ours, but yet their Geometry

would have points of resemblance to ours, as that of the blind coincides with

that of the seeing. If space has any objective counterpart whatever, in short,

and if any inference is possible, as Lotze holds it to be, from space to its

counterpart, then a converse argument is also possible, though it may give

some  only  of  the  qualities  of  Euclidean  space,  since  some  only  of  these

qualities may be found to have a necessary analogue in the counterpart.

  87. Admitting, then, in Lotze's sense, the subjectivity of space, the above

possibility does not seem so empty as he imagines. He discusses it briefly,

however,  in  order  to  pass  on  to  what  he  regards  as  the  real  meaning  of

Metageometry. In this he is guilty of a mathematical mistake, which causes

much irrelevant reasoning. For he believes that Metageometry constructs its

spaces  out  of  straight  lines  and  angles  in  all  respects  similar  to  Euclid's,

whence he derives an easy victory in proving that these elements can lead

only to the one space. In this he has been misled by the phraseology of non-

Euclideans, as well as by Euclid's separation of definitions and axioms. For

the fact is, of course, that straight lines are only fully defined when we add to

the formal definition the axioms of the straight line and of parallels. Within

Euclidean space, Euclid's definition suffices to distinguish the straight line

from all other curves; the two axioms referred to are then absorbed into the

definition of space. But apart from the restriction to Euclidean space, the

definition  has  to  be  supplemented  by  the  two  axioms,  in  order  to  define

completely  the  Euclidean  straight  line.  Thus  Lotze  has  misconceived  the

bearing of non-Euclidean constructions, and has simply missed the point in

arguing as he does. The possibility contemplated by a non-Euclidean, if it fell

under any of Lotze's cases, would fall under the second case discussed above.

  88.  But  the  bearing  of  Metageometry  is  really,  I  think,  different  from

anything imagined by Lotze; and as few writers seem clear on this point, I

will enter somewhat fully into what I conceive to be its purpose.

  In the first place, there are some writers—notably Clifford—who, being

naïve realists as regards space, hold that our evidence is wholly insufficient,as yet, to decide as to its nature in the infinite or in the infinitesimal (cf.

Essays, Vol. I. p. 320): these writers are not concerned with any possibility of

beings  different  from  ourselves,  but  simply  with  the  everyday  space  we

know, which they investigate in the spirit of a chemist discussing whether

hydrogen is a metal, or an astronomer discussing the nebular hypothesis.

  But these are a minority: most, more cautious, admit that our space, so far

as observation extends, is Euclidean, and if not accurately Euclidean, must be

only slightly spherical or pseudo-spherical. Here again, it is the space of daily

life which is under discussion, and here further the discussion is, I think,

independent of any philosophical assumption as to the nature of our space-

intuition. For even if this be purely subjective, the translation of an intuition

into a conception can only be accomplished approximately, within the errors

of observation incident to self-analysis; and until the intuition of space has

become a conception, we get no scientific Geometry. The apodeictic certainty

of the axiom of parallels shrinks to an unmotived subjective conviction, and

vanishes  altogether  in  those  who  entertain  non-Euclidean  doubts.  To

reinforce  the  Euclidean  faith,  reason  must  now  be  brought  to  the  aid  of

intuition; but reason, unfortunately, abandons us, and we are left to the mercy

of approximate observations of stellar triangles—a meagre support, indeed,

for the cherished religion of our childhood.

  89.  But  the  possibility  of  an  inaccuracy  so  slight,  that  our  finest

instruments and our most distant parallaxes show no trace of it, would trouble

men's minds no more than the analogous chance of inaccuracy in the law of

gravitation, were it not for the philosophical import of even the slenderest

possibility  in  this  sphere.  And  it  is  the  philosophical  bearing  of

Metageometry alone, I think, which constitutes its real importance. Even if,

as we will suppose for the moment, observation had established, beyond the

possibility of doubt, that our space might be safely regarded as Euclidean,

still Metageometry would have shown a philosophical possibility, and on this

ground alone it could claim, I think, very nearly all the attention which it at

present deserves.

  But  what  is  this  possibility?  A  thing  is  possible,  according  to  Bradley

(Logic, p. 187), when it would follow from a certain number of conditions,

some of which are known to be realized. Now the conditions to which a form

of externality must conform, in order to be affirmed, are: first, of course, that

it  should  be  experienced,  or  legitimately  inferred  from  somethingexperienced;  but  secondly,  that  it  should  conform  to  certain  logical

conditions, detailed in Chapter III., which may be summed up in the relativity

of position. Now what Metageometry has done, in any case, is to suggest the

proof that the second of these conditions is fulfilled by non-Euclidean spaces.

Euclid is affirmed, therefore, on the ground of immediate experience alone,

and his truth, as unmediated by logical necessity, is merely assertorical, or, if

we prefer it, empirical. This is the most important sense, it seems to me, in

which  non-Euclidean  spaces  are  possible.  They  are,  in  short,  a  step  in  a

philosophical argument, rather than in the investigation of fact: they throw

light  on  the  nature  of  the  grounds  for  Euclid,  rather  than  on  the  actual
                          [102]
conformation of space. This import of Metageometry is denied by Lotze,

on  the  ground  that  non-Euclidean  logic  is  faulty,  a  ground  which  he

endeavours, by much detail and through many pages, to make good—with

what success, we will now proceed to examine.

  90.  Lotze's  attack  on  Metageometry—although  it  remains,  so  far  as  I

know,  the  best  hostile  criticism  extant,  and  although  its  arguments  have

become  part  of  the  regular  stock-in-trade  of  Euclidean  philosophers—

contains, if I am not mistaken, several misunderstandings due to insufficient

mathematical  knowledge  of  the  subject.  As  these  misunderstandings  have

been  widely  spread  among  philosophers,  and  cannot  be  easily  removed

except by a critic who has gone into non-Euclidean Geometry with some

care, it seems desirable to discuss Lotze's strictures point by point.

 

  91. The mathematical criticism begins (§ 131) with a somewhat question-

begging  definition  of  parallel  straight  lines.  Two  straight  lines aα, bβ,

according to this definition, are parallel when—a and b being arbitrary points

on the two lines—if aα = bβ, then ab = αβ, where α, β are two other points on

the two straight lines respectively. This definition—which contains Euclid's

axiom and definition combined in a very convenient and enticing form—is of

course thoroughly suitable to Euclidean Geometry, and leads immediately to

all the Euclidean propositions about parallels. But it is perhaps more honest

to follow Euclid's course; when an axiom is thus buried in a definition, it is

apt to seem, since definitions are supposed to be arbitrary, as though the

difficulty had been overcome, while in reality, the possibility of parallels, as

above  defined,  involves  the  very  point  in  question,  namely,  the  disputed

axiom of parallels. For what this axiom asserts is simply the existence oflines  conforming  to  Lotze's  definition.  The  deduction  of  the  principal

propositions on parallels, with which Lotze follows up his definition, is of

course a very simple proceeding—a proceeding, however, in which the first

step begs the question.

  92. The next argument for the apriority of Euclidean Geometry has, oddly

enough, an exactly opposite bearing, although it is a great favourite with

opponents  of  Metageometry.  Measurements  of  stellar  triangles,  and  all

similar  attempts  at  an  empirical  determination  of  the  space-constant  are,

according to Lotze, beside the mark; for any observed departure from two

right angles, or any finite annual parallax for distant stars, would be attributed

to some new kind of refraction, or, as in the case of aberration, to some other

physical cause, and never to the geometrical nature of space. This is a strong

argument for the empirical validity of Euclid, but as an argument for the

apodeictic certainty of the orthodox system, it has an opposite tendency. For

observations of the kind contemplated would have to be due to departures

from Euclidean straightness, hitherto unknown, on the part of stellar light-

rays.  Such  departure  could,  in  certain  cases,  be  accounted  for  by  a  finite

space-constant, but it could also, probably, be accounted for by a change in

Optics, for example, by attributing refractive properties to the ether. Such

properties could only exist if ether were of varying density, if (say) it were

denser  in  the  neighbourhood  of  any  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  But  such  an

assumption would, I believe, destroy the utility of ether for Physics; a slight

alteration in our Geometry, so slight as not appreciably to affect distances

within the Solar System, would probably be in the end, therefore, should such

errors ever be discovered, a simpler explanation than any that Physics could

offer. But this is not the point of my contention. The point is that, if the

physical  explanation,  as  Lotze  holds,  be  possible  in  the  above  case,  the

converse  must  also  hold:  it  must  be  possible  to  explain  the  present

phenomena by supposing ether refractive and space non-Euclidean. From this

conclusion there is no escape. If every conceivable behaviour of light-rays

can be explained, within Euclid, by physical causes, it must also be possible,

by a suitable choice of hypothetical physical causes, to explain the actual

phenomena as belonging to a non-Euclidean space. Such a hypothesis would

be rightly rejected by Science, for the present, on account of its unnecessary

complexity. Nevertheless it would remain, for philosophy, a possibility to be

reckoned with, and the choice could only be decided upon empirical groundsof simplicity. It may well be doubted whether, in the world we know, the

phenomena could be attributed to a distinctly non-Euclidean space, but this

conclusion follows inevitably from the contention that no phenomena could

force us to assume such a space. Lotze's argument, therefore, if pushed home,

disproves  his  own  view,  and  puts  Euclidean  space,  as  an  empirical
                                                                        [103]
explanation of phenomena, on a level with luminiferous ether.

 

  93.  Lotze  now  proceeds  (§  132)  to  a  detailed  criticism  of  Helmholtz,

whom he regards as a typical exponent of Metageometry. It is possible that,

at the time when he wrote, Helmholtz really did occupy this position; but it is

unfortunate that, in the minds of philosophers, he should still continue to do

so, after the very material advances brought about by the projective treatment

of the subject. It is also unfortunate that his somewhat careless attempts to

popularise mathematical results have so often been disposed of, without due

attention to his more technical and solid contributions. Thus his romances

about Flatland and Sphereland—at best only fairy-tale analogies of doubtful

value—have  been  attacked  as  if  they  formed  an  essential  feature  of

Metageometry.

  But to proceed to particulars: Lotze readily allows that the Flatlanders

would set up Plane Geometry, as we know it, but refuses to admit that the

Spherelanders  could,  without  inferring  the  third  dimension,  set  up  a  two-

dimensional spherical Geometry which should be free from contradictions. I

will endeavour to give a free rendering of Lotze's argument on this point.

  Suppose, he says, a north and south pole, N and S, arbitrarily fixed, and an

equator EW. Suppose a being, B, capable of impressions only from things on

the surface of the sphere, to move in a meridian NBS. Let B start from some

point a, and finally, after describing a great circle, return to the same point a.

If a is known only by the quality of the impression it makes on B, B may

imagine he has not reached the same point a, but another similar point a′,

bearing a relation to a similar to that of the octave in singing: he might even

not arrange his impressions spatially at all. In order that this may occur, we

require the further assumption, that every difference in the above-mentioned

feelings (as he describes the meridian) may be presented as a spatial distance

between two places. Even now, B may think he is describing a Euclidean

straight  line,  containing  similar  points  at  certain  intervals.  Allowing,

however, that he realizes the identity of a with his initial position, he willnow seem, by motion in a straight line, to have returned to the point from

which he started, for his motion cannot, without the third dimension, seem to

him other than rectilinear.

  Up to this point, there seems little ground for objection, except, perhaps, to

the  idea  of  a  straight  line  with  periodical  similar  points—if B  were  as

philosophical  as,  in  these  discussions,  we  usually  suppose  him  to  be,  he

would probably object to this interpretation of his experiences, on the ground

that it regards empty space as something independent of the objects in it. It is

worth pointing out, also, that B would not need to describe the whole circle,

in order suddenly to find himself home again with his old friends. Accurate

measurements  of  small  triangles  would  suffice  to  determine  his  space-

constant, and show him the length of a great circle (or straight line, as he

would call it). We must admit, also, that so hypothetical a being as B might

form no space-intuition at all, but as he is introduced solely for the purposes

of the analogy, it is convenient to allow him all possible qualifications for his

post. But these points do not touch the kernel of the argument, which lies in

the statement that such a straight line, returning into itself after a finite time,

would appear to B as an "unendurable contradiction," and thus force him, for

logical though not for sensational purposes, into the assumption of a third

dimension.  This  assertion  seems  to  me  quite  unwarranted:  the  whole  of

Metageometry is a solid array in disproof of it. Helmholtz's argument is, it

must be remembered, only an analogy, and the contradiction would exist only

for a Euclidean. A complete three-dimensional Geometry has, we have seen

in Chapter I., been developed on the assumption that straight lines are of

finite length. A constant value for the measure of curvature, as our discussion

of Riemann showed, involves neither reference to the fourth dimension, nor

any  kind  of  internal  contradiction.  This  fact  disproves  Lotze's  contention,

which  arises  solely  from  inability  to  divest  his  imagination  of  Euclidean

ideas.

  Lotze next attacks Helmholtz for the assertion that B would know nothing

of parallel lines—parallel straight lines, as the context shows, he meant to
  [104]
say. Lotze, however, takes him as meaning, apparently, mere curves of

constant distance from a given straight line, which are part of the regular

stock-in-trade  of  Metageometry.  Parallels  of  latitude,  in  the  geographical

sense, would not—with the exception of the equator—appear to B as straightlines, but as circles. Great circles he would call straight, and this fact seems

to have misled Lotze into thinking all circles were to be treated as straight

lines.  Parallels  of  latitude,  therefore,  though B  might  call  them  parallels,

would not invalidate Helmholtz's contention, which applies only to straight

lines.

  The argument that such small circles would be parallel, which we have

just disposed of, is only the preface to another proof that B would need a third

dimension. Let us call two of these parallels of latitude l and l, and let them
                                                                  ns

be  equidistant  from  the  equator,  one  in  the  northern,  one  in  the  southern

hemisphere. Consecutive tangent planes, along these parallels, converge, in

the one case northwards, in the other southwards. Either B could become

aware of their difference, says Lotze, or he could not. In the former case,

which he regards as the more probable, he easily proves that B would infer a

third dimension. But this alternative is, I think, wholly inadmissible. Tangent

planes, like Euclidean planes in general, would have no meaning to B; unless,

indeed, he were a metageometrician, which, with all his metaphysical and

mathematical subtlety, the argument supposes him not to be—and to such a

supposition Lotze, surely, is the last person who has a right to object. Lotze's

attempted proof that this is the right alternative rests, if I understand him

aright, on a sheer error in ordinary spherical Geometry. B would observe, he

says, that the meridians made smaller angles with his path towards the nearer

than towards the further pole—as a matter of fact, they would be simply

perpendicular to his path in both directions. What Lotze means is, perhaps,

that all the meridians would meet sooner in one direction than in the other,

and this, of course, is true. But the poles, in which the meridians meet, would

appear to B  as  the  centres  of  the  respective  parallels,  while  the  parallels

themselves  would  appear  to  be  circles.  Now  I  am  at  a  loss  to  see  what

difficulty  would  arise,  to B,  in  supposing  two  different  circles  to  have
                  [105]
different centres. We must, therefore, take the first alternative, that B

would have no sort of knowledge as to the direction in which the tangent

planes converged. Here Lotze attempts, if I have not misunderstood him, to

prove a reductio ad absurdum: B would think, he says, that he was describing

two paths wholly the same in direction, and then he might regard both paths

as circles in a plane. It may be observed that direction, when applied to a

circle as a whole, is meaningless; indeed direction, in all Metageometry, canonly mean, even when applied to straight lines, direction towards a point. To

speak of two lines, which do not meet, as having the same direction, is a

surreptitious introduction of the axiom of parallels. Apart from this, I cannot

conceive any objection, on B's part, to such a view—one should say must, not

might. The whole argumentation, therefore, unless its obscurity has led me

astray, must be pronounced fruitless and inconclusive.

  94. After this preliminary discussion of Sphereland, Lotze proceeds to the

question of a fourth dimension, and thence to spherical and pseudo-spherical

space. As before, he appears to know only the more careless and popular

utterances  of  Helmholtz  and  Riemann,  and  to  have  taken  no  trouble  to

understand  even  the  foundations  of  mathematical  Metageometry.  By  this

neglect, much of what he says is rendered wholly worthless. To begin with,

he  regards,  as  the  purpose  of  Helmholtz's  fairy  tale,  the  suggestion  of  a

possible fourth dimension, whereas the real purpose was quite the opposite—

to  make  intelligible  a  purely  three-dimensional  non-Euclidean  space.

Helmholtz  introduced  Flatland  only  because  its  relation  to  Sphereland  is
                                                            [106]
analogous to the relation of ours to spherical space. But Lotze says: The

Flatlanders would find no difficulty in a third dimension, since it would in no

way contradict their own Geometry, while the people in Sphereland, from the

contradictions in their two-dimensional system, would already have been led

to it. The latter contention I have already tried to answer; the former has an

odd sound, in view of the attempt, a few pages later, to prove à priori that all

forms  of  intuition,  in  any  way  analogous  to  space, must  have  three

dimensions. One cannot help suspecting that the Flatlanders, with two instead

of three dimensions, would make a similar attempt. But to return to Lotze's

argument:  Neither  analogy  can  be  used,  he  says,  to  prove  that  we  ought

perhaps  to  set  up  a  fourth  dimension,  since,  for  us,  no  contradictions  or

otherwise inexplicable phenomena exist. The only people, so far as I know,

who have used this analogy, are Dr Abbot and a few Spiritualists—the former

in  joke,  the  latter  to  explain  certain  phenomena  more  simply  explained,

perhaps, by Maskelyne and Cooke. But although Lotze's conclusion in this

matter  is  sound,  and  one  with  which  Helmholtz  might  have  agreed,  his

arguments,  to  my  mind,  are  irrelevant  and  unconvincing.  There  is  this

difference,  he  says,  between  us  and  the  Spherelanders:  the  latter  were

logically forced to a new dimension, and found it possible; we are not forcedto it, and find it, in our space, impossible. I have contended that, on the

contrary, nothing would force the Spherelanders to assume a third dimension,

while they would find it impossible exactly as we find a fourth impossible—

not logically, that is to say, but only as a presentable construction in given

space.

  After a somewhat elephantine piece of humour, about socialistic whales in

a four-dimensional sea of Fourrier's eau sucrée, Lotze proceeds to a proof, by

logic,  that  every  form  of  intuition,  which  embraces  the  whole  system  of

ordered relations of a coexisting manifold, must have three dimensions. One

might object, on à priori grounds, to any such attempt: what belongs to pure

intuition could hardly, one would have thought, be determined by à priori
          [107]
reasoning. I will not, however, develop this argument here, but endeavour

to point out, as far as its obscurity will allow, the particular fallacy of the

proof in question.

  Lotze's argument is as follows. In this discussion, though our terminology

is necessarily taken from space, we are really concerned with a much more

general  conception.  We  assume,  in  order  to  preserve  the  homogeneity  of

dimensions, that the difference (distance) between any two elements (points)

of our manifold—to borrow Riemann's word—is of the same kind as, and

commensurable with, the difference between any other two elements. Let us

take  a  series  of  elements  at  successive  distances x  such  that  the  distance

between any two is the sum of the distances between intermediate elements.

Such a series corresponds to a straight line, which is taken as the x-axis. Then

a series OY is called perpendicular to the x-axis OX, when the distances of

any element y, on OY, from +mx and -mx are equal. By our hypothesis, these

distances are comparable with, and qualitatively similar to, x and y. So long

as OY is defined only by relation to OX, it is conceptually unique. But now let

us suppose the same relation as that between OX and OY, to be possible

between OY and a new series OZ; we then get a third series OZ perpendicular

to OY, and again conceptually unique, so long as it is defined by relation to

OY  alone.  We  might  proceed,  in  the  same  way,  to  a  fourth  line OU

perpendicular to OZ. But it is necessary, for our purposes, that OZ should be

perpendicular to OX as well as OY. Without this condition, OZ might extend

into  another  world,  and  have  no  corresponding  relation  to OX—this  is  a

possibility only excluded by our unavoidable spatial images. At this pointcomes the crux of the argument. That OZ, says Lotze, which, besides being

perpendicular to OY, is also perpendicular to OX, must be among the series of

OY's,  for  these  were  defined  only  by  perpendicularity  to OX. Hence,  he

concludes, there can only be even a third dimension if OZ coincides with one,

and—as  soon  as OX  is  considered  fixed—with only  one,  of  the  many

members of the OY series.

  In this argument it is difficult—to me at any rate—to see any force at all.

The only way I can account for it is, to suppose that Lotze has neglected the

possibility of any but single infinities. On this interpretation, the argument

might be stated thus: There is an infinite series of continuously varying OY's;

to the common property of these, we add another property, which will divide

their total number by infinity. The remaining OZ, therefore, must be uniquely

determined.  The  same  form  of  argument,  however,  would  prove  that  two

surfaces can only cut one another in a single point, and numberless other

absurdities.  The  fact  is,  that  infinities  may  be  of  different  orders.  For

example, the number of points in a line may be taken as a single infinity, and

so  may  the  number  of  lines  in  a  plane  through  any  point;  hence,  by
                                                                                  2
multiplication, the number of points in a plane is a double infinity, ∞, and if

we divide this number by a single infinity, we get still an infinite number left.

Thus Lotze's argument assumes what he has to prove, that the number of

lines perpendicular to a given line, through any point, is a single infinity,

which is equivalent to the axiom of three dimensions. The whole passage is

so obscure, that its meaning may have escaped me. It is obvious à priori,

however, as I pointed out in the beginning, that any proof of the axiom must

be fallacious somewhere, and the above interpretation of the argument is the

only one I have been able to find.

  95.  The  rest  of  the  Chapter  is  devoted  to  an  attack  on  spherical  and

pseudo-spherical  space,  on  the  ground  that  they  interfere  with  the

homogeneity of the three dimensions, and with the similarity of all parts of

space. This is simply false. Such spaces, like the surface of a sphere, are

exactly alike throughout. Lotze shows, here and elsewhere, that he has not

taken the pains to find out what Metageometry really is. I hold myself, and

have  tried  to  prove  in  this  Essay,  that  Congruence  is  an à priori  axiom,

without which Geometry would be impossible; but the wish to uphold this

axiom  is,  as  Lotze  ought  to  have  known,  the  precise  motive  which  ledMetageometry to limit itself to spaces of constant measure of curvature. We

see here the importance of distinguishing between Helmholtz the philosopher

and  Helmholtz  the  mathematician.  Though  the  philosopher  wished  to

dispense  with  Congruence,  the  mathematician,  as  we  saw  in  Chapter  I.,

retained and strongly emphasized it. A little later Lotze shows, again, how he

has  been  misled  by  the  unfortunate  analogy  of  Sphereland.  A  spherical

surface, he says, he can understand; but how are we to pass from this to a

spherical  space?  Either  this  surface  is  the  whole  of  our  space,  as  in

Sphereland,  or  it  generates  space  by  a  gradually  growing  radius.  Such

concentric  spheres,  as  Lotze  triumphantly  points  out,  of  course  generate

Euclidean space. His disjunction, however, is utterly and entirely false, and

could  never  have  been  suggested  by  any  one  with  even  a  superficial

knowledge of Metageometry. This point is less laboured than the former,

which,  in  all  its  nakedness,  is  thus  re-stated  in  the  last  sentence  of  the

Chapter: "I cannot persuade myself that one could, without the elements of

homogeneous space, even form or define the presentation of heterogeneous

spaces, or of such as had variable measures of curvature." As though such

spaces were ever set up by non-Euclidean mathematics!

  In conclusion, Lotze expresses a hope that Philosophy, on this point, will

not allow itself to be imposed upon by Mathematics. I must, instead, rejoice

that  Mathematics  has  not  been  imposed  upon  by  Philosophy,  but  has

developed freely an important and self-consistent system, which deserves, for

its subtle analysis into logical and factual elements, the gratitude of all who

seek for a philosophy of space.

  96.  The  objections  to  non-Euclidean  Geometry  which  have  just  been

discussed fall under four heads:

  I. Non-Euclidean spaces are not homogeneous; Metageometry therefore

unduly reifies space.

 

  II. They involve a reference to a fourth dimension.

  III.  They  cannot  be  set  up  without  an  implicit  reference  to  Euclidean

space,  or  to  the  Euclidean  straight  line,  on  which  they  are  therefore

dependent.

  IV. They are self-contradictory in one or more ways.

  The reader who has followed me in regarding these four objections as

fallacious,  will  have  no  difficulty  in  disposing  of  any  other  critic  ofMetageometry,  as  these  are  the  only  mathematical  arguments,  so  far  as  I
                                                      [108]
know,  ever  urged  against  non-Euclideans.  The  logical  validity  of

Metageometry, and the mathematical possibility of three-dimensional non-

Euclidean spaces, will therefore be regarded, throughout the remainder of the

work, as sufficiently established.

  97. Two other objections may, indeed, be urged against Metageometry,

but these are rather of a philosophical than of a strictly mathematical import.

The first of these, which has been made the base of operations by Delbœuf,

applies equally to all non-Euclidean spaces. The second, which has not, so far

as I know, been much employed, but yet seems to me deserving of notice,

bears  directly  against  spaces  of  positive  curvature  alone;  but  if  it  could

discredit these, it might throw doubt on the method by which all alike are

obtained. The two objections are:

  I. Space must be such as to allow of similarity, i.e. of the increase or

diminution, in a constant ratio, of all the lines in a figure, without change of

angles; whereas in non-Euclid, lines, like angles, have absolute magnitude.

  II. Space must be infinite, whereas spherical and elliptic spaces are finite.

  I  will  discuss  the  first  objection  in  connection  with  Delbœuf's  articles

referred to above. The second, which has not, to my knowledge, been widely

used in criticism, will be better deferred to Chapter III.

 
 

  Delbœuf.

  98. M. Delbœuf's four articles in the Revue Philosophique contain much

matter that has already been dealt with in the criticism of Lotze, and much

that is irrelevant for our present purpose. The only point, which I wish to

discuss  here,  is  the  question  of  absolute  magnitude,  as  it  is  called—the

question, that is, whether the possibility of similar but unequal geometrical
                                  [109]
figures can be known à priori.

  In discussing this question, it is important, to begin with, to distinguish

clearly the sense in which absolute magnitude is required in non-Euclidean

Geometry, from another sense, in which it would be absurd to regard any

magnitude  as  absolute.  Judgments  of  magnitude  can  only  result  from

comparison,  and  if  Metageometry  required  magnitudes  which  could  be

determined  without  comparison,  it  would  certainly  deserve  condemnation.

But this is not required. All we require is, that it shall be impossible, whilethe  rest  of  space  is  unaffected,  to  alter  the  magnitude  of  any  figure,  as

compared with other figures, while leaving the relative internal magnitudes of

its  parts  unchanged.  This  construction,  which  is  possible  in  Euclid,  is

impossible  in  Metageometry.  We  have  to  discuss  whether  such  an

impossibility renders non-Euclidean spaces logically faulty.

  M.  Delbœuf's  position  on  this  axiom—which  he  calls  the  postulate  of
              [110]
homogeneity—is,  that  all  Geometry  must  presuppose  it,  and  that

Metageometry, consequently, though logically sound, is logically subsequent

to  Euclid,  and  can  only  make  its  constructions  within  a  Euclidean

"homogeneous"  space  (Rev.  Phil.  Vol.  XXXVII.,  pp.  380–1).  He  would

appear to think, nevertheless, that homogeneity (in his sense) is learnt from

experience, though on this point he is not very explicit. (See Vol. XXXVIII.,

p. 129.) No à priori proof, at any rate, is offered in his articles. As a result of

experience, every one would admit, similarity is known to be possible within

the limits of observation; but the fact that this possibility extends to Ordnance

maps, which deal with a spherical surface, should make us chary of inferring,

from  such  a  datum,  the  certainty  of  Euclid  for  large  spaces.  Moreover  if

homogeneity  be  empirical,  Metageometry,  which  dispenses  with  it,  is  not

necessarily  in logical  dependence  upon  Euclid,  since  homogeneity  and

isogeneity  are logically  separable.  I  shall  assume,  therefore,  as  the  only

contention which can be interesting to our argument, that homogeneity is

regarded as à priori, and as logically essential to Geometry.

  99.  Now  we  saw,  in  discussing  Erdmann's  views  of  the  judgment  of

quantity, that in non-Euclidean space, as in Euclidean, a change of all spatial

magnitudes, in the same ratio, would be no change at all; the ratios of all

magnitudes  to  the  space-constant  would  be  unchanged,  and  the  space-

constant, as the ultimate standard of comparison, cannot, in any intelligible

sense, be said to have any particular magnitude. The absolute magnitudes of

Metageometry, therefore, are absolute only as against any other particular

magnitude, not as against other magnitudes in general. If this were not the

case,  the  comparative  nature  of  the  judgment  of  magnitude  would  be

contradicted, and metrical Metageometry would become absurd. But as it is,

the difference from Euclid consists only in this: that in Metageometry we

have, while in Euclid we have not, a standard of comparison involved in the

nature of our space as a whole, which we call the space-constant. We have todiscuss whether the assertion of such a standard involves an undue reification

of space.

  I do not believe that this is the case. For an undue reification of space

would only arise, if we were no longer able to regard position as wholly

relative,  and  as  geometrically  definable  only  by  departure  from  other

positions.  But  the  relativity  of  position,  as  we  have  abundantly  seen,  is

preserved by all spaces of constant curvature—in all of these, positions can
                                                                        [111]
only be defined, geometrically, by relations to fresh positions. This series

of definitions may lead to an infinite regress, but it may also, as in spherical

space, form a vicious circle, and return again to the position from which it

started. No reification of space, no independent existence of mere relations,

seems involved in such a procedure. The whole of Metageometry, in short, is

a proof that the relativity of position is compatible with absolute magnitude,

in  the  only  sense  required  by  non-Euclidean  spaces.  We  must  conclude,

therefore, that there is nothing incompatible, in a denial of homogeneity (in

Delbœuf's  sense),  either  with  the  relational  nature  of  space,  or  with  the

comparative  nature  of  magnitude.  This  last à  priori  objection  to

Metageometry,  therefore,  cannot  be  maintained,  and  the  issue  must  be

decided on empirical grounds alone.

  100. The foundations of Geometry have been the subject of much recent

speculation in France, and this seems to demand some notice. But in spite of

the  splendid  work  which  the  French  have  done  on  the  allied  question  of

number and continuous quantity, I cannot persuade myself that they have

succeeded in greatly advancing the subject of geometrical philosophy. The

chief writers have been, from the mathematical side, Calinon and Poincaré,

from  the  philosophical, Renouvier  and Delbœuf;  as  a  mediator  between

mathematics and philosophy, Lechalas.

  Calinon, in an interesting article on the geometrical indeterminateness of

the universe, maintains that any Geometry may be applied to the actual world

by a suitable hypothesis as to the course of light-rays. For the earth only is

known to us otherwise than by Optics, and the earth is an infinitesimal part of

the universe. This line of argument has been already discussed in connection

with Lotze, but Calinon adds a new suggestion, that the space-constant may

perhaps vary with the time. This would involve a causal connection between

space  and  other  things,  which  seems  hardly  conceivable,  and  which,  ifregarded as possible, must surely destroy Geometry, since Geometry depends
                                                    [112]
throughout on the irrelevance of Causation. Moreover, in all operations

of  measurement,  some  time  is  spent;  unless  we  knew  that  space  was

unchanging throughout the operation, it is hard to see how our results could

be trustworthy, and how, consequently, a change in the parameter could be

discovered. The same difficulties would arise, in fact, as those which result

from supposing space not homogeneous.

  Poincaré maintains that the question, whether Euclid or Metageometry

should  be  accepted,  is  one  of  convenience  and  convention,  not  of  truth;

axioms  are  definitions  in  disguise,  and  the  choice  between  definitions  is

arbitrary.  This  view  has  been  discussed  in  Chapter  I.,  in  connection  with

Cayley's theory of distance, on which it depends.

  Lechalas is a philosophical disciple of Calinon. He is a rationalist of the

pre-Kantian type, but a believer in the validity of Metageometry. He holds

that Geometry can dispense with all purely spatial postulates, and work with
                                [113]
axioms of magnitude alone, which, in his opinion, are purely analytic.

The principle of contradiction, to him, is the sole and only test of truth; we

make long chains of reasoning from our premisses to see if contradictions

will  emerge.  It  might  be  objected  that  this  view,  though  it  saves  general

Geometry from being logically empirical, leaves it only empirically logical;

this must, in fact, be the fate of every piece of à priori knowledge, if M.

Lechalas's were the only test of truth. However, he concludes that general

Geometry is apodeictic, while the space of our actual world, like all other

phenomena, is contingent.

  Delbœuf criticizes non-Euclidean space from an ultra-realist standpoint: he

holds  that real  space  is  neither  homogeneous  nor  isogeneous,  but  that

conceived space, as abstracted from real space, has both these properties. He

offers no justification for his real space, which seems to be maintained in the

spirit of naïve realism, nor does he show how he has acquired his intimate
                                [114]
knowledge of its constitution. His arguments against Metageometry, in so

far as they are not repetitions of Lotze, have been discussed above.

  Renouvier, finally, is a pure Kantian, of the most orthodox type. His views

as to the importance, for Geometry, of the distinction between synthetic and

analytic  judgments,  have been  discussed,  in  connection  with  Kant,  at  the
                                      [115]
beginning of the present Chapter.  101. Before beginning the constructive argument of the next Chapter, let

us endeavour briefly to sum up the theories which have been polemically

advocated throughout the criticisms we have just concluded. We agreed to

accept, with Kant, necessity for any possible experience as the test of the à

priori, but we refused, for the present, to discuss the connection of the à

priori with the subjective, regarding the purely logical test as sufficient for

our  immediate  purpose.  We  also  refused  to  attach  importance  to  the

distinction of analytic and synthetic, since it seemed to apply, not to different

judgments, but only to different aspects of any judgment.

  We then discussed Riemann's attempt to identify the empirical element in

Geometry with the element not deducible from ideas of magnitude, and we

decided that this identification was due to a confusion as to the nature of

magnitude.  For  judgments  of  magnitude,  we  said,  require  always  some

qualitative basis, which is not quantitatively expressible.

  In criticizing Helmholtz, we decided that Mechanics logically presupposes

Geometry, though space presupposes matter; but that the matter which space

presupposes,  and  to  which  Geometry  indirectly  refers,  is  a  more  abstract

matter  than  that  of  Mechanics,  a  matter  destitute  of  force  and  of  causal

attributes, and possessed only of the purely spatial attributes required for the

possibility of spatial figures. But we conceded that Geometry, when applied

to mixed mathematics or to daily life, demands more than this, demands, in

fact, some means of discovering, in the more concrete matter of Mechanics,

either a rigid body, or a body whose departure from rigidity follows some

empirically discoverable law. Actual measurement, therefore, we agreed to

regard as empirical.

  Our conclusions, as regards the empiricism of Riemann and Helmholtz,

were reinforced by a criticism of Erdmann. We then had an opposite task to

perform, in defending Metageometry against Lotze. Here we saw that there

are two senses in which Metageometry is possible. The first concerns our

actual space, and asserts that it may have a very small space-constant; the

second concerns philosophical theories of space, and asserts a purely logical

possibility, which leaves the decision to experience. We saw also that Lotze's

mathematical strictures arose from insufficient knowledge of the subject, and

could all be refuted by a better acquaintance with Metageometry.

  Finally, we discussed the question of absolute magnitude, and found in it

no logical obstacle to non-Euclidean spaces. Our conclusion, then, in so far aswe are as yet entitled to a conclusion, is that all spaces with a space-constant

are à priori justifiable, and that the decision between them must be the work

of experience. Spaces without a space-constant, on the other hand, spaces,

that is, which are not homogeneous throughout, we found logically unsound

and  impossible  to  know,  and  therefore  to  be  condemned à  priori.  The

constructive  proof  of  this  thesis  will  form  the  argument  of  the  following

chapter.

  FOOTNOTES:

  [67] The Critical Philosophy of Kant, Vol. I. p. 287.

  [68] For a discussion of Kant from a less purely mathematical standpoint,

see Chap. IV.

  [69] Cf. Vaihinger's Commentar, II. pp. 202, 265. Also p. 336 ff.

  [70]  E.g.  second  edition,  p.  39:  "So  werden  auch  alle  geometrischen

Grundsätze, z. B. dass in einem Triangel zwei Seiten zusammen grösser sind

als  die  dritte,  niemals  aus  allgemeinen  Begriffen  von  Linie  und  Triangel,

sondern aus der Anschauung, und zwar à priori mit apodiktischer Gewissheit

abgeleitet."

  [71] Cf. Bradley's Logic, Bk. III. Pt. I. Chap. VI.; Bosanquet's Logic, Bk.

I. Chap. I. pp. 97–103.

  [72] Philosophie de la Règle et du Compas, Année Philosophique, II. pp.

1–66.

  [73] I have stated this doctrine dogmatically, as a proof would require a

whole  treatise  on  Logic.  I  accept  the  proofs  offered  by  Bradley  and

Bosanquet, to which the reader is referred.

  [74] For a further discussion of this point, see Chaps. III. and IV.

  [75] See Chap. IV. for a discussion of this argument.

  [76] See Chap. IV. § 185.

  [77] An Otherness of substance, rather than of attribute, is here intended;

an  Otherness  which  may  perhaps  be  called  real  as  opposed  to  logical

diversity.

  [78] This proposition will be argued at length in Chap. IV.

  [79]  See  Psychologie  als  Wissenschaft,  I.  Section  III.  Chap.  VII.;  II.

Section I. Chap. III. and Section II. Chap. III. Compare also Synechologie,

Section I. Chaps. II. and III.

  [80]  On  the  influence  of  Herbart  on  Riemann,  compare  Erdmann,  Die

Axiome der Geometrie, p. 30.  [81]  I  do  not  mean  that  measurement  of  colours  is  effected  without

reference to their relations, since all measurement is essentially comparison.

But in colours, it is the elements which are compared, while in space, it is the

relations between elements.

  [82] For a discussion of this point, see Chap. III. Sec. B, § 176.

  [83]  The  works  of  Helmholtz  on  geometrical  philosophy  comprise,  in

addition to the articles quoted in Chap. I., the following articles: "Ursprung

und Sinn der geometrischen Axiome, gegen Land," Wiss. Abh. Vol. II. p.

640,  1878.  (Also  Mind,  Vol.  III.:  an  answer  to  Land  in  Mind,  Vol.  II.)

"Ursprung und Bedeutung der geometrischen Axiome," 1870, Vorträge und

Reden,  Vol.  II.  p.  1.  (Also  Mind,  Vol.  I.)  Two  Appendices  to  "Die

Thatsachen  in  der  Wahrnehmung,"  entitled:  II.  "Der  Raum  kann

transcendental  sein,  ohne  dass  es  die  Axiome  sind";  and  III.  "Die

Anwendbarkeit  der  Axiome  auf  die  physische  Welt,"  1878,  Vorträge  und

Reden, Vol. II. p. 256 ff.

  The two Appendices last mentioned are popularizings and expansions of

the article in Mind, Vol. III. The most widely read, though also, to my mind,

the least valuable, of all Helmholtz's writings on Geometry, is the article in

Mind, Vol. I. This contains the famous and much misunderstood analogies of

Flatland  and  Sphereland,  which  will  be  discussed,  and  as  far  as  possible

defended, in answering Lotze's attack on Metageometry—an attack based,

apparently,  almost  entirely  on  this  one  popular  article.  The  present

discussion, therefore, may be confined almost entirely to Mind, Vol. III., and

the philosophical portions of the two papers quoted in Chap. I., i.e. to the

articles in Wiss. Abh. Vol. II. pp. 610–660. His other works are popular, and

important only because of the large public to which they appeal.

  [84] In the answer to Land, Mind, Vol. III. and Wiss. Abh. II. p. 640.

  [85] See also Die Thatsachen in der Wahrnehmung, Zusatz II., Der Raum

kann transcendental sein, ohne dass es die Axiome sind. Vorträge und Reden,

Vol. II.

  [86] See below, criticism of Erdmann, § 84.

  [87] See Prof. Land, in Mind, Vol. II.

  [88] See concluding paragraph of Helmholtz's article in Mind, Vol. III.

  [89] Cf. Veronese, Grundzüge der Geometrie (German translation), p. ix.

Also pp. xxxiv, 304, and Note II. pp. 692–4.

  [90] See Chap. IV. § 197 ff.  [91] Cf. the opinion of Bolyai, quoted by Erdmann, Axiome, p. 26; cf. also

ib. p. 60.

  [92] Die Axiome der Geometrie: Eine philosophische Untersuchung der

Riemann-Helmholtz'schen Raumtheorie, Leipzig, 1877.

  [93] On the influence of Mill, cf. Stallo, Concepts of Modern Physics, p.

216.

  [94] This view seems to be derived, through Riemann, from Herbart. See

Psych. als Wiss. ed. Hart. Vol. V. p. 262.

  [95]  The  same  irreducibility  of  space  to  mere  magnitude  is  proved  by

Kant's hands and spherical triangles, in which a difference persists in spite of

complete quantitative equality.

  [96] See §§ 146–7.

  [97] "Jeder Versuch, Kant's Lehre von der Apriorität als des subjectiven,

von aller Erfahrung absolut unabhängigen Erkenntnissfactors, trotzdem zu

halten, ist deshalb von voruherein aussichtslos."

  [98] Ausdehnungslehre von 1844, 2nd edition, pp. xxii. xxiii.

  [99] See § 129 ff.

  [100] Metaphysik, Book II. Chap. II. My references are to the original.

  [101] See Lectures and Essays, Vol. I. p. 261.

  [102] On the meaning of geometrical possibility, cf. Veronese, Grundzüge

der Geometrie (German translation), pp. xi.-xiii.

  [103] Compare Calinon, "Sur l'Indétermination géométrique de l'Univers,"

Revue Philosophique, 1893, Vol. XXXVI. pp. 595–607.

  [104]  Vorträge  und  Reden,  Vol.  II.  p.  9:  "Parallele  Linien  würden  die

Bewohner  der  Kugel  gar  nicht  kennen.  Sie  würden  behaupten,  dass  jede

beliebige zwei geradeste Linien, gehörig verlangert, sich schliesslich nicht

nur in einem, sondern in zwei Punkten schneiden müssten." (The italics are

mine.)  The  omission  of straight  in  such  phrases  is  a  frequent  laxity  of

mathematicians.

  [105] It has been suggested to me that Lotze regards the meridians as

projected on to a plane, as in a map. If this be so, there is an obviously

illegitimate introduction of the third dimension.

  [106]  This  is  proved  by  Helmholtz's  remark  at  the  end  of  a  detailed

attempt to make spherical and pseudo-spherical spaces imaginable (l.c. p.

28): "Anders ist es mit den drei Dimensionen des Raumes. Da alle unsere

Mittel sinnlicher Anschauung sich nur auf einen Raum von drei Dimensionenerstrecken,  und  die  vierte  Dimension  nicht  bloss  eine  Abänderung  von

Vorhandenem, sondern etwas vollkommen Neues wäre, so befinden wir uns

schon  wegen  unserer  körperlichen  Organisation  in  der  absoluten

Unmöglichkeit,  uns  eine  Anschauungsweise  einer  vierten  Dimension

vorzustellen."

  [107] Cf. Grassmann, Ausdehnungslehre von 1844, 2nd Edition, p. xxiii.

  [108]  See  especially  Stallo,  Concepts  of  Modern  Physics,  International

Science Series, Vol. XLII. Chaps. XIII. and XIV.; Renouvier, "Philosophie

de la règle et du compas," Année Philosophique, II.; Delbœuf, "L'ancienne et

les nouvelles géométries," Revue Philosophique, Vols. XXXVI.-XXXIX.

  [109]  M.  Delbœuf  deserves  credit  for  having  based  Euclid,  already  in

1860, in his "Prolégomènes Philosophiques de la Géométrie," on this axiom

—certainly a better basis, at first sight, than the axiom of parallels.

  [110]  This  meaning  of  homogeneity  must  not  be  confounded  with  the

sense in which I have used the word. In Delbœuf's sense, it means that figures

may be similar though of different sizes; in my sense it means that figures

may be similar though in different places. This property of space is called by

Delbœuf isogeneity.

  [111] For a full proof of this proposition, see Chap. III.

  [112] See Chap. III., especially § 133.

  [113] For a criticism of this view, see the above discussions on Riemann

and Erdmann.

  [114] Cf. Couturat, "De l'Infini Mathématique," Paris, Félix Alcan, 1896,

p. 544.

  [115]  The  following  is  a  list  of  the  most  important  recent  French

philosophical writings on Geometry, so far as I am acquainted with them.

  Andrade: "Les bases expérimentales de la géométrie euclidienne"; Rev.

Phil. 1890, II., and 1891, I.

  Bonnel: "Les hypothèses dans la géométrie"; Gauthier-Villars, 1897.

  L'Abbé de Broglie: "La géométrie non-euclidienne," two articles; Annales

de Phil. Chrét. 1890.

  Calinon: "Les espaces géométriques"; Rev. Phil. 1889, I., and 1891, II.

"Sur l'indétermination géométrique de l'univers"; ib. 1893, II.

  Couturat:  "L'Année  Philosophique  de  F.  Pillon,"  Rev.  de  Mét.  et  de

Morale, Jan. 1893.

"Note sur la géométrie non-euclidienne et la relativité de l'espace"; ib., May,1893.

"Études sur l'espace et le temps," ib. Sep. 1896.

  Delbœuf:  "L'ancienne  et  les  nouvelles  géométries,"  four  articles;  Rev.

Phil. 1893–5.

  Lechalas: "La géométrie générale"; Crit. Phil. 1889.

"La géométrie générale et les jugements synthétiques à priori" and "Les bases

expérimentales de la géométrie"; Rev. Phil. 1890, II.

"M. Delbœuf et Le problème des mondes semblables"; ib. 1894, I.

"Note sur la géométrie non-euclidienne et le principe de similitude"; Rev. de

Mét. et de Morale, March, 1893.

"La courbure et la distance en géométrie générale"; ib., March, 1896.

"La géométrie générale et l'intuition"; Annales de Phil. Chrét., 1890.

"Etude sur l'espace et le temps"; Paris, Alcan, 1896.

  Liard: "Des définitions géométrie et des définitions empiriques," 2nd ed.;

Paris, Alcan, 1888.

  Mansion: "Premiers principes de la métagéométrie"; two articles in Rev.

Néo-Scholastique, 1896. Separately published, Gauthier-Villars, 1896.

  Milhaud: "La géométrie non-euclidienne et la théorie de la connaissance";

Rev. Phil. 1888, I.

  Poincaré: "Non-Euclidian Geometry"; Nature, Vol. XLV., 1891–2.

"L'espace et la géométrie"; Rev. de Mét. et de Morale, Nov. 1895.

"Résponse à quelques critiques," ib. Jan. 1897.

  Renouvier: "Philosophie de la règle et du compas"; Crit. Phil., 1889, and
                  me
L'Année Phil., II année, 1891.

  Sorel: "Sur la géométrie non-euclidienne"; Rev. Phil., 1891, I.

  Tannery: "Théorie de la connaissance mathématique"; Rev. Phil., 1894, II.

 
 
 

                                     CHAPTER III.

  Section A.


THE AXIOMS OF PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY.

  102.  Projective  Geometry  proper,  as  we  saw  in  Chapter  I.,  does  not

employ the conception of magnitude, and does not, therefore, require those

axioms which, in the systems of the second or metrical period, were required

solely to render possible the application of magnitude to space. But we saw,

also, that Cayley's reduction of metrical to projective properties was purely

technical and philosophically irrelevant. Now it is in metrical properties alone

—apart from the exception to the axiom of the straight line, which itself,
                                                    [116]
however,  presupposes  metrical  properties—that  non-Euclidean  and

Euclidean spaces differ. The properties dealt with by projective Geometry,

therefore, in so far as these are obtained without the use of imaginaries, are

properties  common  to  all  spaces.  Finally,  the  differences  which  appear

between  the  Geometries  of  different  spaces  of  the  same  curvature—e.g.

between the Geometries of the plane and the cylinder—are differences in
                        [117]
projective  properties.  Thus  the  necessity  which  arises,  in  metrical

Geometry,  for  further  qualifications  besides  those  of  constant  curvature,

disappears when our general space is defined by purely projective properties.

  103. We have good ground for expecting, therefore, that the axioms of

projective Geometry will be the simplest and most complete expression of the

indispensable requisites of any geometrical reasoning: and this expectation, I

hope, will not be disappointed. Projective Geometry, in so far as it deals only

with the properties common to all spaces, will be found, if I am not mistaken,

to be wholly à priori, to take nothing from experience, and to have, like

Arithmetic, a creature of the pure intellect for its object. If this be so, it is that

branch of pure mathematics which Grassmann, in his Ausdehnungslehre of

1844, felt to be possible, and endeavoured, in a brilliant failure, to construct

without any appeal to the space of intuition.

  104. But unfortunately, the task of discovering the axioms of projective

Geometry  is  far  from  easy.  They  have,  as  yet,  found  no  Riemann  or

Helmholtz  to  formulate  them  philosophically.  Many  geometers  have

constructed systems, which they intended to be, and which, with sufficient

care in interpretation, really are, free from metrical presuppositions. But thesepresuppositions are so rooted in all the very elements of Geometry, that the

task of eliminating them demands a reconstruction of the whole geometrical

edifice. Thus Euclid, for example, deals, from the start, with spatial equality

—he employs the circle, which is necessarily defined by means of equality,

and  he  bases  all  his  later  propositions  on  the  congruence  of  triangles  as
                        [118]
discussed in Book I. Before we can use any elementary proposition of

Euclid, therefore, even if this expresses a projective property, we have to

prove that the property in question can be deduced by projective methods.

This has not, in general, been done by projective geometers, who have too

often assumed, for example, that the quadrilateral construction—by which, as

we saw in Chap. I., they introduce projective coordinates—or anharmonic

ratio, which is primâ facie metrical, could be satisfactorily established on

their principles. Both these assumptions, however, can be justified, and we

may  admit,  therefore,  that  the  claims  of  projective  Geometry  to  logical

independence of measurement or congruence are valid. Let us see, then, how

it proceeds.

  105. In the first place, it is important to realize that when coordinates are

used,  in  projective  Geometry,  they  are  not  coordinates  in  the  ordinary

metrical sense, i.e. the numerical measures of certain spatial magnitudes. On

the contrary, they are a set of numbers, arbitrarily but systematically assigned

to different points, like the numbers of houses in a street, and serving only,

from a philosophical standpoint, as convenient designations for points which

the investigation wishes to distinguish. But for the brevity of the alphabet, in

fact, they might, as in Euclid, be replaced by letters. How they are introduced,

and what they mean, has been discussed in Chapter I. Here we have only to

repeat a caution, whose neglect has led to much misunderstanding.

  106. The distinction between various points, then, is not a result, but a

condition, of the projective coordinate system. The coordinate system is a

wholly extraneous, and merely convenient, set of marks, which in no way

touches the essence of projective Geometry. What we must begin with, in this

domain, is the possibility of distinguishing various points from one another.
                                                                                      [119]
This may be designated, with Veronese, as the first axiom of Geometry.

How we are to define a point, and how we distinguish it from other points, is

for the moment irrelevant; for here we only wish to discover the nature of

projective  Geometry,  and  the  kind  of  properties  which  it  uses  anddemonstrates.  How,  and  with  what  justification,  it  uses  and  demonstrates

them, we will discuss later.

  107. Now it is obvious that a mere collection of points, distinguished one

from  another,  cannot  found  a  Geometry:  we  must  have  some  idea  of  the

manner in which the points are interrelated, in order to have an adequate

subject-matter for discussion. But since all ideas of quantity are excluded, the

relations of points cannot be relations of distance in the ordinary sense, nor

even, in the sense of ordinary Geometry, anharmonic ratios, for anharmonic

ratios are usually defined as the ratios of four distances, or of four sines, and

are thus quantitative. But since all quantitative comparison presupposes an

identity  of  quality,  we  may  expect  to  find,  in  projective  Geometry,  the

qualitative substrata of the metrical superstructure.

  And this, we shall see, is actually the case. We have not distance, but we

have the straight line; we have not quantitative anharmonic ratio, but we have

the property, in any four points on a line, of being the intersections with the

rays of a given pencil. And from this basis, we can build up a qualitative

science  of  abstract  externality,  which  is  projective  Geometry.  How  this

happens, I shall now proceed to show.

  108. All geometrical reasoning is, in the last resort, circular: if we start by

assuming points, they can only be defined by the lines or planes which relate

them; and if we start by assuming lines or planes, they can only be defined by

the points through which they pass. This is an inevitable circle, whose ground

of necessity will appear as we proceed. It is, therefore, somewhat arbitrary to

start either with points or with lines, as the eminently projective principle of

duality  mathematically  illustrates;  nevertheless  we  will  elect,  with  most
                                  [120]
geometers, to start with points. We suppose, therefore, as our datum, a set

of discrete points, for the moment without regard to their interconnections.

But since connections are essential to any reasoning about them as a system,

we introduce, to begin with, the axiom of the straight line. Any two of our

points, we say, lie on a line which those two points completely define. This

line, being determined by the two points, may be regarded as a relation of the

two points, or an adjective of the system formed by both together. This is the

only purely qualitative adjective—as will be proved later—of a system of two

points.  Now  projective  Geometry  can  only  take  account  of  qualitative

adjectives,  and  can  distinguish  between  different  points  only  by  theirrelations to other points, since all points, per se, are qualitatively similar.

Hence  it  comes  that,  for  projective  Geometry,  when  two  points  only  are

given, they are qualitatively indistinguishable from any two other points on

the  same  straight  line,  since  any  two  such  other  points  have  the  same

qualitative  relation.  Reciprocally,  since  one  straight  line  is  a  figure

determined by any two of its points, and all points are qualitatively similar, it

follows that all straight lines are qualitatively similar. We may regard a point,

therefore, as determined by two straight lines which meet in it, and the point,

on this view, becomes the only qualitative relation between the two straight

lines. Hence, if the point only be regarded as given, the two straight lines are

qualitatively indistinguishable from any other pair through the point.

  109. The extension of these two reciprocal principles is the essence of all

projective  transformations,  and  indeed  of  all  projective  Geometry.  The

fundamental operations, by which figures are projectively transformed, are

called projection and section. The various forms of projection and section are

defined in Cremona's "Projective Geometry," Chapter I., from which I quote

the following account.

  "To project from a fixed point S (the centre of projection) a figure (ABCD

... abcd ...) composed of points and straight lines, is to construct the straight

lines or projecting rays SA, SB, SC, SD, ... and the planes (projecting planes)

Sa, Sb, Sc, Sd, ... We thus obtain a new figure composed of straight lines and

planes which all pass through the centre S.

  "To cut by a fixed plane σ (transversal plane) a figure (αβγδ ... abcd ...)

made up of planes and straight lines, is to construct the straight lines or traces
                                                              [121]
σα, σβ, σγ ... and the points or traces σa, σb, σc.... By this means we

obtain a new figure composed of straight lines and points lying in the plane σ.

  "To project from a fixed straight line s (the axis) a figure ABCD composed

of points, is to construct the planes sA, sB, sC.... The figure thus obtained is

composed of planes which all pass through the axis s.

  "To cut by a fixed straight line s (a transversal) a figure αβγδ ... composed

of planes, is to construct the points sα, sβ, sγ.... In this way a new figure is

obtained, composed of points all lying on the fixed transversal s.

  "If a figure is composed of straight lines a, b, c ... which all pass through a

fixed point or centre S, it can be projected from a straight line or axis s

passing through S; the result is a figure composed of planes sa, sb, sc....  "If a figure is composed of straight lines a, b, c ... all lying in a fixed

plane, it may be cut by a straight line (transversal) s lying in the same plane;

the figure which results is formed by the points sa, sb, sc...."

  110.  The  successive  application,  to  any  figure,  of  two  reciprocal

operations  of  projection  and  section,  is  regarded  as  producing  a  figure

protectively  indistinguishable  from  the  first,  provided  only  that  the

dimensions of the original figure were the same as those of the resulting

figure, that, for example, if the second operation be section by a plane, the

original figure shall have been a plane figure. The figures obtained from a

given figure, by projection or section alone, are related to that figure by the

principle of duality, of which we shall have to speak later on.

  I shall endeavour to show, in what follows, first, in what sense figures

obtained from each other by projective transformation are qualitatively alike;

secondly, what axioms, or adjectives of space, are involved in the principle of

projective transformation; and thirdly, that these adjectives must belong to

any form of externality with more than one dimension, and are, therefore, à

priori properties of any possible space.

  For  the  sake  of  simplicity,  I  shall  in  general  confine  myself  to  two

dimensions.  In  so  doing,  I  shall  introduce  no  important  difference  of

principle, and shall greatly simplify the mathematics involved.

  111. The two mathematically fundamental things in projective Geometry

are  anharmonic  ratio,  and  the  quadrilateral  construction.  Everything  else

follows mathematically from these two. Now what is meant, in projective

Geometry, by anharmonic ratio?

  If we start from anharmonic ratio as ordinarily defined, we are met by the
                                          [122]
difficulty of its quantitative nature. But among the properties deduced

from  this  definition,  many,  if  not  most,  are  purely  qualitative.  The  most

fundamental of these is that, if through any four points in a straight line we

draw four straight lines which meet in a point, and if we then draw a new

straight line meeting these four, the four new points of intersection have the

same anharmonic ratio as the four points we started with. Thus, in the figure,

abcd, a′b′c′d′, a″b″c″d″, all have the same anharmonic ratio. The reciprocal

relation holds for the anharmonic ratio of four straight lines. Here we have,

plainly, the required basis for a qualitative definition. The definition must be

as follows:  Two sets of four points each are defined as having the same anharmonic

ratio, when (1) each set of four lies in one straight line, and (2) corresponding

points of different sets lie two by two on four straight lines through a single
                                                                                [123]
point,  or  when  both  sets  have  this  relation  to  any  third  set.  And

reciprocally: Two sets of four straight lines are defined as having the same

anharmonic ratio when (1) each set of four passes through a single point, and

(2) corresponding lines of different sets pass, two by two, through four points

in one straight line, or when both sets have this relation to any third set.

  Two sets of points or of lines, which have the same anharmonic ratio, are

treated  by  projective  Geometry  as  equivalent:  this  qualitative  equivalence

replaces  the  quantitative  equality  of  metrical  Geometry,  and  is  obviously

included, by its definition, in the above account of projective transformations

in general.
                                                                          [124]
  112. We have next to consider the quadrilateral construction. This has

a  double  purpose:  first,  to  define  the  important  special  case  known  as  a

harmonic  range;  and  secondly,  to  afford  an  unambiguous  and  exhaustive

method of assigning different numbers to different points. This last method

has,  again,  a  double  purpose:  first,  the  purpose  of  giving  a  convenient

symbolism  for  describing  and  distinguishing  different  points,  and  of  thus

affording  a  means  for  the  introduction  of  analysis;  and  secondly,  of  so

assigning these numbers that, if they had the ordinary metrical significance,

as distances from some point on the numbered straight line, they would yield

–1 as the anharmonic ratio of a harmonic range, and that, if four points have

the same anharmonic ratio as four others, so have the corresponding numbers.

This last purpose is due to purely technical motives: it avoids the confusion

with  our  preconceptions  which  would  result  from  any  other  value  for  a

harmonic  range;  it  allows  us,  when  metrical  interpretations  of  projective

results are desired, to make these interpretations without tedious numerical

transformations, and it enables us to perform projective transformations by

algebraical methods. At the same time, from the strictly projective point of

view, as observed above, the numbers introduced have a purely conventional

meaning; and until we pass to metrical Geometry, no reason can be shown for

assigning the value –1 to a harmonic range. With this preliminary, let us see

in what the quadrilateral construction consists.

  113.  A  harmonic  range,  in  elementary  Geometry,  is  one  whoseanharmonic ratio is –1, or one in which the three segments formed by the four

points are in harmonic progression, or again, one in which the ratio of the two

internal segments is equal to the ratio of the two external segments. If a, b, c,

d be the four points, it is easily seen that these definitions are equivalent to

one another: they give respectively:




  But  as  they  are  all  quantitative,  they  cannot  be  used  for  our  present

purpose. Nor are any definitions which involve bisection of lines or angles

available. We must have a definition which proceeds entirely by the help of

straight lines and points, without measurement of distances or angles. Now

from the above definitions of a harmonic range, we see that a, b, c, d have the

same anharmonic ratio as c, b, a, d. This gives us the property we require for

our  definition.  For  it  shows  that,  in  a  harmonic  range,  we  can  find  a

projective transformation which will interchange a and c. This is a necessary

and  sufficient  condition  for  a  harmonic  range,  and  the  quadrilateral

construction is the general method for giving effect to it.

  Given  any  three  points A, B, D  in  one  straight  line,  the  quadrilateral

construction finds the point C harmonic to A with respect to B, D by the

following method: Take any point O outside the straight line ABD, and join it

to B and D. Through A draw any straight line cutting OD, OB in P and Q.

Join DQ, BP, and let them intersect in R. Join OR, and let OR meet ABD in C.

Then C is the point required.

  To prove this, let DRQ meet OA in T, and draw AR, meeting OD in S.

Then a projective transformation of A, B, C, D from R on to OD gives the

points S, P, O, D, which, projected from A on to DQ, give R, Q, T, D. But

these again, projected from O on to ABD, give C, B, A, D. Hence A, B, C, D

can  be  projectively  transformed  into C, B, A, D,  and  therefore  form  a

harmonic range. From this point, the proof that the construction is unique and
                          [125]
general follows simply.

 

  The introduction of numbers, by this construction, offers no difficulties of

principle—except,  indeed,  those  which  always  attend  the  application  of

number  to  continua—and  may  be  studied  satisfactorily  in  Klein's  Nicht-

Euklid (I. p. 337 ff.). The principle of it is, to assign the numbers 0, 1, ∞ to A,B, D and therefore the number 2 to C, in order that the differences AB, AC,

AD  may  be  in  harmonic  progression.  By  taking B, C, D  as  a  new  triad

corresponding to A, B, D, we find a point harmonic to B with respect to C, D

and assign to it the number 3, and so on. In this way, we can obtain any

number of points, and we are sure of having no number and no point twice

over,  so  that  our  coordinates  have  the  essential  property  of  a  unique

correspondence with the points they denote, and vice versa.

  114. The point of importance in the above construction, however, and the

reason  why  I  have  reproduced  it  in  detail,  is  that  it  proceeds  entirely  by

means of the general principles of transformation enunciated above. From

this stage onwards, everything is effected by means of the two fundamental

ideas  we  have  just  discussed,  and  everything,  therefore,  depends  on  our

general principle of projective equivalence. This principle, as regards two

dimensions,  may  be  stated  more  simply  than  in  the  passage  quoted  from

Cremona. It starts, in two dimensions, from the following definitions:

  To project the points A, B, C, D ... from a centre O, is to construct the

straight lines OA, OB, OC, OD....

  To cut a number of straight lines a, b, c, d ... by a transversal s, is to
                                        [126]
construct the points sa, sb, sc, sd....

  The successive application of these two operations, provided the original

figure consisted of points on one straight line or of straight lines through one

point, gives a figure projectively indistinguishable from the former figure;

and hence, by extension, if any points in one straight line in the original

figure  lie  in  one  straight  line  in  the  derived  figure,  and  reciprocally  for

straight  lines  through  points,  the  two  operations  have  given  projectively

similar figures. This general principle may be regarded as consisting of two

parts, according to the order of the operations: if we begin with projection

and end with section, we transform a figure of points into another figure of

points; by the converse order, we transform a figure of lines into another

figure of lines.

  115. Before we can be clear as to the meaning of our principle, we must

have some notion as to our definition of points and straight lines. But this

definition, in projective Geometry, cannot be given without some discussion

of the principle of duality, the mathematical form of the philosophical circle

involved in geometrical definitions.  Confining  ourselves  for  the  moment  to  two  dimensions,  the  principle

asserts,  roughly  speaking,  that  any  theorem,  dealing  with  lines  through  a

point and points on a line, remains true if these two terms, wherever they

occur, are interchanged. Thus: two points lie on one straight line which they

completely determine; and two straight lines meet in one point, which they

completely determine. The four points of intersection of a transversal with

four  lines  through  a  point  have  an  anharmonic  ratio  independent  of  the

particular transversal; and the four lines joining four points on one straight

line to a fifth point have an anharmonic ratio independent of that fifth point.

So also our general principle of projective transformation has two sides: one

in which points move along fixed lines, and one in which lines turn about

fixed points.

  This duality suggests that any definition of points must be effected by

means of the straight line, and any definition of the straight line must be

effected by means of points. When we take the third dimension into account,

it is true, the duality is no longer so simple; we have now to take account also

of the plane, but this only introduces a circle of three terms, which is scarcely

preferable to a circle of two terms. We now say: Three points, or a line and a

point, determine a plane: but conversely, three planes, or a line and plane,

determine a point. We may regard the straight line as a relation between two

of its points, but we may also regard the point as a relation between two

straight lines through it. We may regard the plane as a relation between three

points, or between a point and a line, but we may also regard the point as a

relation between three planes, or between a line and a plane, which meet in it.

 

  116.  How  are  we  to  get  outside  this  circle?  The  fact  is  that,  in  pure

Geometry, we cannot get outside it. For space, as we shall see more fully

hereafter, is nothing but relations; if, therefore, we take any spatial figure, and

seek  for  the  terms  between  which  it  is  a  relation,  we  are  compelled,  in

Geometry, to seek these terms within space, since we have nowhere else to

seek  them,  but  we  are  doomed,  since  anything  purely  spatial  is  a  mere

relation, to find our terms melting away as we grasp them.

  Thus the relativity of space, while it is the essence of the principle of

duality, at the same time renders impossible the expression of that principle,

or of any other principle of pure Geometry, in a manner which shall be free

from  contradictions.  Nevertheless,  if  we  are  to  advance  at  all  with  ouranalysis of geometrical reasoning and with our definitions of lines and points,

we must, for a while, ignore this contradiction; we must argue as though it

did not exist, so as to free our science from any contradictions which are not

inevitable.

  117. In accordance with this procedure, then, let us define our points as the

terms  of  spatial  relations,  regarding  whatever  is  not  a  point  as  a  relation

between  points.  What,  on  this  view,  must  our  points  be  taken  to  be?

Obviously, if extension is mere relativity, they must be taken to contain no

extension; but if they are to supply the terms for spatial relations, e.g. for

straight lines, these relations must exhibit them as the terms of the figures

they  relate.  In  other  words,  since  what  can  really  be  taken,  without

contradiction, as the term of a spatial relation, is unextended, we must take,

as the term to be used in Geometry, where we cannot go outside space, the

least spatial thing which Geometry can deal with, the thing which, though in
                                                                        [127]
space, contains no space; and this thing we define as the point.

  Neglecting, then, the fundamental contradiction in this definition, the rest

of our definitions follow without difficulty. The straight line is the relation

between  two  points,  and  the  plane  is  the  relation  between  three.  These

definitions  will  be  argued  and  defended  at  length  in  section  B  of  this
        [128]
Chapter, where we can discuss at the same time the alternative metrical

definitions; for our present purpose, it is sufficient to observe that projective

Geometry,  from  the  first,  regards  the  straight  line  as  determined  by  two

points, and the plane as determined by three, from which it follows, if we

take points as possible terms for spatial relations, that the straight line and the

plane may be regarded as relations between two and three points respectively.

If we agree on these definitions, we can proceed to discuss the fundamental

principle of projective Geometry, and to analyse the axioms implicated in its

truth.

  118. Projective Geometry, we have seen, does not deal with quantity, and

therefore recognizes no difference where the difference is purely quantitative.

Now quantitative comparison depends on a recognized identity of quality; the

recognition of qualitative identity, therefore, is logically prior to quantity, and

presupposed  by  every  judgment  of  quantity.  Hence  all  figures,  whose

differences  can  be  exhaustively  described  by  quantity, i.e.  by  pure

measurement, must have an identity of quality, and this must be recognizablewithout appeal to quantity. It follows that, by defining the word quality in

geometrical matters, we shall discover what sets of figures are projectively

indiscernible.  If  our  definition  is  correct,  it  ought  to  yield  the  general

projective principle with which we set out.

  119. We agreed to regard points as the terms of spatial relations, and we

agreed that different points could be distinguished. But we postponed the

discussion of the conditions under which this distinction could be effected.

This discussion will yield us the definition of quality and the proof of our

general projective principle.

  Points,  to  begin  with,  have  been  defined  as  nothing  but  the  terms  for

spatial  relations.  They  have,  therefore,  no  intrinsic  properties;  but  are

distinguished solely by means of their relations. Now the relation between

two points, we said, is the straight line on which they lie. This gives that

identity of quality for all pairs of points on the same straight line, which is

required both by our projective principle and by metrical Geometry. (For

only where there is identity of quality can quantity be properly applied.) If

only  two  points  are  given,  they  cannot,  without  the  use  of  quantity,  be

distinguished from any two other points on the same straight line; for the

qualitative  relation  between  any  two  such  points  is  the  same  as  for  the

original pair, and only by a difference of relation can points be distinguished

from one another.

  But conversely, one straight line is nothing but the relation between two of

its points, and all points are qualitatively alike. Hence there can be nothing to

distinguish one straight line from another except the points through which it

passes, and these are distinguished from other points only by the fact that it

passes through them. Thus we get the reciprocal transformation: if we are

given  only  one  point,  any  pair  of  straight  lines  through  that  point  is

qualitatively indistinguishable from any other. This again is, on the one hand,

the basis of the second part of our general projective principle, and on the

other hand the condition of applying quantity, in the measurement of angles,

to the departure of two intersecting straight lines.

  120. We can now see the reason for what may have hitherto seemed a

somewhat arbitrary fact, namely, the necessity of four collinear points for

anharmonic  ratio.  Recurring  to  the  quadrilateral  construction  and  the

consequent  introduction  of  number,  we  see  that  anharmonic  ratio  is  an

intrinsic  projective  relation  of  four  collinear  points  or  concurrent  straightlines, such that given three terms and the relation, the fourth term can be

uniquely  determined  by  projective  methods.  Now  consider  first  a  pair  of

points.  Since  all  straight  lines  are  projectively  equivalent,  the  relation

between one pair of points is precisely equivalent to that between another

pair. Given one point only, therefore, no projective relation, to any second

point, can be assigned, which shall in any way limit our choice of the second

point. Given two points, however, there is such a relation—the third point

may  be  given  collinear  with  the  first  two.  This  limits  its  position  to  one

straight line, but since two points determine nothing but one straight line, the

third point cannot be further limited. Thus we see why no intrinsic projective

relation can be found between three points, which shall enable us, from two,

uniquely to determine the third. With three given collinear points, however,

we  have  more  given  than  a  mere  straight  line,  and  the  quadrilateral

construction enables us uniquely to determine any number of fresh collinear

points. This shows why anharmonic ratio must be a relation between four

points, rather than between three.

  121. We can now prove, I think, that two figures, which are projectively

related, are qualitatively similar. Let us begin with a collection of points on a

straight line. So long as these are considered without reference to other points

or figures, they are all qualitatively similar. They can be distinguished by

immediate intuition, but when we endeavour, without quantity, to distinguish

them conceptually, we find the task impossible, since the only qualitative

relation of any two of them, the straight line, is the same for any other two.

But now let us choose, at hap-hazard, some point outside the straight line.

The points of our line now acquire new adjectives, namely their relations to

the new point, i.e. the straight lines joining them to this new point. But these

straight lines, reciprocally, alone define our external point, and all straight

lines are qualitatively similar. If we take some other external point, therefore,

and join it to the same points of our original straight line, we obtain a figure

in which, so long as quantity is excluded, there is no conceptual difference

from the former figure. Immediate intuition can distinguish the two figures,

but  qualitative  discrimination  cannot  do  so.  Thus  we  obtain  a  projective

transformation  of  four  lines  into  four  other  lines,  as  giving  a  figure

qualitatively indistinguishable from the original figure. A similar argument

applies to the other projective transformations. Thus the only reason, within

projective  Geometry,  for  not  regarding  projective  figures  as  actuallyidentical,  is  the  intuitive  perception  of  difference  of  position.  This  is

fundamental,  and  must  be  accepted  as  a datum.  It  is  presupposed  in  the

distinction of various points, and forms the very life of Geometry. It is, in

fact, the essence of the notion of a form of externality, which notion forms

the subject-matter of projective Geometry.

  122.  We  may  now  sum  up  the  results  of  our  analysis  of  projective

Geometry, and state the axioms on which its reasoning is based. We shall

then have to prove that these axioms are necessary to any form of externality,

with which we shall pass, from mere analysis, to a transcendental argument.

  The axioms which have been assumed in the above analysis, and which, it

would seem, suffice to found projective Geometry, may be roughly stated as

follows:

  I. We can distinguish different parts of space, but all parts are qualitatively

similar, and are distinguished only by the immediate fact that they lie outside

one another.

  II.  Space  is  continuous  and  infinitely  divisible;  the  result  of  infinite
                                                      [129]
division, the zero of extension, is called a point.

  III. Any two points determine a unique figure, called a straight line, any

three in general determine a unique figure, the plane. Any four determine a

corresponding figure of three dimensions, and for aught that appears to the

contrary, the same may be true of any number of points. But this process

comes  to  an  end,  sooner  or  later,  with  some  number  of  points  which

determine the whole of space. For if this were not the case, no number of

relations of a point to a collection of given points could ever determine its
                                                                            [130]
relation to fresh points, and Geometry would become impossible.

  This  statement  of  the  axioms  is  not  intended  to  have  any  exclusive

precision: other statements equally valid could easily be made. For all these

axioms, as we shall see hereafter, are philosophically interdependent, and

may, therefore, be enunciated in many ways. The above statement, however,

includes, if I am not mistaken, everything essential to projective Geometry,

and everything required to prove the principle of projective transformation.

Before  discussing  the  apriority  of  these  axioms,  let  us  once  more  briefly

recapitulate the ends which they are intended to attain.

  123.  From  the  exclusively  mathematical  standpoint,  as  we have  seen,

projective Geometry discusses only what figures can be obtained from eachother by projective transformations, i.e. by the operations of projection and

section. These operations, in all their forms, presuppose the point, straight
                [131]
line, and plane, whose necessity for projective Geometry, from the purely

mathematical  point  of  view,  is  thus  self-evident  from  the  start.  But

philosophically, projective Geometry has, as we saw, a wider aim. This wider

aim, which gives, to the investigation of projectively equivalent figures, its

chief  importance,  consists  in  the  determination  of  qualitative  spatial

similarity, in the determination, that is, of all the figures which, when any one

figure  is  given,  can  be  distinguished  from  the  given  figure,  so  long  as

quantity is excluded, only by the mere fact that they are external to it.

  124. Now when we consider what is involved in such absolute qualitative

equivalence, we find at once, as its most obvious prerequisite, the perfect

homogeneity  of  space.  For  it  is  assumed  that  a  figure  can  be  completely

defined  by  its  internal  relations,  and  that  the  external  relations,  which

constitute its position, though they suffice to distinguish it from other figures,

in no way affect its internal properties, which are regarded as qualitatively

identical with those of figures with quite different external relations. If this

were not the case, anything analogous to projective transformation would be

impossible.  For  such  transformation  always  alters  the  position, i.e.  the

external  relations,  of  a  figure,  and  could  not,  therefore,  if  figures  were

dependent on their relations to other figures or to empty space, be studied

without reference to other figures, or to the absolute position of the original

figure. We require for our principle, in short, what may be called the mutual

passivity and reciprocal independence of two parts or figures of space.

  This passivity and this independence involve the homogeneity of space, or

its equivalent, the relativity of position. For if the internal properties of a

figure are the same, whatever its external relations may be, it follows that all

parts of space are qualitatively similar, since a change of external relation is a

change in the part of space occupied. It follows, also, that all position is

relative and extrinsic, i.e., that the position of a point, or the part of space

occupied by a figure, is not, and has no effect upon, any intrinsic property of

the point or figure, but is exclusively a relation to other points or figures in

space, and remains without effect except where such relations are considered.

  125. The homogeneity of space and the relativity of position, therefore, are

presupposed  in  the  qualitative  spatial  comparison  with  which  projectiveGeometry deals. The latter, as we saw, is also the basis of the principle of

duality. But these properties, as I shall now endeavour to prove, belong of

necessity to any form of externality, and are thus à priori properties of all

possible spaces. To prove this, however, we must first define the notion of a

form of externality in general.

  Let us observe, to begin with, that the distinction between Euclidean and

non-Euclidean  Geometries,  so  important  in  metrical  investigations,

disappears  in  projective  Geometry  proper.  This  suggests  that  projective

Geometry, though originally invented as the science of Euclidean space, and

subsequently  of  non-Euclidean  spaces  also,  deals  really  with  a  wider

conception, a conception which includes both, and neglects the attributes in

which they differ. This conception I shall speak of as a form of externality.

  126.  In  Grassmann's  profound  philosophical  introduction  to  his

Ausdehnungslehre of 1844, he suggested that Geometry, though improperly

regarded as pure, was really a branch of applied mathematics, since it dealt

with a subject-matter not created, like number, by the intellect, but given to it,

and therefore not wholly subject to its laws alone. But it must be possible—

so he contended—to construct a branch of pure mathematics, a science, that

is, in which our object should be wholly a creature of the intellect, which

should yet deal, as Geometry does, with extension—extension as conceived,

however, not as empirically perceived in sensation or intuition.

  From  this  point  of  view,  the  controversy  between  Kantians  and  anti-

Kantians becomes wholly irrelevant, since the distinction between pure and

mixed mathematics does not lie in the distinction between the subjective and

the  objective,  but  between  the  purely  intellectual  on  the  one  hand,  and

everything else on the other. Now Kant had contended, with great emphasis,

that  space  was  not  an  intellectual  construction,  but  a  subjective  intuition.

Geometry,  therefore,  with  Grassmann's  distinction,  belongs  to  mixed

mathematics  as  much  on  Kant's  view  as  on  that  of  his  opponents.  And

Grassmann's distinction, I contend, is the more important for Epistemology,

and the one to be adopted in distinguishing the à priori from the empirical.

For  what  is  merely  intuitional  can  change,  without  upsetting  the  laws  of

thought, without making knowledge formally impossible: but what is purely

intellectual cannot change, unless the laws of thought should change, and all

our knowledge simultaneously collapse. I shall therefore follow Grassmann's

distinction  in  constructing  an à  priori  and  purely  conceptual  form  ofexternality.

  127. The pure doctrine of extension, as constructed by Grassmann, need

not  be  discussed—it  included  much  empirical  material,  and  was

philosophically a failure. But his principles, I think, will enable us to prove

that  projective  Geometry,  abstractly  interpreted,  is  the  science  which  he

foresaw,  and  deals  with  a  matter  which  can  be  constructed  by  the  pure

intellect alone. If this be so, however, it must be observed that projective
                                                                    [132]
Geometry, for the moment, is rendered purely hypothetical. All necessary
                                                      [133]
truth, as Bradley has shown, is hypothetical, and asserts, primâ facie,

only the ground on which rests the necessary connection of premisses and

conclusion.  If  we  construct  a  mere  conception  of  externality,  and  thus

abandon our actually given space, the result of our construction, until we

return to something actually given, remains without existential import—if

there be  experienced  externality,  it  asserts,  then  there  must  be  a  form  of

externality with such and such properties. That there must be experienced

externality, Kant's first argument about space proves, I think, to those who

admit experience of a world of diverse but interrelated things. But this is a

question which belongs to the next Chapter.

  What we have to do here is, not to discuss whether there is a form of

externality,  but  whether,  if  there  be  such  a  form,  it  must  possess  the

properties embodied in the axioms of projective Geometry. Now first of all,

what do we mean by such a form?

  128. In any world in which perception presents us with various things,

with discriminated and differentiated contents, there must be, in perception,
                                                [134]
at least one "principle of differentiation," an element, that is, by which

the  things  presented  are  distinguished  as  various.  This  element,  taken  in

isolation, and abstracted from the content which it differentiates, we may call

a form of externality. That it must, when taken in isolation, appear as a form,

and not as a mere diversity of material content, is, I think, fairly obvious. For

a  diversity  of  material  content  cannot  be  studied  apart  from  that  material

content; what we wish to study here, on the contrary, is the bare possibility of
                                                                                      [135]
such diversity, which forms the residuum, as I shall try to prove hereafter,

when  we  abstract  from  any  sense-perception  all  that  is  distinctive  of  its

particular matter. This possibility, then, this principle of bare diversity, is our

form of externality. How far it is necessary to assume such a form, as distinct                                                          [136]
from interrelated things, I shall consider later on. For the present, since

space, as dealt with by Geometry, is certainly a form of this kind, we have

only to ask: What properties must such a form, when studied in abstraction,

necessarily possess?

  129. In the first place, externality is an essentially relative conception—

nothing can be external to itself. To be external to something is to be another

with  some  relation  to  that  thing.  Hence,  when  we  abstract  a  form  of

externality from all material content, and study it in isolation, position will

appear,  of necessity,  as  purely  relative—a  position  can  have  no  intrinsic

quality, for our form consists of pure externality, and externality contains no

shadow  or  trace  of  an  intrinsic  quality.  Thus  we  obtain  our  fundamental

postulate,  the  relativity  of  position,  or,  as  we  may  put  it,  the  complete

absence, on the part of our form, of any vestige of thinghood.

  The  same  argument  may  also  be  stated  as  follows:  If  we  abstract  the

conception of externality, and endeavour to deal with it per se, it is evident

that we must obtain an object alike destitute of elements and of totality. For

we have abstracted from the diverse matter which filled our form, while any

element, or any whole, would retain some of the qualities of a matter. Either

an element or a whole, in fact, would have to be a thing not external to itself,

and would thus contain something not pure externality. Hence arise infinite

divisibility, with the self-contradictory notion of the point, in the search for

elements,  and  unbounded  extension,  with  the  contradiction  of  an  infinite

regress or a vicious circle, in the search for a completed whole. Thus again,

our form contains neither elements nor totality, but only endless relations—

the terms of these relations being excluded by our abstraction from the matter

which fills our form.

  130. In like manner we can deduce the homogeneity of our form. The

diversity of content, which was possible only within the form of externality,

has been abstracted from, leaving nothing but the bare possibility of diversity,

the bare principle of differentiation, itself uniform and undifferentiated. For if

diversity presupposes such a form, the form cannot, unless it were contained

in a fresh form, be itself diverse or differentiated.

  Or we may deduce the same property from the relativity of position. For

any quality in one position, by which it was marked out from another, would

be necessarily more or less intrinsic, and would contradict the pure relativity.Hence  all  positions  are  qualitatively  alike, i.e.  the  form  is  homogeneous

throughout.

  131. From what has been said of homogeneity and relativity, follows one

of the strangest properties of a form of externality. This property is, that the

relation of externality between any two things is infinitely divisible, and may

be regarded, consequently, as made up of an infinite number of the would-be
                                                                                      [137]
elements of our form, or again as the sum of two relations of externality.

To speak of dividing or adding relations may well sound absurd—indeed it

reveals the impropriety of the word relation in this connexion. It is difficult,

however, to find an expression which shall be less improper. The fact seems

to be, that externality is not so much a relation as bare relativity, or the bare
                                                                                  [138]
possibility of a relation. On this subject, I shall enlarge in Chapter IV. At

this point it is only important to realize, what the subsequent argument will

assume, that the relation—if we may so call it—of externality between two or

more things must, since our form is homogeneous, be capable of continuous

alteration, and must, since our infinitely divisible form is constituted by such

relations, be capable of infinite division. But the result of infinite division is

defined as the element of our form. (Our form has no elements, but we have

to imagine elements in order to reason about it, as will be shown more fully

in Chapter IV.) Hence it follows, that every relation of externality may be

regarded, for scientific purposes, as an infinite congeries of elements, though

philosophically, the relations alone are valid, and the elements are a self-

contradictory  result  of  hypostatizing  the  form  of  externality.  This  way  of

regarding relations of externality is important in understanding the meaning

of such ideas as three or four collinear points.

  As this point is difficult and important, I will repeat, in somewhat greater

detail, the explanation of the manner in which straight lines and planes come

to be regarded as congeries of points. From the strictly projective standpoint,

though all other figures are merely a collection of any required number of

points, lines or planes, given by some projective construction, straight lines

and planes themselves are given integrally, and are not to be considered as

divisible or composed of parts. To say that a point lies on a straight line

means,  for  projective  Geometry  proper,  that  the  straight  line  is  a  relation

between  this  and  some  other  point.  Here  the  points  concerned,  if  our

statement is to be freed from contradictions, must be regarded, if I may use                                                                                      [139]
such an expression, as real points—i.e. as unextended material centres.

Straight lines and planes are then relations between these material atoms.

They are relations, however, which may undergo a metrical alteration while

remaining projectively unchanged. When the projective relation between the

two points A, B is the same as that between the two points A, C, while the

metrical relation (distance) is different, the three points A, B, C are said to be

collinear. Now the metrical manner of regarding spatial figures demands that

they should be hypostatized, and no longer regarded as mere relations. For

when  we  regard  a  quantity  as  extensive, i.e.  as  divisible  into  parts,  we

necessarily regard it as more than a mere relation or adjective, since no mere

relation  or  adjective  can  be  divided.  For  quantitative  treatment,  therefore,
                                            [140]
spatial relations must be hypostatized. When this is done, we obtain, as

we saw above, a homogeneous and infinitely divisible form of externality.

We find now that distance, for example, may be continuously altered without

changing the straight line on which it is measured. We thus obtain, on the

straight  line  in  question,  a  continuous  series  of  points,  which,  since  it  is

continuous, we regard as constituting our straight line. It is thus solely from

the  hypostatizing  of  relations,  which  metrical  Geometry  requires,  that  the

view of straight lines and planes as composed of points arises, and it is from

this hypostatizing that the difficulties of metrical Geometry spring.

  132. The next step, in defining a form of externality, is obtained from the

idea  of dimensions.  Positions,  we  have  seen,  are  defined  solely  by  their

relations to other positions. But in order that such definition may be possible,

a  finite  number  of  relations  must  suffice,  since  infinite  numbers  are

philosophically  inadmissible.  A  position  must  be  definable,  therefore,  if

knowledge of our form is to be possible at all, by some finite integral number

of relations to other positions. Every relation thus necessary for definition we

call a dimension. Hence we obtain the proposition: Any form of externality

must have a finite integral number of dimensions.

  133. The above argument, it may be urged, has overlooked a possibility. It

has used a transcendental argument, so an opponent may contend, without

sufficiently  proving  that  knowledge  about  externality  must  be  possible

without reference to the matters external to each other. The definition of a

position may be impossible, so long as we neglect the matter which fills the

form, but may become possible when this matter is taken into account. Suchan objection can, I think, be successfully met, by a reference to the passivity

and homogeneity of our form. For any dependence of the definition of a

position on the particular matter filling that position, would involve some

kind of interaction between the matter and its position, some effect of the

diverse  content  on  the  homogeneous  form.  But  since  the  form  is  totally

destitute of thinghood, perfectly impassive, and perfectly void of differences

between its parts, any such effect is inconceivable. An effect on a position

would have to alter it in some way, but how could it be altered? It has no

qualities except those which make it the position it is, as opposed to other

positions; it cannot change, therefore, without becoming a different position.

But such a change contradicts the law of identity. Hence it is not the position

which has changed, but the content which has moved in the form. Thus it

must be possible, if knowledge of our form can be obtained at all, to obtain

this knowledge in logical independence of the particular matter which fills it.

The above argument, therefore, granted the possibility of knowledge in the

department in question, shows the necessity of a finite integral number of

dimensions.

  134. Let us repeat our original argument in the light of this elucidation. A

position is completely defined when, and only when, enough relations are

known to enable us to determine its relation to any fresh known position.

Only by relations within the form of externality, as we have just seen, and

never by relations which involve a reference to the particular matter filling

the form, can such a definition be effected. But the possibility of such a

definition  follows  from  the  Law  of  Excluded  Middle,  when  this  law  is

interpreted to mean, as Bosanquet makes it mean, that "Reality ... is a system
                                        [141]
of  reciprocally  determinate  parts."  For  this  implies  that,  given  the

relations of a part A to other parts B, C ..., a sufficient wealth of such relations

throws light on the relations of B to C, etc. If this were not the case, the parts

A, B, C ... could not be said to form such a system; for in such a system, to

define A is to define, at the same time, all the other members, and to give an

adjective to A, is to give an adjective to B and C. But the relations between

positions  are,  when  we  restore  the  matter  from  which  the  positions  were

abstracted, relations between the things occupying those positions, and these

relations, we have seen, can be studied without reference to the particular

nature, in other respects, of the related things. It follows that, when we applythe general principle of systematic unity to these relations in particular, we

find  these  relations  to  be  dependent  on  each  other,  since  they  are  not

dependent, for their definition, on anything else. This gives the axiom of

dimensions,  in  the  above  general  form,  as  the  result,  on  our  abstract

geometrical level, of the relativity of position and the law of excluded middle.

  135. Before proceeding further, it is necessary to discuss the important

special case where a form of externality has only one dimension. Of the two

such forms, given in experience, one, namely time, presents an instance of

this  special  case.  But  it  may  be  shown,  I  think,  that  the  function,  in

constituting the possibility of experience, which we demand of such forms,

could not be accomplished by a one-dimensional form alone. For in a one-

dimensional  form,  the  various  contents  may  be  arranged  in  a  series,  and

cannot, without interpenetration, change the order of contents in the series.

But interpenetration is impossible, since a form of externality is the mere

expression  of  diversity  among  things,  from  which  it  follows  that  things

cannot occupy the same position in a form, unless there is another form by
                                                                                      [142]
which to differentiate them. For without externality, there is no diversity.

Thus two bodies may occupy the same space, but only at different times: two

things may exist simultaneously, but only at different places. A form of one

dimension, therefore, could not, by itself, allow that change of the relations of

externality,  by  which  alone  a  varied  world  of  interrelated  things  can  be

brought into consciousness. In a one-dimensional space, for example, only a

single object, which must appear as a point, or two objects at most, one in

front and one behind, could ever be perceived. Thus two or more dimensions

seem  an  essential  condition  of  anything  worth  calling  an  experience  of

interrelated things.

  136. It may be objected, to this argument, that its validity depends upon

the  assumption  that  the  change  of  a  relation  of  externality  must  be

continuous. Both to make and to meet this objection, in a manner which shall

not imply time, seems almost impossible. For we cannot speak of change,

whether continuous or discrete, without imagining time. Let us, therefore,

allow time to be known, and discuss whether the temporal change, in any
                                                              [143]
other form of externality, is necessarily continuous. We must reply, I

think,  that  continuity  is  necessary.  The  change  of  relation,  in  our  non-

temporal form, may be safely described as motion, and the law of Causality—since we have already assumed time—may be applied to this motion. It

then  follows  that  discrete  motion  would  involve  a  finite  effect  from  an

infinitesimal cause, for a cause acting only for a moment of time would be

infinitesimal. It involves, also, a validity in the point of time, whereas what is

valid  in  any  form  of  externality  is  not,  as  we  have  already  seen,  the

infinitesimal and self-contradictory element resulting from infinite division,

but the finite relation which mathematics analyzes into vanishing elements.

Hence change must be continuous, and the possibility of serial arrangement

holds good.

  In a one-dimensional form other than time, the same argument must hold.

For something analogous to Causality would be necessary to experience, and

the relativity of the form would still necessarily hold. Hence, since only these

two  properties  of  time  have  been  assumed,  the  above  contention  would

remain valid of any second form whose relations were correlated with those

of the first, as the analogue of Causality would require them to be.

  137.  The  next  step  in  the  argument,  which  assumes  two  or  more

dimensions, is concerned with the general analogues of straight lines and

planes, i.e. with figures—which may be regarded either as relations between

positions or as series of positions—uniquely determined by two or by three

positions. If this step can be successfully taken, our deduction of the above

projective  axioms  will  be  complete,  and  descriptive  Geometry  will  be

established as the abstract à priori doctrine of forms of externality.

  To prove this contention, consider of what nature the relations can be by

which positions are defined. We have seen already that our form is purely

relational  and  infinitely  divisible,  and  that  positions  (points)  are  the  self-

contradictory outcome of the search for something other than relations. What

we really mean, therefore, by the relations defining a position, is, when we

undo our previous abstraction, the relations of externality by which some

thing is related to other things. But how, when we remain in the abstract

form, must such relations appear?

  138. We have to prove that two positions must have a relation independent

of any reference to other positions. To prove this, let us recur to what was

said, in connection with dimensions, as to the passivity and homogeneity of

our  form.  Since  positions  are  defined  only  by  relations,  there  must  be

relations, within the form, between positions. But if there are such relations,

there must be a relation which is intrinsic to two positions. For to suppose thecontrary, is to attribute an interaction or causal connection, of some kind,

between those two positions and other positions—a supposition which the

perfect  homogeneity  of  our  form  renders  absurd,  since  all  positions  are

qualitatively similar, and cannot be changed without losing their identity. We

may  put  this  argument  thus:  since  positions  are  only  defined  by  their

relations, such definition could never begin, unless it began with a relation

between  only  two  positions.  For  suppose  three  positions A, B, C  were

necessary, and gave rise to the relation abc between the three. Then there

would remain no means of defining the different pairs BC, CA, AB, since the

only relation defining them would be one common to all three pairs. Nothing

would be gained, in this case, by reference to fresh points, for it follows, from

the homogeneity and passivity of the form, that these fresh points could not

affect the internal relations of our triad, which relations, if they can give

definiteness at all, must give it without the aid of external reference. Two

positions must, therefore, if definition is to be possible, have some relation

which  they  by  themselves  suffice  to  define.  Precisely  the  same  argument

applies to three positions, or to four; the argument loses its scope only when

we have exhausted the dimensions of the form considered. Thus, in three

dimensions, five positions have no fresh relation, not deducible from those

already known, for by the definition of dimensions, all the relations involved

can be deduced from those of the fourth point to the first three, together with

those of the fifth to the first three.

  We  may  give  the  argument  a  more  concrete,  and  perhaps  a  more

convincing shape, by considering the matter arranged in our form. If two

things are mutually external, they must since they belong to the same world,

have some relation of externality; there is, therefore, a relation of externality

between two things. But since our form is homogeneous, the same relation of

externality may subsist in other parts of the form, i.e. while the two things

considered alter their relations of externality to other things. The relation of

externality  between  two  things  is,  therefore,  independent  of  other  things.

Hence, when we return to the abstract language of the form, two positions

have a relation determined by those two positions alone, and independent of

other positions.

  Precisely the same argument applies to the relations of three positions, and

in each case the relation must appear in the form as not a mere inference from

the positions it relates. For relations, as we have seen, actually constitute aform  of  externality,  and  are  not  mere  inferences  from  terms,  which  are
                                    [144]
nowhere to be found in the form.

 

  To  sum  up:  Since  position  is  relative,  two  positions  must  have some

relation to each other; and since our form of externality is homogeneous, this

relation can be kept unchanged while the two positions change their relations

to other positions. Hence their relation is intrinsic, and independent of other

positions.  Since  the  form  is  a  mere  complex  of  relations,  the  relation  in

question  must,  if  the  form  is  sensuous  or  intuitive,  be  itself  sensuous  or

intuitive, and not a mere inference. In this case, a unique relation must be a

unique figure—in spatial terms, the straight line joining the two points.

  139. With this, our deduction of projective Geometry from the à priori

conceptual properties of a form of externality is completed. That such a form,

when  regarded  as  an  independent  thing,  is  self-contradictory,  has  been

abundantly evident throughout the discussion. But the science of the form has

been founded on the opposite way of regarding it: we have held it throughout

to  be  a  mere  complex  of  relations,  and  have  deduced  its  properties

exclusively from this view of it. The many difficulties, in applying such an à

priori deduction to intuitive space, and in explaining, as logical necessities,

properties which appear as sensuous or intuitional data, must be postponed to

Chapter IV. For the present, I wish to point out that projective Geometry is

wholly à priori; that it deals with an object whose properties are logically

deduced from its definition, not empirically discovered from data; that its

definition, again, is founded on the possibility of experiencing diversity in

relation, or multiplicity in unity; and that our whole science, therefore, is

logically implied in, and deducible from, the possibility of such experience.

  140. In metrical Geometry, on the contrary, we shall find a very different

result.  Although  the  geometrical  conditions  which  render  spatial

measurement possible, will be found identical, except for slight differences in

the form of statement, with the à priori  axioms  discussed  above,  yet  the

actual measurement—which deals with actually given space, not the mere

intellectual construction we have been just discussing—gives results which

can only be known empirically and approximately, and can be deduced by no

necessity  of  thought.  The  Euclidean  and  non-Euclidean  spaces  give  the

various results which are à priori possible; the axioms peculiar to Euclid—

which  are  properly  not  axioms,  but  empirical  results  of  measurement—determine,  within  the  errors  of  observation,  which  of  these à  priori

possibilities  is  realized  in  our  actual  space.  Thus  measurement  deals

throughout  with  an  empirically  given  matter,  not  with  a  creature  of  the

intellect, and its à priori elements are only the conditions presupposed in the

possibility of measurement. What these conditions are, we shall see in the

second section of this chapter.

 

  Section B.


THE AXIOMS OF METRICAL GEOMETRY.

  141. We have now reviewed the axioms of projective Geometry, and have

seen that they are à priori deductions from the fact that we can experience

externality, i.e. a coexistent multiplicity of different but interrelated things.

But projective Geometry, in spite of its claims, is not the whole science of

space, as is sufficiently proved by the fact that it cannot discriminate between
                                                [145]
Euclidean  and  non-Euclidean  spaces.  For  this  purpose,  spatial

measurement is required: metrical Geometry, with its quantitative tests, can

alone effect the discrimination. For all application of Geometry to physics,

also, measurement is required; the law of gravitation, for example, requires

the determination of actual distances. For many purposes, in short, projective

Geometry  is  wholly  insufficient:  thus  it  is  unable  to  distinguish  between

different  kinds  of  conics,  though  their  distinction  is  of  fundamental

importance in many departments of knowledge.

 

  Metrical Geometry is, then, a necessary part of the science of space, and a

part not included in descriptive Geometry. Its à priori element, nevertheless,

so far as this is spatial and not arithmetical, is the same as the postulate of

projective Geometry, namely, the homogeneity of space, or its equivalent, the

relativity of position. We can see, in fact, that the à priori element in both is

likely to be the same. For the à priori in metrical Geometry will be whatever

is presupposed in the possibility of spatial measurement, i.e. of quantitative

spatial  comparison.  But  such  comparison  presupposes  simply  a  known

identity of quality, the determination of which is precisely the problem of

projective  Geometry.  Hence  the  conditions  for  the  possibility  of

measurement, in so far as they are not arithmetical, will be precisely the same

as those for projective Geometry.  142.  Metrical  Geometry,  therefore,  though  distinct  from  projective

Geometry, is not independent of it, but presupposes it, and arises from its

combination  with  the  extraneous  idea  of quantity.  Nevertheless  the

mathematical form of the axioms, in metrical Geometry, is slightly different

from  their  form  in  projective  Geometry.  The  homogeneity  of  space  is

replaced by its equivalent, the axiom of Free Mobility. The axiom of the

straight line is replaced by the axiom of distance: Two points determine a

unique quantity, distance, which is unaltered in any motion of the two points

as a single figure. This axiom, indeed, will be found to involve the axiom of

the  straight  line—such  a  quantity  could  not  exist  unless  the  two  points

determined a unique curve—but its mathematical form is changed. Another

important change is the collapse of the principle of duality: quantity can be

applied  to  the  straight  line,  because  it  is  divisible  into  similar  parts,  but

cannot be applied to the indivisible point. We thus obtain a reason, which was

wanting in descriptive Geometry, for preferring points, as spatial elements, to
                          [146]
straight lines or planes. Finally, an entirely new idea is introduced with

quantity, namely, the idea of Motion. Not that we study motion, or that any of

our  results  have  reference  to  motion,  but  that  they  cannot,  though  in

projective Geometry they could, be obtained without at least an ideal motion

of our figures through space.

  Let us now examine in detail the prerequisites of spatial measurement. We

shall  find  three  axioms,  without  which  such  measurement  would  be

impossible,  but  with  which  it  is  adequate  to  decide,  empirically  and

approximately, the Euclidean or non-Euclidean nature of our actual space.

We  shall  find,  further,  that  these  three  axioms  can  be  deduced  from  the

conception  of  a  form  of  externality,  and  owe  nothing  to  the  evidence  of

intuition. They are, therefore, like their equivalents the axioms of projective

Geometry, à priori, and deducible from the conditions of spatial experience.

This  experience,  accordingly,  can  never  disprove  them,  since  its  very

existence presupposes them.

  I. The Axiom of Free Mobility.

  143. Metrical Geometry, to begin with, may be defined as the science

which deals with the comparison and relations of spatial magnitudes. The

conception  of  magnitude,  therefore,  is  necessary  from  the  start.  Some  of

Euclid's axioms, accordingly, have been classed as arithmetical, and havebeen  supposed  to  have  nothing  particular  to  do  with  space.  Such  are  the

axioms that equals added to or subtracted from equals give equals, and that

things which are equal to the same thing are equal to one another. These

axioms, it is said, are purely arithmetical, and do not, like the others, ascribe

an adjective to space. As regards their use in arithmetic, this is of course true.

But if an arithmetical axiom is to be applied to spatial magnitudes, it must
                              [147]
have some spatial import, and thus even this class is not, in Geometry,

merely arithmetical. Fortunately, the geometrical element is the same in all

the axioms of this class—we can see at once, in fact, that it can amount to no
                                                    [148]
more than a definition of spatial magnitude. Again, since the space with

which Geometry deals is infinitely divisible, a definition of spatial magnitude

reduces itself to a definition of spatial equality, for, as soon as we have this

last, we can compare two spatial magnitudes by dividing each into a number
                                                                          [149]
of equal units, and counting the number of such units in each. The ratio

of the number of units is, of course, the ratio of the two magnitudes.

  144. We require, then, at the very outset, some criterion of spatial equality:

without  such  a  criterion  metrical  Geometry  would  become  wholly

impossible.  It  might  appear,  at  first  sight,  as  though  this  need  not  be  an

axiom, but might be a mere definition. In part this is true, but not wholly. The

part  which  is  merely  a  definition  is  given  in  Euclid's  eighth  axiom:

"Magnitudes which exactly coincide are equal." But this gives a sufficient

criterion only when the magnitudes to be compared already occupy the same

position. When, as will normally be the case, the two spatial magnitudes are

external to one another—as, indeed, must be the case, if they are distinct, and

not whole and part—the two magnitudes can only be made to coincide by a

motion of one or both of them. In order, therefore, that our definition of

spatial  magnitude  may  give  unambiguous  results,  coincidence  when

superposed, if it can ever occur, must occur always, whatever path be pursued

in bringing it about. Hence, if mere motion could alter shapes, our criterion of

equality would break down. It follows that the application of the conception
                                                                            [150]
of magnitude to figures in space involves the following axiom: Spatial

magnitudes can be moved from place to place without distortion; or, as it

may be put, Shapes do not in any way depend upon absolute position in

space.
                                                          [151]
  The above axiom is the axiom of Free Mobility. I propose to prove (1)that  the  denial  of  this  axiom  would  involve  logical  and  philosophical

absurdities, so that it must be classed as wholly à priori; (2) that metrical

Geometry,  if  it  refused  this  axiom,  would  be  unable,  without  a  logical

absurdity, to establish the notion of spatial magnitude at all. The conclusion

will be, that the axiom cannot be proved or disproved by experience, but is an

à priori condition of metrical Geometry. As I shall thus be maintaining a

position  which  has  been  much  controverted,  especially  by  Helmholtz  and

Erdmann, I shall have to enter into the arguments at some length.

  145.  A. Philosophical  Argument.  The  denial  of  the  axiom  involves

absolute position, and an action of mere space, per se, on things. For the

axiom does not assert that real bodies, as a matter of empirical fact, never

change their shape in any way during their passage from place to place: on

the  contrary,  we  know  that  such  changes  do  occur,  sometimes  in  a  very

noticeable  degree,  and  always  to  some  extent.  But  such  changes  are

attributed, not to the change of place as such, but to physical causes: changes

of temperature, pressure, etc. What our axiom has to deal with is not actual
                                              [152]
material bodies, but geometrical figures, and it asserts that a figure which

is possible in any one position in space is possible in every other. Its meaning

will become clearer by reference to a case where it does not hold, say the

space  formed  by  the  surface  of  an  egg.  Here,  a  triangle  drawn  near  the

equator  cannot  be  moved  without  distortion  to  the  point,  as  it  would  no

longer fit the greater curvature of the new position: a triangle drawn near the

point cannot be fitted on to the flatter end, and so on. Thus the method of

superposition,  such  as  Euclid  employs  in  Book  I.  Prop.  IV.,  becomes

impossible; figures cannot be freely moved about, indeed, given any figure,

we can determine a certain series of possible positions for it on the egg,

outside which it becomes impossible. What I assert is, then, that there is a

philosophic absurdity in supposing space in general to be of this nature. On

the egg we have marked points, such as the two ends; the space formed by its

surface is not homogeneous, and if things are moved about in it, it must of

itself exercise a distorting effect upon them, quite independently of physical

causes; if it did not exercise such an effect, the things could not be moved.

Thus  such  a  space  would  not  be  homogeneous,  but  would  have  marked

points,  by  reference  to  which  bodies  would  have  absolute  position,  quite

independently of any other bodies. Space would no longer be passive, butwould  exercise  a  definite  effect  upon  things,  and  we  should  have  to

accommodate ourselves to the notion of marked points in empty space; these

points being marked, not by the bodies which occupied them, but by their

effects on any bodies which might from time to time occupy them. This want

of homogeneity and passivity is, however, absurd; space must, since it is a

form of externality, allow only of relative, not of absolute, position, and must

be completely homogeneous throughout. To suppose it otherwise, is to give it

a thinghood which no form of externality can possibly possess. We must,

then, on purely philosophical grounds, admit that a geometrical figure which

is  possible  anywhere  is  possible  everywhere,  which  is  the  axiom  of  Free

Mobility.

  146. B. Geometrical Argument. Let us see next what sort of Geometry we

could construct without this axiom. The ultimate standard of comparison of

spatial magnitudes must, as we saw in introducing the axiom, be equality

when  superposed;  but  need  we,  from  this  equality,  infer  equality  when

separated?  It  has  been  urged  by  Erdmann  that,  for  the  more  immediate
                                                          [153]
purposes of Geometry, this would be unnecessary. We might construct a

new Geometry, he thinks, in which sizes varied with motion on any definite

law. Such a view, as I shall show below, involves a logical error as to the

nature  of  magnitude.  But  before  pointing  this  out,  let  us  discuss  the

geometrical consequences of assuming its truth. Suppose the length of an

infinitesimal arc in some standard position were ds; then in any other position

p its length would be ds.f(p), where the form of the function f(p) must be

supposed  known.  But  how  are  we  to  determine  the  position p?  For  this

purpose, we require p's coordinates, i.e., some measurement of distance from

the origin. But the distance from the origin could only be measured if we

assumed our law f(p) to measure it by. For suppose the origin to be O, and Op

to be a straight line whose length is required. If we have a measuring rod with

which we travel along the line and measure successive infinitesimal arcs, the

measuring rod will change its size as we move, so that an arc which appears

by  the  measure  to  be ds  will  really  be f(s).ds,  where s  is  the  previously

traversed distance. If, on the other hand, we move our line Op slowly through

the origin, and measure each piece as it passes through, our measure, it is

true, will not alter, but now we have no means of discovering the law by

which any element has changed its length in coming to the origin. Hence,until we assume our function f(p), we have no means of determining p, for we

have just seen that distances from the origin can only be estimated by means

of the law f(p). It follows that experience can neither prove nor disprove the

constancy of shapes throughout motion, since, if shapes were not constant,

we  should  have  to assume  a  law  of  their  variation  before  measurement

became  possible,  and  therefore  measurement  could  not  itself  reveal  that
                [154]
variation to us.

  Nevertheless, such an arbitrarily assumed law does, at first sight, give a

mathematically possible Geometry. The fundamental proposition, that two

magnitudes which can be superposed in any one position can be superposed

in  any  other,  still  holds.  For  two  infinitesimal  arcs,  whose  lengths  in  the

standard position are ds and ds, would, in any other position p, have lengths
                          12

f(p).ds  and f(p).ds,  so  that  their  ratio  would  be  unaltered.  From  this
      12

constancy of ratio, as we know through Riemann and Helmholtz, the above

proposition follows. Hence all that Geometry requires, it would seem, as a

basis  for  measurement,  is  an  axiom  that  the  alteration  of  shapes  during

motion follows a definite known law, such as that assumed above.

  147. There is, however, in such a view, as I remarked above, a logical

error as to the nature of magnitude. This error has been already pointed out in
                          [155]
dealing  with  Erdmann,  and  need  only  be  briefly  repeated  here.  A

judgment  of  magnitude  is  essentially  a  judgment  of  comparison:  in

unmeasured  quantity,  comparison  as  to  the  mere  more  or  less,  but  in

measured magnitude, comparison as to the precise how many times. To speak

of differences of magnitude, therefore, in a case where comparison cannot

reveal them, is logically absurd. Now in the case contemplated above, two

magnitudes,  which  appear  equal  in  one  position,  appear  equal  also  when

compared in another position. There is no sense, therefore, in supposing the

two magnitudes unequal when separated, nor in supposing, consequently, that

they  have  changed  their  magnitudes  in  motion.  This  senselessness  of  our

hypothesis is the logical ground of the mathematical indeterminateness as to

the law of variation. Since, then, there is no means of comparing two spatial

figures,  as  regards  magnitude,  except  superposition,  the  only  logically

possible axiom, if spatial magnitude is to be self-consistent, is the axiom of

Free Mobility in the form first given above.

  148. Although this axiom is à priori, its application to the measurement ofactual bodies, as we found in discussing Helmholtz's views, always involves
                          [156]
an  empirical  element.  Our  axiom,  then,  only  supplies  the à  priori

condition for carrying out an operation which, in the concrete, is empirical—

just as arithmetic supplies the à priori condition for a census. As this topic

has been discussed at length in Chapter II., I shall say no more about it here.

  149.  There  remain,  however,  a  few  objections  and  difficulties  to  be

discussed. First, how do we obtain equality in solids, and in Kant's cases of

right  and  left  hands,  or  of  right  and  left-handed  screws,  where  actual

superposition is impossible? Secondly, how can we take congruence as the

only possible basis of spatial measurement, when we have before us the case

of time, where no such thing as congruence is conceivable? Thirdly, it might

be urged that we can immediately estimate spatial equality by the eye, with

more or less accuracy, and thus have a measure independent of congruence.

Fourthly, how is metrical Geometry possible on non-congruent surfaces, if

congruence  be  the  basis  of  spatial  measurement?  I  will  discuss  these

objections successively.

  150. (1) How do we measure the equality of solids? These could only be

brought  into  actual  congruence  if  we  had  a  fourth  dimension  to  operate
[157]
in, and from what I have said before of the absolute necessity of this test,

it might seem as though we should be left here in utter ignorance. Euclid is

silent on the subject, and in all works on Geometry it is assumed as self-

evident that two cubes of equal side are equal. This assumption suggests that

we are not so badly off as we should have been without congruence, as a test

of equality in one or two dimensions; for now we can at least be sure that two

cubes have all their sides and all their faces equal. Two such cubes differ,

then, in no sensible spatial quality save position, for volume, in this case at

any rate, is not a sensible quality. They are, therefore, as far as such qualities

are  concerned,  indiscernible.  If  their  places  were  interchanged,  we  might

know the change by their colour, or by some other non-geometrical property;

but  so  far  as  any  property  of  which  Geometry  can  take  cognisance  is

concerned,  everything  would  seem  as  before.  To  suppose  a  difference  of

volume, then, would be to ascribe an effect to mere position, which we saw to

be inadmissible while discussing Free Mobility. Except as regards position,

they are geometrically indiscernible, and we may call to our aid the Identity

of  Indiscernibles  to  establish  their  agreement  in  the  one  remaininggeometrical property of volume. This may seem rather a strange principle to

use  in  Mathematics,  and  for  Geometry  their  equality  is,  perhaps,  best

regarded as a definition; but if we demand a philosophical ground for this

definition, it is, I believe, only to be found in the Identity of Indiscernibles.

We can, without error, make our definition of three-dimensional equality rest

on two-dimensional congruence. For since direct comparison as to volume is

impossible, we are at liberty to define two volumes as equal, when all their

various  lines,  surfaces,  angles  and  solid  angles  are  congruent,  since  there

remains,  in  such  a  case,  no measurable  difference  between  the  figures

composing the two volumes. Of course, as soon as we have established this

one case of equality of volumes, the rest of the theory follows; as appears

from the ordinary method of integrating volumes, by dividing them into small

cubes.

  Thus congruence helps to establish three-dimensional equality, though it

cannot directly prove such equality; and the same philosophical principle, of

the homogeneity of space, by which congruence was proved, comes to our

rescue here. But how about right-handed and left-handed screws? Here we

can no longer apply the Identity of Indiscernibles, for the two are very well

discernible. But as with solids, so here, Free Mobility can help us much. It

can enable us, by ordinary measurement, to show that the internal relations of

both screws are the same, and that the difference lies only in their relation to

other things in space. Knowing these internal relations, we can calculate, by

the Geometry which Free Mobility has rendered possible, all the geometrical

properties  of  these  screws—radius,  pitch,  etc.—and  can  show  them  to  be

severally equal in both. But this is all we require. Mediate comparison is

possible,  though  immediate  comparison  is  not.  Both  can,  for  instance,  be

compared with the cylinder on which both would fit, and thus their equality

can be proved. A precisely similar proof holds, of course, for the other cases,

right  and  left  hands,  spherical  triangles,  etc.  On  the  whole,  these  cases
                                                                                  [158]
confirm my argument; for they show, as Kant intended them to show, the

essential relativity of space.

  151. (2) As regards time, no congruence is here conceivable, for to effect

congruence  requires  always—as  we  saw  in  the  case  of  solids—one  more

dimension than belongs to the magnitudes compared. No day can be brought

into temporal coincidence with any other day, to show that the two exactlycover each other; we are therefore reduced to the arbitrary assumption that

some  motion  or  set  of  motions,  given  us  in  experience,  is  uniform.

Fortunately,  we  have  a  large  set  of  motions  which  all  roughly  agree;  the

swing  of  the  pendulum,  the  rotation  and  revolution  of  the  earth  and  the

planets,  etc.  These  do  not  exactly  agree,  but  they  lead  us  to  the  laws  of

motion, by which we are able, on our arbitrary hypothesis, to estimate their

small departures from uniformity; just as the assumption of Free Mobility

enabled us to measure the departures of actual bodies from rigidity. But here,

as there, another possibility is mathematically open to us, and can only be

excluded by its philosophic absurdity; we might have assumed that the above

set  of  approximately  agreeing  motions  all  had  velocities  which  varied

approximately  as  some  arbitrarily  assumed  function  of  the  time, f(t)  say,

measured from some arbitrary origin. Such an assumption would still keep

them as nearly synchronous as before, and would give an equally possible,

though  more  complex,  system  of  Mechanics;  instead  of  the  first  law  of

motion, we should have the following: A particle perseveres in its state of

rest, or of rectilinear motion with velocity varying as f(t), except in so far as it

is  compelled  to  alter  that  state  by  the  action  of  external  forces.  Such  a

hypothesis is mathematically possible, but, like the similar one for space, it is

excluded logically by the comparative nature of the judgment of quantity, and

philosophically by the fact that it involves absolute time, as a determining

agent in change, whereas time can never, philosophically, be anything but a

passive form, abstracted from change. I have introduced this parallel from

time, not as directly bearing on the argument, but as a simpler case which

may serve to illustrate my reasoning in the more complex case of space. For

since time, in mathematics, is one-dimensional, the mathematical difficulties

are simpler than in Geometry; and although nothing accurately corresponds

to  congruence,  there  is  a  very  similar  mixture  of  mathematical  and

philosophical necessity, giving, finally, a thoroughly definite axiom as the

basis  of  time-measurement,  corresponding  to  congruence  as  the  basis  of
                      [159]
space-measurement.

  152. (3) The case of time-measurement suggests the third of the above

objections to the absolute necessity of the axiom of Free Mobility. Psycho-

physics has shown that we have an approximate power, by means of what

may be called the sense of duration, of immediately estimating equal shorttimes. This establishes a rough measure independent of any assumed uniform

motion,  and  in  space  also,  it  may  be  said,  we  have  a  similar  power  of

immediate comparison. We can see, by immediate inspection, that the sub-

divisions on a foot rule are not grossly inaccurate; and so, it may be said, we

both have a measure independent of congruence, and also could discover, by

experience,  any  gross  departure  from  Free  Mobility.  Against  this  view,

however, there is at the outset a very fundamental psychological objection. It

has been urged that all our comparison of spatial magnitudes proceeds by

ideal superposition. Thus James says (Psychology, Vol. II. p. 152): "Even

where we only feel one sub-division to be vaguely larger or less, the mind

must  pass  rapidly  between  it  and  the  other  sub-division,  and  receive  the

immediate sensible shock of the more," and "so far as the sub-divisions of a

sense-space are to be measured exactly against each other, objective forms

occupying one sub-division must be directly or indirectly superposed upon
        [160]
the other."

  Even if we waive this fundamental objection, however, others remain. To

begin with, such judgments of equality are only very rough approximations,

and cannot be applied to lines of more than a certain length, if only for the

reason that such lines cannot well be seen together. Thus this method can

only give us any security in our own immediate neighbourhood, and could in

no wise warrant such operations as would be required for the construction of

maps &c., much less the measurement of astronomical distances. They might

just enable us to say that some lines were longer than others, but they would

leave Geometry in a position no better than that of the Hedonical Calculus, in

which we depend on a purely subjective measure. So inaccurate, in fact, is

such a method acknowledged to be, that the foot-rule is as much a need of

daily  life  as  of  science.  Besides,  no  one  would  trust  such  immediate

judgments, but for the fact that the stricter test of congruence to some extent

confirms them; if we could not apply this test, we should have no ground for

trusting them even as much as we do. Thus we should have, here, no real

escape from our absolute dependence upon the axiom of Free Mobility.

  153. (4) One last elucidatory remark is necessary before our proof of this

axiom can be considered complete. We spoke above of the Geometry on an

egg, where Free Mobility does not hold. What, I may be asked, is there about

a thoroughly non-congruent Geometry, more impossible than this Geometryon the egg? The answer is obvious. The Geometry of non-congruent surfaces

is only  possible  by  the  use  of  infinitesimals,  and  in  the  infinitesimal  all

surfaces become plane. The fundamental formula, that for the length of an

infinitesimal arc, is only obtained on the assumption that such an arc may be

treated as a straight line, and that Euclidean Plane Geometry may be applied

in the immediate neighbourhood of any point. If we had not our Euclidean

measure,  which  could  be  moved  without  distortion,  we  should  have  no

method of comparing small arcs in different places, and the Geometry of non-

congruent surfaces would break down. Thus the axiom of Free Mobility, as

regards three-dimensional space, is necessarily implied and presupposed in

the  Geometry  of  non-congruent  surfaces;  the  possibility  of  the  latter,

therefore,  is  a  dependent  and  derivative  possibility,  and  can  form  no

argument against the à priori necessity of congruence as the test of equality.

  154.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  axiom  of  Free  Mobility,  as  I  have

enunciated it, includes also the axiom to which Helmholtz gives the name of

Monodromy.  This  asserts  that  a  body  does  not  alter  its  dimensions  in

consequence of a complete revolution through four right angles, but occupies

at the end the same position as at the beginning. The supposed mathematical

necessity  of  making  a  separate  axiom  of  this  property  of  space  has  been

disproved by Sophus Lie (v. Chap. I. § 45); philosophically, it is plainly a
                                      [161]
particular case of Free Mobility, and indeed a particularly obvious case,

for a translation really does make some change in a body, namely, a change

in position, but a rotation through four right angles may be supposed to have

been performed any number of times without appearing in the result, and the

absurdity  of  ascribing  to  space  the  power  of  making  bodies  grow  in  the

process is palpable; everything that was said above on congruence in general

applies with even greater evidence to this special case.

  155.  The  axiom  of  Free  Mobility  involves,  if  it  is  to  be  true,  the

homogeneity of space, or the complete relativity of position. For if any shape,

which  is  possible  in  one  part  of  space,  be  always  possible  in  another,  it

follows that all parts of space are qualitatively similar, and cannot, therefore,

be distinguished by any intrinsic property. Hence positions in space, if our

axiom be true, must be wholly defined by external relations, i.e. Position is

not an intrinsic, but a purely relative, property of things in space. If there

could be such a thing as absolute position, in short, metrical Geometry wouldbe impossible. This relativity of position is the fundamental postulate of all

Geometry, to which each of the necessary metrical axioms leads, and from

which, conversely, each of these axioms can be deduced.

  156.  This  converse  deduction,  as  regards  Free  Mobility,  is  not  very
                                                                    [162]
difficult,  and  follows  from  the  argument  of  Section  A,  which  I  will

briefly recapitulate. In the first place, externality is an essentially relative

conception—nothing can be external to itself. To be external to something is

to be an other with some relation to that thing. Hence, when we abstract a

form  of  externality  from  all  material  content,  and  study  it  in  isolation,

position will appear of necessity as purely relative—it can have no intrinsic

quality, for our form consists of pure externality, and externality contains no

shadow or trace of an intrinsic quality. Hence we derive our fundamental

postulate, the relativity of position. From this follows the homogeneity of our

form, for any quality in one position, which marked out that position from

another, would be necessarily more or less intrinsic, and would contradict the

pure relativity. Finally Free Mobility follows from homogeneity, for our form

would  not  be  homogeneous  unless  it  allowed,  in  every  part,  shapes  or

systems  of  relations,  which  it  allowed  in  any  other  part.  Free  Mobility,

therefore, is a necessary property of every possible form of externality.

  157. In summing up the argument we have just concluded, we may exhibit

it,  in  consequence  of  the  two  preceding  paragraphs,  in  the  form  of  a

completed circle. Starting from the conditions of spatial measurement, we

found that the comparison, required for measurement, could only be effected

by superposition. But we found, further, that the result of such comparison

will only be unambiguous, if spatial magnitudes and shapes are unaltered by

motion  in  space,  if,  in  other  words,  shapes  do  not  depend  upon  absolute

position in space. But this axiom can only be true if space is homogeneous

and position merely relative. Conversely, if position is assumed to be merely

relative, a change of magnitude in motion—involving as it does, the assertion

of  absolute  position—is  impossible,  and  our  test  of  spatial  equality  is

therefore adequate. But position in any form of externality must be purely

relative, since externality cannot be an intrinsic property of anything. Our

axiom, therefore, is à priori in a double sense. It is presupposed in all spatial

measurement, and it is a necessary property of any form of externality. A

similar double apriority, we shall see, appears in our other necessary axioms.                                      [163]
  II. The Axiom of Dimensions.

  158. We have seen, in discussing the axiom of Free Mobility, that all
                                                                                    [164]
position is relative, that is, a position exists only by virtue of relations. It

follows that, if positions can be defined at all, they must be uniquely and

exhaustively defined by some finite number of such relations. If Geometry is

to be possible, it must happen that, after enough relations have been given to

determine  a  point  uniquely,  its  relations  to  any  fresh  known  point  are

deducible from the relations already given. Hence we obtain, as an à priori

condition of Geometry, logically indispensable to its existence, the axiom

that Space  must  have  a  finite  integral  number  of  Dimensions.  For  every

relation required in the definition of a point constitutes a dimension, and a

fraction of a relation is meaningless. The number of relations required must

be  finite,  since  an  infinite  number  of  dimensions  would  be  practically

impossible to determine. If we remember our axiom of Free Mobility, and

remember  also  that  space  is  a  continuum,  we  may  state  our  axiom,  for

metrical Geometry, in the form given by Helmholtz (v. Chap. I. § 25): "In a

space of n dimensions, the position of every point is uniquely determined by
                                                                                  [165]
the measurement of n continuous independent variables (coordinates)."

  159.  So  much,  then,  is à  priori  necessary  to  metrical  Geometry.  The

restriction of the dimensions to three seems, on the contrary, to be wholly the
                      [166]
work of experience. This restriction cannot be logically necessary, for as

soon  as  we  have  formulated  any  analytical  system,  it  appears  wholly

arbitrary. Why, we are driven to ask, cannot we add a fourth coordinate to our
                                                4
x, y, z, or give a geometrical meaning to x? In this more special form, we are

tempted to regard the axiom of dimensions, like the number of inhabitants of

a town, as a purely statistical fact, with no greater necessity than such facts

have.

  Geometry  affords  intrinsic  evidence  of  the  truth  of  my  division  of  the

axiom of dimensions into an à priori and empirical portion. For while the

extension of the number of dimensions to four, or to n, alters nothing in plane

and solid Geometry, but only adds a new branch which interferes in no way

with  the  old, some  definite  number  of  dimensions  is  assumed  in  all

Geometries, nor is it possible to conceive of a Geometry which should be free
                        [167]
from this assumption.

  160. Let us, since the point seems of some interest, repeat our proof of theapriority of this axiom from a slightly different point of view. We will begin,

this time, from the most abstract conception of space, such as we find in

Riemann's dissertation, or in Erdmann's extents. We have here, an ordered
                                                                              [168]
manifold,  infinitely  divisible  and  allowing  of  Free  Mobility.  Free

Mobility involves, as we saw, the power of passing continuously from any

one point to any other, by any course which may seem pleasant to us; it

involves, also, that, in such a course, no changes occur except changes of

mere position, i.e., positions do not differ from one another in any qualitative

way. (This absence of qualitative difference is the distinguishing mark of

space as opposed to other manifolds, such as the colour- and tone-systems: in

these, every element has a definite qualitative sensational value, whereas in

space,  the  sensational  value  of  a  position  depends  wholly  on  its  spatial

relation to our own body, and is thus not intrinsic, but relative.) From the

absence of qualitative differences among positions, it follows logically that

positions exist only by virtue of other positions; one position differs from

another just because they are two, not because of anything intrinsic in either.

Position is thus defined simply and solely by relation to other positions. Any

position, therefore, is completely defined when, and only when, enough such

relations have been given to enable us to determine its relation to any new

position, this new position being defined by the same number of relations.

Now, in order that such definition may be at all possible, a finite number of

relations  must  suffice.  But  every  such  relation  constitutes  a  dimension.

Therefore, if Geometry is to be possible, it is à priori necessary that space

should have a finite integral number of dimensions.

  161.  The  limitation  of  the  dimensions  to  three  is,  as  we  have  seen,

empirical;  nevertheless,  it  is  not  liable  to  the  inaccuracy  and  uncertainty

which  usually  belong  to  empirical  knowledge.  For  the  alternatives  which

logic leaves to sense are discrete—if the dimensions are not three, they must

be two or four or some other number—so that small errors are out of the
        [169]
question.  Hence  the  final  certainty  of  the  axiom  of  three  dimensions,

though in part due to experience, is of quite a different order from that of

(say) the law of Gravitation. In the latter, a small inaccuracy might exist and

remain undetected; in the former, an error would have to be so considerable

as to be utterly impossible to overlook. It follows that the certainty of our

whole axiom, that the number of dimensions is three, is almost as great asthat of the à priori element, since this element leaves to sense a definite

disjunction of discrete possibilities.

  III. The Axiom of Distance.

  162. We have already seen, in discussing projective Geometry, that two

points must determine a unique curve, the straight line. In metrical Geometry,

the corresponding axiom is, that two points must determine a unique spatial

quantity, distance. I propose to prove, in what follows, (1) that if distance, as

a  quantity  completely  determined  by  two  points,  did  not  exist,  spatial

magnitude would not be measurable; (2) that distance can only be determined

by two points, if there is an actual curve in space determined by those two

points;  (3)  that  the  existence  of  such  a  curve  can  be  deduced  from  the

conception of a form of externality, and (4) that the application of quantity to

such  a  curve  necessarily  leads  to  a  certain  magnitude,  namely  distance,

uniquely  determined  by  any  two  points  which  determine  the  curve.  The

conclusion will be, if these propositions can be successfully maintained, that

the axiom of distance is à priori in the same double sense as the axiom of

Free Mobility, i.e. it is presupposed in the possibility of measurement, and it

is necessarily true of any possible form of externality.

  163.  (1)  The  possibility  of  spatial  measurement  allows  us  to  infer  the

existence of a magnitude uniquely determined by any two points. The proof

of  this  depends  on  the  axiom  of  Free  Mobility,  or  its  equivalent,  the

homogeneity of space. We have seen that these are involved in the possibility

of spatial measurement; we may employ them, therefore, in any argument as

to the conditions of this possibility.

  Now to begin with, two points must, if Geometry is to be possible, have

some  relation  to  each  other,  for  we  have  seen  that  such  relations  alone

constitute position or localization. But if two points have a relation to each

other, this must be an intrinsic relation. For it follows, from the axiom of Free

Mobility, that two points, forming a figure congruent with the given pair, can

be constructed in any part of space. If this were not possible, we have seen

that metrical Geometry could not exist. But both the figures may be regarded

as composed of two points and their relation; if the two figures are congruent,

therefore,  it  follows  that  the  relation  is  quantitatively  the  same  for  both

figures, since congruence is the test of spatial equality. Hence the two points

have a quantitative relation, which is such that they can traverse all space in a

combined motion without in any way altering that relation. But in such ageneral motion, any external relation of the two points, any relation involving
                                                            [170]
other  points  or  figures  in  space,  must  be  altered.  Hence  the  relation

between  the  two  points,  being  unaltered,  must  be  an  intrinsic  relation,  a

relation involving no other point or figure in space; and this intrinsic relation
                  [171]
we call distance.

  164. It might be objected, to the above argument, that it involves a petitio

principii. For it has been assumed that the two points and their relation form a

figure, to which other figures can be congruent. Now if two points have no

intrinsic relation, it would seem that they cannot form such a figure. The

argument, therefore, apparently assumes what it had to prove. Why, it may be

asked, should not three points be required, before we obtain any relation,

which Free Mobility allows us to construct afresh in other parts of space?

  The answer to this, as to the corresponding question in the first section of

this  chapter,  lies,  I  think,  in  the  passivity  of  space,  or  the  mutual

independence of its parts. For it follows, from this independence, that any

figure, or any assemblage of points, may be discussed without reference to

other figures or points. This principle is the basis of infinite divisibility, of the

use  of  quantity  in  Geometry,  and  of  all  possibility  of  isolating  particular

figures for discussion. It follows that two points cannot be dependent, as to

their relation, on any other points or figures, for if they were so dependent,

we should have to suppose some action of such points or figures on the two

points  considered,  which  would  contradict  the  mutual  independence  of

different positions. To illustrate by an example: the relation of two given

points does not depend on the other points of the straight line on which the

given points lie. For only through their relation, i.e. through the straight line

which they determine, can the other points of the straight line be known to

have any peculiar connection with the given pair.

  165. But why, it may be asked, should there be only one such relation

between two points? Why not several? The answer to this lies in the fact that

points are wholly constituted by relations, and have no intrinsic nature of
          [172]
their own. A point is defined by its relations to other points, and when

once the relations necessary for definition have been given, no fresh relations

to the points used in definition are possible, since the point defined has no

qualities from which such relations could flow. Now one relation to any one

other point is as good for definition as more would be, since however manywe had, they would all remain unaltered in a combined motion of both points.

Hence there can only be one relation determined by any two points.

  166. (2) We have thus established our first proposition—two points have

one and only one relation uniquely determined by those two points. This

relation we call their distance apart. It remains to consider the conditions of

the  measurement  of  distance, i.e.,  how  far  a  unique  value  for  distance

involves a curve uniquely determined by the two points.

  In the first place, some curve joining the two points is involved in the

above notion of a combined motion of the two points, or of two other points

forming a figure congruent with the first two. For without some such curve,

the two point-pairs cannot be known as congruent, nor can we have any test
                                                                                      [173]
by which to discover when a point-pair is moving as a single figure.

Distance  must  be  measured,  therefore,  by  some  line  which  joins  the  two

points. But need this be a line which the two points completely determine?

  167. We are accustomed to the definition of the straight line as the shortest

distance between two points, which implies that distance might equally well

be measured by curved lines. This implication I believe to be false, for the

following reasons. When we speak of the length of a curve, we can give a

meaning to our words only by supposing the curve divided into infinitesimal

rectilinear arcs, whose sum gives the length of an equivalent straight line;

thus unless we presuppose the straight line, we have no means of comparing

the  lengths  of  different  curves,  and  can  therefore  never  discover  the

applicability of our definition. It might be thought, perhaps, that some other

line, say a circle, might be used as the basis of measurement. But in order to

estimate in this way the length of any curve other than a circle, we should

have to divide the curve into infinitesimal circular arcs. Now two successive

points do not determine a circle, so that an arc of two points would have an

indeterminate length. It is true that, if we exclude infinitesimal radii for the

measuring circles, the lengths of the infinitesimal arcs would be determinate,

even if the circles varied, but that is only because all the small circular arcs

through two consecutive points coincide with the straight line through those

two points. Thus, even with the help of the arbitrary restriction to a finite

radius, all that happens is that we are brought back to the straight line. If, to

mend matters, we take three consecutive points of our curve, and reckon

distance by the arc of the circle of curvature, the notion of distance loses itsfundamental  property  of  being  a  relation  between two  points.  For  two

consecutive  points  of  the  arc  could  not  then  be  said  to  have  any

corresponding  distance  apart—three  points  would  be  necessary  before  the

notion of distance became applicable. Thus the circle is not a possible basis

for  measurement,  and  similar  objections  apply,  of  course,  with  increased

force, to any other curve. All this argument is designed to show, in detail, the

logical  impossibility  of  measuring  distance  by  any  curve  not  completely

defined by the two points whose distance apart is required. If in the above we

had taken distance as measured by circles of given radius, we should have

introduced into its definition a relation to other points besides the two whose

distance was to be measured, which we saw to be a logical fallacy. Moreover,

how are we to know that all the circles have equal radii, until we have an

independent measure of distance?

  168. A straight line, then, is not the shortest distance, but is simply the

distance  between  two  points—so  far,  this  conclusion  has  stood  firm.  But

suppose we had two or more curves through two points, and that all these

curves were congruent inter se. We should then say, in accordance with the

definition of spatial equality, that the lengths of all these curves were equal.

Now  it  might  happen  that,  although  no  one  of  the  curves  was  uniquely

determined by the two end-points, yet the common length of all the curves

was  so  determined.  In  this  case,  what  would  hinder  us  from  calling  this

common  length  the  distance  apart,  although  no  unique  figure  in  space

corresponded to it? This is the case contemplated by spherical Geometry,

where,  as  on  a  sphere,  antipodes  can  be  joined  by  an  infinite  number  of

geodesics,  all  of  which  are  of  equal  length.  The  difficulty  supposed  is,

therefore,  not  a  purely  imaginary  one,  but  one  which  modern  Geometry

forces us to face. I shall consequently discuss it at some length.

  169. To begin with, I must point out that my axiom is not quite equivalent

to  Euclid's.  Euclid's  axiom  states  that  two  straight  lines  cannot  enclose  a

space, i.e., cannot have more than one common point. Now if every two

points,  without  exception,  determine  a  unique  straight  line,  it  follows,  of

course, that two different straight lines can have only one point in common—

so far, the two axioms are equivalent. But it may happen, as in spherical

space, that two points in general determine a unique straight line, but fail to

do so when they have to each other the special relation of being antipodes. In

such a system every pair of straight lines in the same plane meet in twopoints,  which  are  each  other's  antipodes;  but  two  points, in general,  still

determine  a  unique  straight  line.  We  are  still  able,  therefore,  to  obtain

distances from unique straight lines, except in limiting cases; and in such

cases, we can take any point intermediate between the two antipodes, join it

by the same straight line to both antipodes, and measure its distance from

those antipodes in the usual way. The sum of these distances then gives a

unique value for the distance between the antipodes.

  Thus even in spherical space, we are greatly assisted by the axiom of the

straight line; all linear measurement is effected by it, and exceptional cases

can be treated, through its help, by the usual methods for limits. Spherical

space, therefore, is not so adverse as it at first appeared to be to the à priori

necessity of the axiom. Nevertheless we have, so far, not attacked the kernel

of the objection which spherical space suggested. To this attack it is now our

duty to proceed.

  170. It will be remembered that, in our à priori proof that two points must

have one definite relation, we held it impossible for those two points to have,

to the rest of space, any relation which would be unaltered by motion. Now in

spherical space, in the particular case where the two points are antipodes,

they have a relation, unaltered by motion, to the rest of space—the relation,

namely, that their distance is half the circumference of the universe. In our

former discussion, we assumed that any relation to outside space must be a

relation of position—and a relation of position must be altered by motion.

But  with  a  finite  space,  in  which  we  have  absolute  magnitude,  another

relation becomes possible, namely, a relation of magnitude. Antipodal points,

accordingly,  like  coincident  points,  no  longer  determine  a  unique  straight

line.  And  it  is  instructive  to  observe  that  there  is,  in  consequence,  an

ambiguity  in  the  expression  for  distance,  like  the  ordinary  ambiguity  in
                                2
angular measurement. If 1/k be the space constant, and d be one value for the

distance between two points, 2πkn ± d, where n is any integer, is an equally

good value. Distance is, in short, a periodic function like angle. Thus such a

state  of  things  rather  confirms  than  destroys  my  contention,  that  distance

depends on a curve uniquely determined by two points. For as soon as we

drop  this  unique  determination,  we  see  ambiguities  creeping  into  our

expression  for  distance.  Distance  still  has  a  set  of discrete  values,

corresponding to the fact that, given one point, the straight line is uniquelydetermined for all other points but one, the antipodal point. It is tempting to

go on, and say: If through every pair of points there were an infinite number

of the curves used in measuring distance, distance would be able, for the

same  pair  of  points,  to  take,  not  only  a  discrete  series,  but  an  infinite

continuous series of values.

  171.  This,  however,  is  mere  speculation.  I  come  now  to  the pièce de

résistance of my argument. The ambiguity in spherical space arose, as we

saw, from a relation of magnitude to the rest of space—such a relation being

unaltered by a motion of the two points, and therefore falling outside our

introductory  reasoning.  But  what  is  this  relation  of  magnitude?  Simply  a

relation of the distance between the two points to a distance given in the

nature of the space in question. It follows that such a relation presupposes a

measure  of  distance,  and  need  not,  therefore,  be  contemplated  in  any

argument  which  deals  with  the à  priori  requisites  for  the  possibility  of
                  [174]
definite distances.

  172. I have now shown, I hope conclusively, that spherical space affords

no objection to the apriority of my axiom. Any two points have one relation,

their distance, which is independent of the rest of space, and this relation

requires, as its measure, a curve uniquely determined by those two points. I

might have taken the bull by the horns, and said: Two points can have no

relation but what is given by lines which join them, and therefore, if they

have  a  relation  independent  of  the  rest  of  space,  there  must  be  one  line
                                                                            [175]
joining them which they completely determine. Thus James says:

 

  "Just  as,  in  the  field  of  quantity,  the  relation  between  two  numbers  is

another number, so in the field of space the relations are facts of the same

order with the facts they relate.... When we speak of the relation of direction

of two points towards each other, we mean simply the sensation of the line

that joins the two points together. The line is the relation.... The relation of

position between the top and bottom points of a vertical line is that line, and

nothing else."

  If I had been willing to use this doctrine at the beginning, I might have

avoided all discussion. A unique relation between two points must in this

case, involve a unique line between them. But it seemed better to avoid a

doctrine  not  universally  accepted,  the  more  so  as  I  was  approaching  the

question from the logical, not the psychological, side. After disposing of theobjections, however, it is interesting to find this confirmation of the above

theory from so different a standpoint. Indeed, I believe James's doctrine could

be proved to be a logical necessity, as well as a psychological fact. For what

sort of thing can a spatial relation between two distinct points be? It must be

something spatial, and it must, since points are wholly constituted by their

relations, be something at least as real and tangible as the points it relates.

There  seems  nothing  which  can  satisfy  these  requirements,  except  a  line

joining them. Hence, once more, a unique relation must involve a unique line.

That  is,  linear  magnitude  is  logically  impossible,  unless  space  allows  of

curves uniquely determined by any two of their points.

  173. (3) But farther, the existence of curves uniquely determined by two
                                                                            [176]
points can be deduced from the nature of any form of externality. For we

saw, in discussing Free Mobility, that this axiom, together with homogeneity

and the relativity of position, can be so deduced, and we saw in the beginning

of our discussion on distance, that the existence of a unique relation between

two points could be deduced from the homogeneity of space. Since position

is relative, we may say, any two points must have some relation to each other:

since  our  form  of  externality  is  homogeneous,  this  relation  can  be  kept

unchanged while the two points move in the form, i.e., change their relations

to  other  points;  hence  their  relation  to  each  other  is  an  intrinsic  relation,

independent of their relations to other points. But since our form is merely a

complex of relations, a relation of externality must appear in the form, with

the same evidence as anything else in the form; thus if the form be intuitive

or sensational, the relation must be immediately presented, and not a mere

inference. Hence the intrinsic relation between two points must be a unique

figure  in  our  form, i.e.  in  spatial  terms,  the  straight  line  joining  the  two

points.

  174.  (4)  Finally,  we  have  to  prove  that  the  existence  of  such  a  curve

necessarily leads, when quantity is applied to the relation between two points,

to a unique magnitude, which those two points completely determine. With

this, we shall be brought back to distance, from which we started, and shall

complete the circle of our argument.

  We  saw,  in section  A  §  119,  that  the  figure  formed  by  two  points  is

projectively indistinguishable from that formed by any two other points in the

same straight line; the figure, in both cases, is, from the projective standpoint,simply  the  straight  line  on  which  the  two  points  lie.  The  difference  of

relation, in the two cases, is not qualitative, since projective Geometry cannot

deal with it; nevertheless, there is some difference of relation. For instance, if

one  point  be  kept  fixed,  while  the  other  moves,  there  is  obviously  some

change  of  relation.  This  change,  since  all  parts  of  the  straight  line  are

qualitatively alike, must be a change of quantity. If two points, therefore,

determine a unique figure, there must exist, for the distinction between the

various other points of this figure, a unique quantitative relation between the

two  determining  points,  and  therefore,  since  these  points  are  arbitrary,

between only two points. This relation is distance, with which our argument

began, and to which it at least returns.

  175. To sum up: If points are defined simply by relations to other points,

i.e., if all position is relative, every point must have to every other point one,

and only one, relation independent of the rest of space. This relation is the

distance between the two points. Now a relation between two points can only

be defined by a line joining them—nay further, it may be contended that a

relation can only be a line joining them. Hence a unique relation involves a

unique line, i.e., a line determined by any two of its points. Only in a space

which  admits  of  such  a  line  is  linear  magnitude  a  logically  possible

conception. But when once we have established the possibility, in general, of

drawing such lines, and therefore of measuring linear magnitudes, we may

find that a certain magnitude has a peculiar relation to the constitution of

space. The straight line may turn out to be of finite length, and in this case its

length  will  give  a  certain  peculiar  magnitude,  the  space-constant.  Two

antipodal points, that is, points which bisect the entire straight line, will then

have a relation of magnitude which, though unaltered by motion, is rendered

peculiar by a certain constant relation to the rest of space. This peculiarity

presupposes a measure of linear magnitude in general, and cannot, therefore,

upset the apriority of the axiom of the straight line. But it destroys, for points

having  the  peculiar  antipodal  relation  to  each  other,  the  argument  which

proved that the relation between two points could not, since it was unchanged

by motion, have reference to the rest of space. Thus it is intelligible that, for

such  special  points,  the  axiom  breaks  down,  and  an  infinite  number  of

straight  lines  are  possible  between  them;  but  unless  we  had  started  with

assuming the general validity of the axiom, we could never have reached a

position in which antipodal points could have been known to be peculiar, or,indeed,  a  position  which  would  have  enabled  us  to  give  any  quantitative

definition whatever of particular points.

  Distance and the straight line, as relations uniquely determined by two

points, are thus à priori necessary to metrical Geometry. But further, they are

properties which must belong to any form of externality. Since their necessity

for Geometry was deduced from homogeneity and the relativity of position,

and since these are necessary properties of any form of externality, the same

argument proves both conclusions. We thus obtain, as in the case of Free

Mobility, a double apriority: The axiom of Distance, and its implication, the

axiom  of  the  Straight  Line,  are,  on  the  one  hand,  presupposed  in  the

possibility of spatial magnitude, and cannot, therefore, be contradicted by any

experience  resulting  from  the  measurement  of  space;  while  they  are

consequences, on the other hand, of the necessary properties of any form of

externality which is to render possible experience of an external world.

  176. In connection with the straight line, it will be convenient to discuss

the  conditions  of  a  metrical  coordinate  system.  The  projective  coordinate

system,  as  we  have  seen,  aims  only  at  a  convenient  nomenclature  for

different points, and can be set up without introducing the notion of spatial

quantity.  But  a  metrical  coordinate  system  does  much  more  than  this.  It

defines every point quantitatively, by its quantitative spatial relations to a

certain  coordinate  figure.  Only  when  the  system  of  coordinates  is  thus

metrical, i.e.,  when  every  coordinate  represents  some  spatial  magnitude,

which is itself a relation of the point defined to some other point or figure—

can  operations  with  coordinates  lead  to  a  metrical  result.  When,  as  in

projective Geometry, the coordinates are not spatial magnitudes, no amount

of transformation can give a metrical result. I wish to prove, here, that a

metrical coordinate system necessarily involves the straight line, and cannot,

without a logical fallacy, be set up on any other basis. The projective system

of  coordinates,  as  we  saw,  is  entirely  based  on  the  straight  line;  but  the

metrical  system  is  more  important,  since  its  quantities  embody  actual

information as to spatial magnitudes, which, in projective Geometry, is not

the case.

  In  the  first  place,  a  point's  metrical  coordinates  constitute  a  complete

quantitative definition of it; now a point can only be defined, as we have

seen, by its relations to other points, and these relations can only be defined

by  means  of  the  straight  line.  Consequently,  any  metrical  system  ofcoordinates must involve the straight line, as the basis of its definitions of

points.

  This à priori argument, however, though I believe it to be quite sound, is

not likely to carry conviction to any one persuaded of the opposite. Let us,

therefore, examine metrical coordinate systems in detail, and show, in each

case, their dependence on the straight line.

  We have already seen that the notion of distance is impossible without the

straight  line.  We  cannot,  therefore,  define  our  coordinates  in  any  of  the

ordinary ways, as the distances from three planes, lines, points, spheres, or

what not. Polar coordinates are impossible, since,—waiving the straightness

of the radius vector—the length of the radius vector becomes unmeaning.

Triangular coordinates involve not only angles, which must in the limit be

rectilinear, but straight lines, or at any rate some well-defined curves. Now

curves can only be metrically defined in two ways: Either by relation to the

straight line, as, e.g., by the curvature at any point, or by purely analytical

equations, which presuppose an intelligible system of metrical coordinates.

What methods remain for assigning these arbitrary values to different points?

Nay, how are we to get any estimate of the difference—to avoid the more

special notion of distance—between two points? The very notion of a point

has become illusory. When we have a coordinate system, we may define a

point by its three coordinates; in the absence of such a system, we may define

the notion of point in general as the intersection of three surfaces or of two

curves. Here we take surfaces and curves as notions which intuition makes

plain,  but  if  we  wish  them  to  give  us  a  precise  numerical  definition  of

particular points, we must specify the kind of surface or curve to be used.

Now this, as we have seen, is only possible when we presuppose either the

straight line, or a coordinate system. It follows that every coordinate system

presupposes the straight line, and is logically impossible without it.

  177. The above three axioms, we have seen, are à priori necessary to

metrical  Geometry.  No  others  can  be  necessary,  since  metrical  systems,

logically  as  unassailable  as  Euclid's,  and  dealing  with  spaces  equally

homogeneous  and  equally  relational,  have  been  constructed  by  the

metageometers, without the help of any other axioms. The remaining axioms

of Euclidean Geometry—the axiom of parallels, the axiom that the number of

dimensions is three, and Euclid's form of the axiom of the straight line (two

straight lines cannot enclose a space)—are not essential to the possibility ofmetrical Geometry, i.e., are not deducible from the fact that a science of

spatial magnitudes is possible. They are rather to be regarded as empirical

laws,  obtained,  like  the  empirical  laws  of  other  sciences,  by  actual

investigation of the given subject-matter—in this instance, experienced space.

  178. In summing up the distinctive argument of this Section, we may give

it a more general form, and discuss the conditions of measurement in any

continuous manifold, i.e., the qualities necessary to the manifold, in order

that quantities in it may be determinable, not only as to the more or less, but

as to the precise how much.

  Measurement, we may say, is the application of number to continua, or, if

we prefer it, the transformation of mere quantity into number of units. Using

quantity  to  denote  the  vague  more  or  less,  and magnitude  to  denote  the

precise number of units, the problem of measurement may be defined as the

transformation of quantity into magnitude.

  Now a number, to begin with, is a whole consisting of smaller units, all of

these units being qualitatively alike. In order, therefore, that a continuous

quantity may be expressible as a number, it must, on the one hand, be itself a

whole, and must, on the other hand, be divisible into qualitatively similar

parts. In the aspect of a whole, the quantity is intensive; in the aspect of an

aggregate of parts, it is extensive. A purely intensive quantity, therefore, is

not numerable—a purely extensive quantity, if any such could be imagined,

would not be a single quantity at all, since it would have to consist of wholly

unsynthesized  particulars.  A  measurable  quantity,  therefore,  is  a  whole

divisible into similar parts. But a continuous quantity, if divisible at all, must

be infinitely divisible. For otherwise the points at which it could be divided

would form natural barriers, and so destroy its continuity. But further, it is

not  sufficient  that  there  should  be  a  possibility  of  division  into  mutually

external parts; while the parts, to be perceptible as parts, must be mutually

external,  they  must  also,  to  be  knowable  as equal  parts,  be  capable  of

overcoming their mutual externality. For this, as we have seen, we require

superposition, which involves Free Mobility and homogeneity—the absence

of  Free  Mobility  in  time,  where  all  other  requisites  of  measurement  are

fulfilled,  renders  direct  measurement  of  time  impossible.  Hence  infinite

divisibility, free mobility, and homogeneity are necessary for the possibility

of measurement in any continuous manifold, and these, as we have seen, are

equivalent to our three axioms. These axioms are necessary, therefore, notonly for spatial measurement, but for all measurement. The only manifold

given in experience, in which these conditions are satisfied, is space. All

other exact measurement—as could be proved, I believe, for every separate

case—is effected, as we saw in the case of time, by reduction to a spatial

correlative. This explains the paramount importance, to exact science, of the

mechanical view of nature, which reduces all phenomena to motions in time

and space. For number is, of all conceptions, the easiest to operate with, and

science  seeks  everywhere  for  an  opportunity  to  apply  it,  but  finds  this
                                                                          [177]
opportunity only by means of spatial equivalents to phenomena.

  179. We have now seen in what the à priori element of Geometry consists.

This à priori element may be defined as the axioms common to Euclidean

and non-Euclidean spaces, as the axioms deducible from the conception of a

form of externality, or—in metrical Geometry—as the axioms required for

the possibility of measurement. It remains to discuss, in a final chapter, some

questions of a more general philosophic nature, in which we shall have to

desert the firm ground of mathematics and enter on speculations which I put

forward very tentatively, and with little faith in their ultimate validity. The

chief questions for this final chapter will be two: (1) How is such à priori and

purely  logical  necessity  possible,  as  applied  to  an  actually  given  subject-

matter like space? (2) How can we remove the contradictions which have

haunted us in this chapter, arising out of the relativity, infinite divisibility,

and unbounded extension of space? These two questions are forced upon us

by the present chapter, but as they open some of the fundamental problems of

philosophy, it would be rash to expect a conclusive or wholly satisfactory

answer.  A  few  hints  and  suggestions  may  be  hoped  for,  but  a  complete

solution could only be obtained from a complete philosophy, of which the

prospects are far too slender to encourage a confident frame of mind.

  FOOTNOTES:

  [116] See infra, Axiom of Distance, in Sec. B. of this Chapter.

  [117] Thus on a cylinder, two geodesics, e.g. a generator and a helix, may

have  any  number  of  intersections—a  very  important  difference  from  the

plane.

  [118] Cf. Cremona, Projective Geometry (Clarendon Press, 2nd ed. 1893)

p. 50: "Most of the propositions in Euclid's Elements are metrical, and it is

not easy to find among them an example of a purely descriptive theorem."  [119] Op. cit. p. 226.

  [120] Some ground for this choice will appear when we come to metrical

Geometry.

  [121] The straight line σa denotes the straight line common to the planes σ

and a, the point σa denotes the point common to the plane σ and the straight

line a, and similarly for the rest of the notation.

  [122] Cremona (op. cit. Chap. IX. p. 50) defines anharmonic ratio as a

metrical property which is unaltered by projection. This, however, destroys

the  logical  independence  of  projective  Geometry,  which  can  only  be

maintained by a purely descriptive definition.

  [123] There is no corresponding property of three points on a line, because

they can be projectively transformed into any other three points on the same

line. See § 120.

  [124] Due to v. Staudt's "Geometrie der Lage."

  [125] See Cremona, op. cit. Chapter VIII.

  [126] The corresponding definitions, for the two-dimensional manifold of

lines through a point, follow by the principle of duality.

  [127] It is important to observe that this definition of the Point introduces

metrical ideas. Without metrical ideas, we saw, nothing appears to give the

Point precedence of the straight line, or indeed to distinguish it conceptually

from  the  straight  line.  A  reference  to  quantity  is  therefore  inevitable  in

defining  the  Point,  if  the  definition  is  to  be  geometrical.  A  non-metrical

definition would have to be also non-geometrical. See Chap. IV. §§ 196–199.

  [128] §§ 163–175.

  [129] On this axiom, however, compare § 131.

  [130] For the proof of this proposition, see Chap. III. Sec. B, Axiom of

Dimensions.

  [131] The straight line and plane, in all discussions of general Geometry,

are not necessarily Euclidean. They are simply figures determined, in general,

by two and by three points respectively; whether they conform to the axiom

of parallels and to Euclid's form of the axiom of the straight line, is not to be

considered in the general definition.

  [132]  That  projective  Geometry  must  have  existential  import,  I  shall

attempt to prove in Chapter IV.

  [133] Logic, Book I. Chapter II.

  [134] Cf. Bradley's Logic, p. 63. It will be seen that the sense in which Ihave spoken of space as a principle of differentiation is not the sense of a

"principle of individuation" which Bradley objects to.

  [135] Chap. IV. §§ 186–191.

  [136] Chap. IV. § 201 ff.

  [137]  It  is  important  to  observe,  however,  that  this  way  of  regarding

spatial  relations  is  metrical;  from  the  projective  standpoint,  the  relation

between two points is the whole unbounded straight line on which they lie,

and need not be regarded as divisible into parts or as built up of points.

  [138] §§ 207, 208. Cf. Hegel, Naturphilosophie, § 254.

  [139] See Chap. IV. §§ 196–199.

  [140] See a forthcoming article on "The relations of number and quantity"

by the present writer in Mind, July, 1897.

  [141] Logic, Vol. II. Chap. VII. p. 211.

  [142]  Real,  as  opposed  to  logical,  diversity  is  throughout  intended.

Diverse aspects may coexist in a thing at one time and place, but two diverse

real things cannot so coexist.

  [143] On the insufficiency of time alone, see Chapter IV. § 191.

  [144]  Geometrically,  the  axiom  of  the  plane  is,  not  that  three  points

determine a figure at all, which follows from the axiom of the straight line,

but that the straight line joining two casual points of the plane lies wholly in

the plane. This axiom requires a projective method of constructing the plane,

i.e. of finding all the triads of points which determine the same projective

figure as the given triad. The required construction will be obtained if we can

find  any  projective  figure  determined  by  three  points,  and  any  projective

method of reaching other points which determine the same figure.

  Let O, P, Q be the three points whose projective relation is required. Then

we have given us the three straight lines PQ, QO, OP. Metrically, the relation

between these points is made up of the area, and the magnitude of the sides

and angles, of the triangle OPQ, just as the relation between two points is

distance. But projectively, the figure is unchanged when P and Q travel along

OP and OQ, or when OP and OQ turn about O in such a way as still to meet

PQ.  This  is  a  result  of  the  general  principle  of  projective  equivalence

enunciated above (§§ 108, 109). Hence the projective relation between O, P,

Q is the same as that between O, p, q or O, P′, Q′; that is, p, q and P′, Q′ lie in

the plane OPQ.  In  this  way,  any  number  of  points  on  the  plane  may  be

obtained, and by repeating the construction with fresh triads, every point ofthe  plane  can  be  reached.  We  have  to  prove  that,  when  the  plane  is  so

constructed, the straight line joining any two points of the plane lies wholly

in the plane.

  It is evident, from the manner of construction, that any point of PQ, OP,

OQ, OP′ or OQ′ lies in the plane. If we can prove that any point of pq lies in

the  plane,  we  shall  have  proved  all  that  is  required,  since pq  may  be

transformed,  by  successive  repetitions  of  the  same  construction,  into  any

straight line joining two points of the plane. But we have seen that the same

plane is determined by O, p, q and by O, P, Q. The straight lines PQ, pq

have, therefore, the same relation to the plane. But PQ lies wholly in the

plane; therefore pq also lies wholly in the plane. Hence our axiom is proved.

  [145] A detailed proof has been given above, Chap. I. 3rd period. It is to

be observed that any reference to infinitely distant elements involves metrical

ideas.

  [146] Cf. Section A, §§ 115–117.

  [147] Contrast Erdmann, op. cit. p. 138.

  [148] Cf. Erdmann, op. cit. p. 164.

  [149]  Strictly  speaking,  this  method  is  only  applicable  where  the  two

magnitudes are commensurable. But if we take infinite divisibility rigidly, the

units can theoretically be taken so small as to obtain any required degree of

approximation. The difficulty is the universal one of applying to continua the

essentially discrete conception of number.

  [150] Cf. Erdmann, op. cit. p. 50.

  [151] Also called the axiom of congruence. I have taken congruence to be

the definition  of  spatial  equality  by  superposition,  and  shall  therefore

generally speak of the axiom as Free Mobility.

  [152] For the sense in which these figures are to be regarded as material,

see criticism of Helmholtz, Chapter II. §§ 69 ff.

  [153] Op. cit. p. 60.

  [154] The view of Helmholtz and Erdmann, that mechanical experience

suffices  here,  though  geometrical  experience  fails  us,  has  been  discussed

above, Chapter II. §§ 73, 82.

  [155] Chapter II. § 81.

  [156] Chapter II. § 72.

  [157] Contrast Delbœuf, L'ancienne et les nouvelles géométries, II. Rev.

Phil. 1894, Vol. xxxvii. p. 354.  [158] Prolegomena, § 13. See Vaihinger's Commentar, II. pp. 518–532

esp. pp. 521–2. The above was Kant's whole purpose in 1768, but only part of

his purpose in the Prolegomena, where the intuitive nature of space was also

to be proved.

  [159] On the subject of time measurement, cf. Bosanquet's Logic, Vol. i.

pp. 178–183. Since time, in the above account, is measured by motion, its

measurement presupposes that of spatial magnitudes.

  [160] Cf. Stumpf. Ursprung der Raumvorstellung, p. 68.

  [161] As is Helmholtz's other axiom, that the possibility of superposition

is independent of the course pursued in bringing it about.

  [162] Cf. §§ 129, 130.

  [163] This deduction is practically the same as that in Sec. A, but I have

stated it here with more special reference to space and to metrical Geometry.

  [164] The question: "Relations to what?" is a question involving many

difficulties. It will be touched on later in this chapter, and answered, as far as

possible, in the fourth chapter. For the present, in spite of the glaring circle

involved, I shall take the relations as relations to other positions.

  [165] Wiss. Abh. Vol. II. p. 614.

  [166] Cp. Grassmann, Ausdehnungslehre von 1844, 2nd ed. p. XXIII.

  [167] Delbœuf, it is true, speaks of Geometries with m/n dimensions, but

gives no reference (Rev. Phil. T. xxxvi. p. 450).

  [168] In criticizing Erdmann, it will be remembered, we saw that Free

Mobility is a necessary property of his extents, though he does not regard it

as such.

  [169] Cf. Riemann, Hypothesen welche der Geometrie zu Grunde liegen,

Gesammelte Werke, p. 266; also Erdmann, op. cit. p. 154.

  [170] This is subject, in spherical space, to the modification pointed out

below, in dealing with the exception to the axiom of the straight line. See §§

168–171.

  [171] In speaking of distance at once as a quantity and as an intrinsic

relation,  I  am  anxious  to  guard  against  an  apparent  inconsistency.  I  have

spoken of the judgment of quantity, throughout, as one of comparison; how,

then, can a quantity be intrinsic? The reply is that, although measurement and

the  judgment  of  quantity  express  the  result  of  comparison,  yet  the  terms

compared must exist before the comparison; in this case, the terms compared

in measuring distances, i.e. in comparing them inter se, are intrinsic relationsbetween  points.  Thus,  although  the measurement  of  distance  involves  a

reference to other distances, and its expression as a magnitude requires such a

reference, yet its existence does not depend on any external reference, but

exclusively on the two points whose distance it is.

  [172] See the end of the argument on Free Mobility, § 155 ff.

  [173] In Frischauf's "Absolute Geometrie nach Johann Bolyai," Anhang,

there  is  a  series  of  definitions,  starting  from  the  sphere,  as  the  locus  of

congruent point-pairs when one point of the pair is fixed, and hence obtaining

the circle and the straight line. From the above it follows, that the sphere so

defined already involves a curve between the points of the point-pair, by

which various point-pairs can be known as congruent; and it will appear, as

we proceed, that this curve must be a straight line. Frischauf's definition by

means of the sphere involves, therefore, a vicious circle, since the sphere

presupposes the straight line, as the test of congruent point-pairs.

  [174]  Nor  in  any  argument  which,  like  those  of  projective  Geometry,

avoids  the  notion  of  magnitude  or  distance  altogether.  It  follows  that  the

propositions  of  projective  Geometry  apply,  without  reserve,  to  spherical

space, since the exception to the axiom of the straight line arises only on

metrical ground.

  [175] Psychology, Vol. II. pp. 149–150.

  [176] This step in the argument has been put very briefly, since it is a mere

repetition of the corresponding argument in Section A, and is inserted here

only for the sake of logical completeness. See § 137 ff.

  [177]  Cf.  Hannequin,  Essai  critique  sur  l'hypothèse  des  atomes,  Paris,

1895, passim.

 
 
                                     CHAPTER IV.


                PHILOSOPHICAL CONSEQUENCES.

  180.  In  the  present  chapter,  we  have  to  discuss  two  questions  which,

though scarcely geometrical, are of fundamental importance to the theory of

Geometry  propounded  above.  The  first  of  these  questions  is  this:  What

relation can a purely logical and deductive proof, like that from the nature of

a form of externality, bear to an experienced subject-matter such as space?

You have merely framed a general conception, I may be told, containing

space as a particular species, and you have then shown, what should have

been  obvious  from  the  beginning,  that  this  general  conception  contained

some of the attributes of space. But what ground does this give for regarding

these  attributes  as à  priori?  The  conception  Mammal  has  some  of  the

attributes of a horse; but are these attributes therefore à priori adjectives of

the horse? The answer to this obvious objection is so difficult, and involves

so much general philosophy, that I have kept it for a final chapter, in order

not to interrupt the argument on specially geometrical topics.

  181. I have already indicated, in general terms, the ground for regarding as

à  priori  the  properties  of  any  form  of  externality.  This  ground  is

transcendental, i.e.  it  is  to  be  found  in  the  conditions  required  for  the

possibility of experience. The form of externality, like Riemann's manifolds,

is a general class-conception, including time as well as Euclidean and non-

Euclidean  spaces.  It  is  not  motived,  however,  like  the  manifolds,  by  a

quantitative resemblance to space, but by the fact that it fulfils, if it has more

than  one  dimension,  all  those  functions  which,  in  our  actual  world,  are

fulfilled by space. But a form of externality, in order to accomplish this, must

be, not a mere conception, but an actually experienced intuition. Hence the

conception of such a form is the general conception, containing under it every

logically possible intuition which can fulfil the function actually fulfilled by

space.  And  this  function  is,  to  render  possible  experience  of  diverse  but

interrelated things. Some form in sense-perception, then, whose conception is

included under our form of externality, is à priori necessary to experience of

diversity in relation, and without experience of this, we should, as modern

logic shows, have no experience at all. This still leaves untouched the relation

of  the à priori  to  the  subjective:  the  form  of  externality  is  necessary  toexperience, but is not, on that account, to be declared purely subjective. Of

course, necessity for experience can only arise from the nature of the mind

which experiences; but it does not follow that the necessary conditions could

be fulfilled, unless the objective world had certain properties. The ground of

necessity,  we  may  safely  say,  arises  from  the  mind;  but  it  by  no  means

follows that the truth of what is necessary depends only on the constitution of

the  mind.  Where  this  is  not  the  case,  our  conclusion,  when  a  piece  of

knowledge has been declared à priori, can only be: Owing to the constitution

of the mind, experience will be impossible unless the world accepts certain

adjectives.

  Such, in outline, will be the argument of the first half of this chapter, and

such  will  be  the  justification  for  regarding  as à  priori  those  axioms  of

Geometry,  which  were  deduced  above  from  the  conception  of  a  form  of

externality.  For  these  axioms,  and  these  only,  are  necessarily  true  of  any

world in which experience is possible.
      [178]
  182. The view suggested has, obviously, much in common with that of

the  Transcendental  Aesthetic.  Indeed  the  whole  of  it,  I  believe,  can  be

obtained  by  a  certain  limitation  and  interpretation  of  Kant's  classic

arguments. But as it differs, in many important points, from the conclusions

aimed at by Kant, and as the agreement may easily seem greater than it is, I

will begin by a brief comparison, and endeavour, by reference to authoritative

criticisms, to establish the legitimacy of my divergence from him.

  183. In the first place, the psychological element is much larger in Kant's

thesis than in mine. I shall contend, it is true, that a form of externality, if it is

to do its work, must not be a mere conception or a mere inference, but must

be a given element in sense-perception—not, of course, originally given in

isolation,  but  discoverable,  through  analysis,  by  attention  to  the  object  of
                  [179]
sense-perception. But Kant contended, not only that this element is given,

but  also  that  it  is  subjective.  Space,  for  him,  is,  on  the  one  hand,  not

conceptual, but on the other hand, not sensational. It forms, for him, no part

of the data of sense, but is added by a subjective intuition, which he regards
                                                                              [180]
as not only logically, but psychologically, prior to objects in space.

  This part of Kant's argument is wholly irrelevant for us. Whether a form of

externality be given in sense, or in a pure intuition, is for us unimportant,

since we neglect the question as to the connection of the à priori and thesubjective;  while  the  temporal  priority  of  space  to  objects  in  it  has  been

generally  recognized  as  irrelevant  to  Epistemology,  and  has  often  been
                                                          [181]
regarded  as  forming  no  part  of  Kant's  thesis.  If  we  call  intuitional

whatever is given in sense-perception, then we may contend that a form of

externality must be intuitional; but whether it is a pure intuition, in Kant's

sense, or not, is irrelevant to us, as is its priority to the objects in it.

  That  the  non-sensational  nature  of  space  is  no  essential  part  of  Kant's

logical teaching, appears from an examination of his argument. He has made,

in the introduction, the purely logical distinction of matter and form, but has

given to this distinction, in the very moment of suggesting it, a psychological

implication. This he does by the assertion that the form, in which the matter

of sensations is ordered, cannot itself be sensational. From this assumption it

follows, of course, that space cannot be sensational. But the assumption is

totally unsupported by argument, being set forth, apparently, as a self-evident
                                                          [182][183]
axiom; it has been severely criticized by Stumpf and others, and has
                                                                [184]
been described by Vaihinger as a fatal petitio principii; it is irrelevant to

the logical argument, when this argument is separated, as we have separated

it, from all connection with psychological subjectivity; and finally, it leaves

us a prey to psychological theories of space, which have seemed, of late, but

little favourable to the pure Kantian doctrine.

  184. We have a right, therefore, in an epistemological inquiry, to neglect

Kant's  psychological  teaching—in  so  far,  at  any  rate,  as  it  distinguishes

spatial intuition from sensation—and attend rather to the logical aspect alone.

That part of his psychological teaching, which maintains that space is not a

mere conception, is, with certain limitations, sufficiently evident as applied to

actual space; but for us, it must be transformed into a much more difficult

thesis,  namely,  that no  form  of  externality,  which  renders  experience  of

diversity in relation possible, can be merely conceptual. This question, to

which we must return later, is no longer psychological, but belongs wholly to

Epistemology.

  185.  What,  then,  remains  the  kernel,  for  our  purposes,  of  Kant's  first

argument for the apriority of space? His argument, in the form in which he

gave it, is concerned with the eccentric projection of sensations. In order that

I may refer sensations, he says, to something outside myself, I must already

have the subjective space-form in the mind. In this shape, as Vaihinger pointsout (Commentar, II. pp. 69, 165), the argument rests on a petitio principii, for

only if sensations are necessarily non-spatial does their projection demand a

subjective space-form. But, further, is the logical apriority of space concerned

with the externality of things to ourselves?

  Space seems to perform two functions: on the one hand, it reveals things,

by the eccentric projection of sensations, as external to the self, while, on the

other hand, it reveals simultaneously presented things as mutually external.

These two  functions,  though  often  treated  as  coordinate  and  almost
          [185]
equivalent, seem to me widely different. Before we discuss the apriority

of space, we must carefully distinguish, I think, between these two functions,

and decide which of them we are to argue about.

  Now  externality  to  the  Self,  it  would  seem,  must  necessarily  raise  the

whole question of the nature and limits of the Ego, and what is more, it

cannot be derived from spatial presentation, unless we give the Self a definite

position in space. But things acquire a position in space only when they can

appear in sense-perception; we are forced, therefore, if we adopt this view of

the function of space, to regard the Self as a phenomenon presented to sense-

perception. But this reduces externality to the Self to externality to the body.

The body, however, is a presented object like any other, and externality of

objects to it is, therefore, a special case of the mutual externality of presented

things.  Hence  we  cannot  regard  space  as  giving,  primarily  at  any  rate,

externality to the Self, but only the mutual externality of the things presented
                      [186]
to sense-perception.

  186. This, then, is the kind of externality we are to expect from space, and

our question must be: Would the existence of diverse but interrelated things

be  unknowable,  if  there  were  not,  in  sense-perception,  some  form  of

externality? This is the crucial question, on which turns the apriority of our

form, and hence of the necessary axioms of Geometry.

  187.  The  converse  argument  to  mine,  the  argument  from  the  spatio-

temporal element in perception to a world of interrelated but diverse things, is

developed  at  length  in  Bradley's  Logic.  It  is  put  briefly  in  the  following

sentence  (p.  44,  note):  "If  space  and  time  are  continuous,  and  if  all

appearance must occupy some time or space—and it is not hard to support

both  these theses—we  can  at  once  proceed  to  the  conclusion,  no  mere

particular exists. Every phenomenon will exist in more times or spaces than                                                                [187]
one; and against that diversity will be itself an universal." The importance

of this fact appears, when we consider that, if any mere particular existed, all

judgment and inference as to that particular would be impossible, since all

judgment and inference necessarily operate by means of universal. But all

reality is constructed from the This of immediate presentation, from which

judgment and inference necessarily spring. Owing, however, to the continuity

and relativity of space and time, no This can be regarded either as simple or

as self-subsistent. Every This, on the one hand, can be analyzed into Thises,

and on the other hand, is found to be necessarily related to other things,

outside the limits of the given object of sense-perception. This function of

space and time is presupposed in the following statement from Bosanquet's

Logic  (Vol.  I.  pp.  77–78):  "Reality  is  given  for  me in  present  sensuous

perception, and in the immediate feeling of my own sentient existence that

goes with it. The real world, as a definite organized system, is for me an

extension of this present sensation and self feeling by means of judgment,

and it is the essence of judgment to effect and sustain such an extension....

The subject in every judgment of Perception is some given spot or point in

sensuous contact with the percipient self. But, as all reality is continuous, the

subject is not merely this given spot or point."

  188.  This  doctrine  of  Bradley  and  Bosanquet  is  the  converse  of  the

epistemological  doctrine  I  have  to  advocate.  Owing  to  the  continuity  and

relativity of space and time, they say, we are able to construct a systematic

world, by judgment and inference, out of that fragmentary and yet necessarily

complex  existence  which  is  given  in  sense-perception.  My  contention  is,

conversely, that since all knowledge is necessarily derived by an extension of

the This of sense-perception, and since such extension is only possible if the

This has that fragmentary and yet complex character conferred by a form of

externality,  therefore  some  form  of  externality,  given  with  the This,  is

essential to all knowledge, and is thus logically à priori. Bradley's argument,

if sound, already proves this contention; for while, on the one hand, he uses

no properties of space and time but those which belong to every form of

externality, he proves, on the other hand, that judgment and inference require

the This to be neither single nor self-subsistent. But I will endeavour, since

the point is of fundamental importance, to reproduce the proof, in a form

more suited than Bradley's to the epistemological question.  189. The essence of my contention is that, if experience is to be possible,

every sensational This must, when attended to, be found, on the one hand,

resolvable into Thises,  and  on  the  other  hand  dependent,  for  some  of  its

adjectives, on external reference. The second of these theses follows from the

first, for if we take one of the Thises contained in the first This, we get a new

This necessarily related to the other Thises which make up the original This. I

may, therefore, confine myself to the first proposition, which affirms that the

object of perception must contain a diversity, not only of conceptual content,

but  of  existence,  and  that  this  can  only  be  known  if  sense-perception

contains, as an element, some form of externality.

  My premiss, in this argument, is that all knowledge involves a recognition

of  diversity  in  relation,  or,  if  we  prefer  it,  of  identity  in  difference.  This

premiss I accept from Logic, as resulting from the analysis of judgment and

inference. To prove such a premiss, would require a treatise on Logic; I must

refer the reader, therefore, to the works of Bradley and Bosanquet on the

subject.  It  follows  at  once,  from  my  premiss,  that  knowledge  would  be

impossible, unless the object of attention could be complex, i.e. not a mere

particular. Now could the mental object—i.e., in this connection, the object

of  a  cognition—be  complex,  if  the  object  of  immediate  perception  were

always simple?

  190.  We  might  be  inclined,  at  first  sight,  to  answer  this  question

affirmatively. But several difficulties, I think, would prevent such an answer.

In the first place, knowledge must start from perception. Hence, either we

could have no knowledge except of our present perception, or else we must

be able to contrast and compare it with some other perception. Now in the

first case, since the present perception, by hypothesis, is a mere particular,

knowledge of it is impossible, according to our premiss. But in the second

case,  the  other  perception,  with  which  we  compare  our  first,  must  have

occurred  at  some  other  time,  and  with  time,  we  have  at  once  a  form  of

externality. But what is more, our present perception is no longer a mere

particular. For the power of comparing it with another perception involves a

point of identity between the two, and thus renders both complex. Moreover,

time must be continuous, and the present, as Bradley points out, is no mere
                [188]
point  of  time.  Thus  our  present  perception  contains  the  complexity

involved in duration throughout the specious present: its mere particularityand its simplicity are lost. Its self-subsistence is also lost, for beyond the

specious present, lie the past and the future, to which our present perception

thus  unavoidably  refers  us.  Time  at  least,  therefore,  is  essential  to  that

identity in difference, which all knowledge postulates.

  191.  But  we  have  derived,  from  all  this,  no  ground  for  affirming  a

multiplicity  of  real  things,  or  a  form  of  externality  of  more  than  one

dimension, which, we saw, was necessary for the truth of two out of our three

axioms. This brings us to the question: Have we enough, with time alone as a

form of externality, for the possibility of knowledge?

  This question we must, I think, answer in the negative. With time alone,

we have seen, our presented object must be complex, but its complexity must,

if I may use such a phrase, be merely adjectival. Without a second form of
                                                                      [189]
externality, only one thing can be given at one moment, and this one

thing, therefore, must constitute the whole of our world. The object of past

perception must—since our one thing has nothing external to it, by which it

could be created or destroyed—be regarded as the same thing in a different

state. The complexity, therefore, will lie only in the changing states of our

one  thing—it  will  be  adjectival,  not  substantival.  Moreover  we  have  the

following  dilemma:  Either  the  one  thing  must  be  ourselves,  or  else  self-

consciousness  could  never  arise.  But  the  chief  difficulty  of  such  a  world

would lie in the changes of the thing. What could cause these changes, since

we  should  know  of  nothing  external  to  our  thing?  It  would  be  like  a

Leibnitzian  monad,  without  any  God  outside  it  to  prearrange  its  changes.

Causality, in such a world, could not be applied, and change would be wholly

inexplicable.

 

  Hence  we  require  also  the  possibility  of  a  diversity  of  simultaneously

existing things, not merely of successive adjectives; and this, we have seen,

cannot  be  given  by  time  alone,  but  only  by  a  form  of  externality  for

simultaneous parts of one presentation. We could never, in other words, infer

the existence of diverse but interrelated things, unless the object of sense-

perception could have substantival complexity, and for such complexity we

require a form of externality other than time. Such a form, moreover, as was

shown in Chapter III., Section A (§ 135), can only fulfil its functions if it has

more than one dimension. In our actual world, this form is given by space; in

any world, knowable to beings with our laws of thought, some such form, aswe have now seen, must be given in sense-perception.

  This argument may be briefly summed up, by assuming the doctrine of

Bradley, that all knowledge is obtained by inference from the This of sense-

perception.  For,  if  this  be  so,  the This—in  order  that  inference,  which

depends  on  identity  in  difference,  may  be  possible  at  all—must  itself  be

complex, and must, on analysis, reveal adjectives having a reference beyond

itself. But this, as was shown above, can only happen by means of a form of

externality. This establishes the à priori axioms of Geometry, as necessarily

having existential import and validity in any intelligible world.

  192. The above argument, I hope, has explained why I hold it possible to

deduce, from a mere conception like that of a form of externality, the logical

apriority of certain axioms as to experienced space. The Kantian argument—

which was correct, if our reasoning has been sound, in asserting that real

diversity, in our actual world, could only be known by the help of space—

was only mistaken, so far as its purely logical scope extends, in overlooking

the possibility of other forms of externality, which could, if they existed,

perform  the  same  task  with  equal  efficiency.  In  so  far  as  space  differs,

therefore, from these other conceptions of possible intuitional forms, it is a

mere experienced fact, while in so far as its properties are those which all

such forms must have, it is à priori necessary to the possibility of experience.

  I cannot hope, however, that no difficulty will remain, for the reader, in

such a deduction, from abstract conceptions, of the properties of an actual

datum in sense-perception. Let us consider, for example, such a property as

impenetrability. To suppose two things simultaneously in the same position

in a form of externality, is a logical contradiction; but can we say as much of

actual space and time? Is not the impossibility, here, a matter of experience

rather than of logic? Not if the above argument has been sound, I reply. For

in that case, we infer real diversity, i.e. the existence of different things, only

from difference of position in space or time. It follows, that to suppose two

things in the same point of space and time, is still a logical contradiction: not

because we have constructed the data of sense out of logic, but because logic

is  dependent,  as  regards  its  application,  on  the  nature  of  these  data.  This

instance illustrates, what I am anxious to make plain, that my argument has

not  attempted  to  construct  the  living  wealth  of  sense-perception  out  of

"bloodless  categories,"  but  only  to  point  out  that,  unless  sense-perception

contained a certain element, these categories would be powerless to grapplewith it.

  193.  How  we  are  to  account  for  the  fortunate  realization  of  these

requirements—whether  by  a  pre-established  harmony,  by  Darwinian

adaptation to our environment, by the subjectivity of the necessary element in

sense-perception, or by a fundamental identity and unity between ourselves

and the rest of reality—is a further question, belonging rather to metaphysics

than to our present line of argument. The à priori, we have said throughout, is

that which is necessary for the possibility of experience, and in this we have a

purely logical criterion, giving results which only Logic and Epistemology

can prove or disprove. What is subjective in experience, on the contrary, is

primarily a question for psychology, and should be decided on psychological

grounds alone. When these two questions have been separately answered, but

not till then, we may frame theories as to the connection of the à priori and

the subjective; to allow such theories to influence our decision, on either of

the two previous questions, is liable, surely, to confuse the issue, and prevent

a clear discrimination between fundamentally different points of view.

 

  194. I come now to the second question with which this chapter has to

deal, the question, namely: What are we to do with the contradictions which

obtruded themselves in Chapter III., whenever we came to a point which

seemed fundamental? I shall treat this question briefly, as I have little to add

to answers with which we are all familiar. I have only to prove, first, that the

contradictions  are  inevitable,  and  therefore  form  no  objection  to  my

argument; secondly, that the first step in removing them is to restore the

notion of matter, as that which, in the data of sense-perception, is localized

and interrelated in space.

  195. The contradictions in space are an ancient theme—as ancient, in fact,

as Zeno's refutation of motion. They are, roughly, of two kinds, though the

two kinds cannot be sharply divided. There are the contradictions inherent in

the notion of the continuum, and the contradictions which spring from the

fact that space, while it must, to be knowable, be pure relativity, must also, it

would seem, since it is immediately experienced, be something more than

mere relations. The first class of contradictions has been encountered more

frequently in this essay, and is also, I think, the more definite, and the more

important for our present purpose. I doubt, however, whether the two classes

are really distinct; for any continuum, I believe, in which the elements are notdata, but intellectual constructions resulting from analysis, can be shown to

have the same relational and yet not wholly relational character as belongs to

space.

  The  three  following  contradictions,  which  I  shall  discuss  successively,

seem to me the most prominent in a theory of Geometry.

  (1) Though the parts of space are intuitively distinguished, no conception

is adequate to differentiate them. Hence arises a vain search for elements, by

which the differentiation could be accomplished, and for a whole, of which

the  parts  of  space  are  to  be  components.  Thus  we  get  the  point,  or  zero

extension, as the spatial element, and an infinite regress or a vicious circle in

the search for a whole.

  (2) All positions being relative, positions can only be defined by their

relations, i.e. by the straight lines or planes through them; but straight lines

and  planes,  being  all  qualitatively  similar,  can  only  be  defined  by  the

positions they relate. Hence, again, we get a vicious circle.

  (3)  Spatial  figures  must  be  regarded  as  relations.  But  a  relation  is

necessarily  indivisible,  while  spatial  figures  are  necessarily  divisible ad

infinitum.

  196.  (1) Points.  The  antinomy  of  the  point—which  arises  wherever  a

continuum is given, and elements have to be sought in it—is fundamental to

Geometry. It has been given, perhaps unintentionally, by Veronese as the first

axiom, in the form: "There are different points. All points are identical" (op.

cit. p. 226). We saw, in discussing projective Geometry, that straight lines

and planes must be regarded, on the one hand as relations between points,
                                                      [190]
and on the other hand as made up of points. We saw again, in dealing

with measurement, how space must be regarded as infinitely divisible, and

yet as mere relativity. But what is divisible and consists of parts, as space

does, must lead at last, by continued analysis, to a simple and unanalyzable

part, as the unit of differentiation. For whatever can be divided, and has parts,

possesses some thinghood, and must, therefore, contain two ultimate units,

the whole namely, and the smallest element possessing thinghood. But in

space this is notoriously not the case. After hypostatizing space, as Geometry

is compelled to do, the mind imperatively demands elements, and insists on

having them, whether possible or not. Of this demand, all the geometrical
                                                                [191]
applications of the infinitesimal calculus are evidence. But what sort ofelements  do  we  thus  obtain?  Analysis,  being  unable  to  find  any  earlier

halting-place, finds its elements in points, that is, in zero quanta of space.

Such a conception is a palpable contradiction, only rendered tolerable by its

necessity and familiarity. A point must be spatial, otherwise it would not

fulfil the function of a spatial element; but again it must contain no space, for

any finite extension is capable of further analysis. Points can never be given

in intuition, which has no concern with the infinitesimal: they are a purely

conceptual  construction,  arising out  of  the  need  of  terms  between  which

spatial relations can hold. If space be more than relativity, spatial relations

must involve spatial relata; but no relata appear, until we have analyzed our

spatial data down to nothing. The contradictory notion of the point, as a thing

in space without spatial magnitude, is the only outcome of our search for

spatial relata. This reductio ad absurdum surely suffices, by itself, to prove

the essential relativity of space.

  197.  Thus  Geometry  is  forced,  since  it  wishes  to  regard  space  as

independent, to hypostatize its abstractions, and therefore to invent a self-

contradictory notion as the spatial element. A similar absurdity appears, even

more  obviously,  in  the  notion  of  a  whole  of  space.  The  antinomy  may,

therefore,  be  stated  thus:  Space,  as  we  have  seen  throughout,  must,  if

knowledge  of  it  is  to  be  possible,  be  mere  relativity;  but  it  must  also,  if

independent knowledge of it, such as Geometry seeks, is to be possible, be

something more than mere relativity, since it is divisible and has parts. But

we  saw,  in Chap. III.,  Section  A  (§  133)  that  knowledge  of  a  form  of

externality must be logically independent of the particular matter filling the

form. How then are we to extricate ourselves from this dilemma?

  The only way, I think, is, not to make Geometry dependent on Physics,
                                              [192]
which  we  have  seen  to  be  erroneous,  but  to  give  every  geometrical

proposition  a  certain  reference  to  matter  in  general.  And  at  this  point  an

important distinction must be made. We have hitherto spoken of space as

relational, and of spatial figures as relations. But space, it would seem, is

rather  relativity  than  relations—itself  not  a  relation,  it  gives  the  bare
                                                        [193]
possibility of relations between diverse things. As applied to a spatial

figure, which can only arise by a differentiation of space, and hence by the

introduction of some differentiating matter, the word relation is, perhaps, less

misleading  than  any  other;  as  applied  to  empty  undifferentiated  space,  itseems by no means an accurate description.

  But a bare possibility cannot exist, or be given in sense-perception! What

becomes, then, of the arguments of the first part of this chapter? I reply, it is

not  empty  space,  but  spatial  figures,  which  sense-perception  reveals,  and

spatial figures, as we have just seen, involve a differentiation of space, and

therefore a reference to the matter which is in space. It is spatial figures, also,

and  not  empty  space,  with  which  Geometry  has  to  deal.  The  antinomy

discussed above arises then—so it would seem—from the attempt to deal

with empty space, rather than with spatial figures and the matter to which

they necessarily refer.

  198. Let us see whether, by this change, we can overcome the antinomy of

the point. Spatial figures, we shall now say, are relations between the matter

which  differentiates  empty  space.  Their  divisibility,  which  seemed  to

contradict their relational character, may be explained in two ways: first, as

holding of the figures considered as parts of empty space, which is itself not a

relation;  second,  as  denoting  the  possibility  of  continuous  change  in  the

relation expressed by the spatial figure. These two ways are, at bottom, the

same;  for  empty  space  is  a  possibility  of  relations,  and  the  figure,  when

viewed in connection with empty space, thus becomes a possible relation,

with which other possible relations may be contrasted or compared. But the

second way of regarding divisibility is the better way, since it introduces a

reference  to  the  matter  which  differentiates  empty  space,  without  which,

spatial figures, and therefore Geometry, could not exist. It is empty space,

then—so we must conclude—which gives rise to the antinomy in question;

for  empty  space  is  a  bare  possibility  of  relations,  undifferentiated  and

homogeneous, and thus wholly destitute of parts or of thinghood. To speak of

parts of a possibility is nonsense; the parts and differentiations arise only

through a reference to the matter which is differentiated in space.

  199.  But  what  nature  must  we  ascribe  to  this  matter,  which  is  to  be

involved in all geometrical propositions? In criticizing Helmholtz (Chap. II. §

73), it may be remembered, we decided that Geometry refers to a peculiar

and abstract kind of matter, which is not regarded as possessing any causal

qualities, as exerting or as subject to the action of forces. And this is the

matter, I think, which we require for the needs of the moment. Not that we

affirm, of course, that actual matter can be destitute of the properties with

which Physics is cognizant, but that we abstract from these properties, asbeing irrelevant to Geometry. All that we require, for our immediate purpose,

is a subject of that diversity which space renders possible, or terms for those

relations  by  which  empty  space,  if  space  is  to  be  studied  at  all,  must  be

differentiated. But how must a matter, which is to fulfil this function, be

regarded?

  Empty space, we have said, is a possibility of diversity in relation, but

spatial  figures,  with  which  Geometry  necessarily  deals,  are  the  actual

relations  rendered  possible  by  empty  space.  Our  matter,  therefore,  must

supply  the  terms  for  these  relations.  It  must  be  differentiated,  since  such

differentiation, as we have seen, is the special work of space. We must find,
                                                                          [194]
therefore, in our matter, that unit of differentiation, or atom, which in

space we could not find. This atom must be simple, i.e. it must contain no

real diversity; it must be a This not resolvable into Thises. Being simple, it

can contain no relations within itself, and consequently, since spatial figures

are mere relations, it cannot appear as a spatial figure; for every spatial figure

involves some diversity of matter. But our atom must have spatial relations

with other atoms, since to supply terms for these relations is its only function.

It is also capable of having these relations, since it is differentiated from other

atoms. Hence we obtain an unextended term for spatial relations, precisely of

the kind we require. So long as we sought this term without reference to

anything more than space, the self-contradictory notion of the point was the

only outcome of our search; but now that we allow a reference to the matter

differentiated by space, we find at once the term which was needed, namely,

a  non-spatial  simple  element,  with  spatial  relations  to  other  elements.  To

Geometry such a term will appear, owing to its spatial relations, as a point;

but the contradiction of the point, as we now see, is a result only of the undue

abstraction with which Geometry deals.

  200. (2) The  circle  in  the  definition  of  straight  lines  and  planes. This

difficulty need not long detain us, since we have already, with the material

atom, broken through the relativity which caused our circle. Straight lines, in

the purely geometrical procedure, are defined only by points, and points only

by straight lines. But points, now, are replaced by material atoms: the duality

of points and lines, therefore, has disappeared, and the straight line may be

defined as the spatial relation between two unextended atoms. These atoms

have spatial adjectives, derived from their relations to other atoms; but theyhave no intrinsic spatial adjectives, such as could belong to them if they had

extension or figure. Thus straight lines and planes are the true spatial units,

and points result only from the attempt to find, within space, those terms for

spatial relations which exist only in a more than spatial matter. Straight lines,

planes  and  volumes  are  the  spatial  relations  between  two,  three  or  four

unextended atoms, and points are a merely convenient geometrical fiction, by

which  possible  atoms  are  replaced.  For,  since  space,  as  we  saw,  is  a

possibility, Geometry deals not with actually realized spatial relations, but

with the whole scheme of possible relations.

  201. (3) Space is at once relational and more than relational. We have

already touched on the question how far space is other than relations, but as

this question is quite fundamental, as relation is an ambiguous and dangerous

word,  as  I  have  made  constant  use  of  the  relativity  of  space  without

attempting to define a relation, it will be necessary to discuss this antinomy at

length.

  202. Now for this discussion it is essential to distinguish clearly between

empty space and spatial figures. Empty space, as a form of externality, is not

actual  relations,  but  the  possibility  of  relations:  if  we  ascribe  existential

import to it, as the ground, in reality, of all diversity in relation, we at once

have space as something not itself relations, though giving the possibility of

all relations. In this sense, space is to be distinguished from spatial order.

Spatial order, it may be said, presupposes space, as that in which this order is
                                [195]
possible.  Thus  Stumpf  says:  "There  is  no  order  or  relation  without  a

positive  absolute  content,  underlying  it,  and  making  it  possible  to  order

anything in this manner. Why and how should we otherwise distinguish one

order from another?... To distinguish different orders from one another, we

must everywhere recognize a particular absolute content, in relation to which

the order takes place. And so space, too, is not a mere order, but just that by

which the spatial order, side-by-sideness (Nebeneinander) distinguishes itself

from the rest."

  May we not, then, resolve the antinomy very simply, by a reference to this

ambiguity of space? Bradley contends (Appearance and Reality, pp. 36–7)

that, on the one hand, space has parts, and is therefore not mere relations,

while on the other hand, when we try to say what these parts are, we find

them after all to be mere relations. But cannot the space which has parts beregarded as empty space, Stumpf's absolute underlying content, which is not

mere relations, while the parts, in so far as they turn out to be mere relations,

are those relations which constitute spatial order, not empty space? If this can

be maintained, the antinomy no longer exists.

  But such an explanation, though I believe it to be a first step towards a

solution, will, I fear, itself demand almost as much explanation as the original

difficulty. For the connection of empty space with spatial order is itself a

question full of difficulty, to be answered only after much labour.

  203. Let us consider what this empty space is. (I speak of "empty" space

without  necessarily  implying  the  absence  of  matter,  but  only  to  denote  a

space which is not a mere order of material things.) Stumpf regards it as

given in sense; Kant, in the last two arguments of his metaphysical deduction,

argues that it is an intuition, not a concept, and must be known before spatial

order becomes possible. I wish to maintain, on the contrary, that it is wholly

conceptual; that space is given only as spatial order; that spatial relations,

being given, appear as more than mere relations, and so become hypostatized;

that when hypostatized, the whole collection of them is regarded as contained

in empty space; but that this empty space itself, if it means more than the

logical possibility of space-relations, is an unnecessary and self-contradictory

assumption. Let us begin by considering Kant's arguments on this point.

  Leibnitz had affirmed that space was only relations, while Newton had

maintained the objective reality of absolute space. Kant adopted a middle

course: he asserted absolute space, but regarded it as purely subjective. The

assertion of absolute space is the object of his second argument; for if space

were mere relations between things, it would necessarily disappear with the
                                                                                      [196]
disappearance of the things in it; but this the second argument denies.

Now  spatial  order  obviously  does  disappear  with  matter,  but  absolute  or

empty  space  may  be  supposed  to  remain.  It  is  this,  then,  which  Kant  is

arguing  about,  and  it  is  this  which  he  affirms  to  be  a  pure  intuition,
                                              [197]
necessarily presupposed by spatial order.

  204.  But  can  we  agree  in  regarding  empty  space,  the  "infinite  given

whole," as really given? Must we not, in spite of Kant's argument, regard it as

wholly conceptual? It is not required, in the first place, by the argument of

the first half of this chapter, which required only that every This of sense-

perception should be resolvable into Thises, and thus involved only an orderamong Thises, not anything given originally without reference to them at all.
                                                  [198]
In the second place, Kant's two arguments designed to prove that empty

space is not conceptual, are inadequate to their purpose. The argument that

the parts of space are not contained under it, but in it, proves certainly that

space is not a general conception, of which spatial figures are the instances;

but it by no means follows that empty space is not a conception. Empty space

is undifferentiated and homogeneous; parts of space, or spatial figures, arise

only by reference to some differentiating matter, and thus belong rather to

spatial order than to empty space. If empty space be the pre-condition of

spatial order, we cannot expect it to be connected with spatial relations as

genus  with  species.  But  empty  space  may  nevertheless  be  a  universal

conception; it may be related to spatial order as the state to the citizens. These

are not instances of the state, but are contained in it; they also, in a sense,

presuppose it, for a man can only become a citizen by being related to other
                  [199]
citizens in a state.

 

  The uniqueness of space, again, seems hardly a valid argument for its

intuitional  nature;  to  regard  it  as  an  argument  implies,  indeed,  that  all

conceptions are abstracted from a series of instances—a view which has been
                                                                                      [200]
criticized in Chapter II. (§ 77), and need not be further discussed here.

There is no ground, therefore, in Kant's two arguments for the intuitional

nature of empty space, which can be maintained against criticism.

  205. Another ground for condemning empty space is to be found in the

mathematical  antinomies.  For  it  is  no  solution,  as  Lotze  points  out

(Metaphysik,  Bk.  II.  Chap.  I.,  §  106),  to  regard  empty  space  as  purely

subjective: contradictions in a necessary subjective intuition form as great a

difficulty as in anything else. But these antinomies arise only in connection

with empty space, not with spatial order as an aggregate of relations. For only

when space is regarded as possessed of some thinghood, can a whole or a true

element  be  demanded.  This  we  have  seen  already  in  connection  with  the

Point. When space is regarded, so far as it is valid, as only spatial order,

unbounded extension and infinite divisibility both disappear. What is divided

is  not  spatial  relations,  but  matter;  and  if  matter,  as  we  have  seen  that

Geometry requires, consists of unextended atoms with spatial relations, there

is no reason to regard matter either as infinitely divisible, or as consisting of

atoms of finite extension.  206.  But  whence  arises,  on  this  view,  the  paradox  that  we  cannot  but

regard space as having more or less thinghood, and as divisible ad infinitum?

This  must  be  explained,  I  think,  as  a  psychological  illusion,  unavoidably

arising from the fact that spatial relations are immediately presented. They

thus have a peculiar psychical quality, as immediate experiences, by which

quality they can be distinguished from time-relations or any other order in

which things may be arranged. To Stumpf, whose problem is psychological,

such a psychical quality would constitute an absolute underlying content, and

would  fully  justify  his  thesis;  to  us,  however,  whose  problem  is

epistemological,  it  would  not  do  so,  but  would  leave  the meaning of the

spatial element in sense-perception free from any implication of an absolute
                [201]
or empty space. May we not, then, abandon empty space, and say: Spatial

order consists of felt relations, and quâ felt has, for Psychology, an existence

not wholly resolvable into relations, and unavoidably seeming to be more

than  mere  relations.  But  when  we  examine  the  information,  as  to  space,

which  we  derive  from  sense-perception,  we  find  ourselves  plunged  in

contradictions, as soon as we allow this information to consist of more than

relations. This leaves spatial order alone in the field, and reduces empty space

to a mere name for the logical possibility of spatial relations.

  207.  The  apparent  divisibility  of  the  relations  which  constitute  spatial

order,  then,  may  be  explained  in  two  ways,  though  these  are  at  bottom

equivalent. We may take the relation as considered in connection with empty

space,  in  which  case  it  becomes  more  than  a  relation;  but  being  falsely

hypostatized,  it  appears  as  a  complex  thing,  necessarily  composed  of

elements, which elements, however, nowhere emerge until we analyze the

pseudo-thing  down  to  nothing,  and  arrive  at  the  point.  In  this  sense,  the

divisibility of spatial relations is an unavoidable illusion. Or again, we may

take the relation in connection with the material atoms it relates. In this case,

other  atoms  may  be  imagined,  differently  localized  by  different  spatial

relations. If they are localized on the straight line joining two of the original

atoms, this straight line appears as divided by them. But the original relation

is not really divided: all that has happened is, that two or more equivalent

relations have replaced it, as two compounded relations of father and son may

replace the equivalent relation of grandfather and grandson. These two ways

of viewing the apparent divisibility are equivalent: for empty space, in so faras it is not illusion, is a name for the aggregate of possible space-relations. To

regard  a  figure  in  empty  space  as  divided,  therefore,  means,  if  it  means

anything, to regard two or more other possible relations as substituted for it,

which gives the second way of viewing the question.

  The same reference to matter, then, by which the antinomy of the Point

was solved, solves also the antinomy as to the relational nature of space.

Space, if it is to be freed from contradictions, must be regarded exclusively as

spatial order, as relations between unextended material atoms. Empty space,

which arises, by an inevitable illusion, out of the spatial element in sense-

perception, may be regarded, if we wish to retain it, as the bare principle of

relativity, the bare logical possibility of relations between diverse things. In

this  sense,  empty  space  is  wholly  conceptual;  spatial  order  alone  is

immediately experienced.

  208. But in what sense does spatial order consist of relations? We have

hitherto spoken of externality as a relation, and in a sense such a manner of

speaking is justified. Externality, when predicated of anything, is an adjective

of that thing, and implies a reference to some other thing. To this extent, then,

externality is analogous to other relations; and only to this extent, in our

previous arguments, has it been regarded as a relation. But when we take

account of further qualities of relations, externality begins to appear, not so

much  as  a  relation,  but  rather  as  a  necessary  aspect  or  element  in  every

relation. And this is borne out by the necessity, for the existence of relations,

of some given form of externality.

  Every relation, we may say, involves a diversity between the related terms,

but  also  some  unity.  Mere  diversity  does  not  give  a  ground  for  that

interaction, and that interdependence, which a relation requires. Mere unity

leaves the terms identical, and thus destroys the reference of one to another

required for a relation. Mere externality, taken in abstraction, gives only the

element of diversity required for a relation, and is thus more abstract than any

actual relation. But mere diversity does not give that indivisible whole of

which any actual relation must consist, and is thus, when regarded abstractly,

not subject to the restrictions of ordinary relations.

  But with mere diversity, we seem to have returned to empty space, and

abandoned spatial order. Mere diversity, surely, is either complete or non-

existent; degrees of diversity, or a quantitative measure of it, are nonsense.

We cannot, therefore, reduce spatial order to mere diversity. Two things, ifthey occupy different positions in space, are necessarily diverse, but are as

necessarily something more; otherwise spatial order becomes unmeaning.

 

  Empty  space,  then,  in  the  above  sense  of  the  possibility  of  spatial

relations,  contains  only  one  aspect  of  a  relation,  namely  the  aspect  of

diversity; but spatial order, by its reference to matter, becomes more concrete,

and contains also the element of unity, arising out of the connection of the

different  material  atoms.  Spatial  order,  then,  consists  of  relations  in  the

ordinary sense; its merely spatial element, however—if one may make such a

distinction—the element, that is, which can be abstracted from matter and

regarded as constituting empty space, is only one aspect of a relation, but an

aspect which, in the concrete, must be inseparably bound up with the other

aspect. Here, once more, we see the ground of the contradictions in empty

space, and the reason why spatial order is free from these contradictions.

  Conclusion.

  209. We have now completed our review of the foundations of Geometry.

It will be well, before we take leave of the subject, briefly to review and

recapitulate the results we have won.

  In  the  first  chapter,  we  watched  the  development  of  a  branch  of

Mathematics designed, at first, only to establish the logical independence of

Euclid's axiom of parallels, and the possibility of a self-consistent Geometry

which dispensed with it. We found the further development of the subject

entangled, for a while, in philosophical controversy; having shown one axiom

to be superfluous, the geometers of the second period hoped to prove the

same conclusion of all the others, but failed to construct any system free from

three  fundamental  axioms.  Being  concerned  with  analytical  and  metrical

Geometry,  they  tended  to  regard  Algebra  as à priori, but held that those

properties of spatial magnitudes, which were not deducible from the laws of

Algebra, must be empirical. In all this, they aimed as much at discrediting

Kant as at advancing Mathematics. But with the third period, the interest in

Philosophy diminishes, the opposition to Euclid becomes less marked, and

most important of all, measurement is no longer regarded as fundamental,

and space is dealt with by descriptive rather than quantitative methods. But

nevertheless, three axioms, substantially the same as those retained in the

second period, are still retained by all geometers.

  In the second chapter, we endeavoured, by a criticism of some geometricalphilosophies, to prepare the ground for a constructive theory of Geometry.

We saw that Kant, in applying the argument of the Transcendental Aesthetic

to space, had gone too far, since its logical scope extended only to some form

of externality in general. We saw that Riemann, Helmholtz and Erdmann,

misled  by  the  quantitative  bias,  overlooked  the  qualitative  substratum

required by all judgments of quantity, and thus mistook the direction in which

the  necessary  axioms  of  Geometry  are  to  be  found.  We  rejected,  also,

Helmholtz's view that Geometry depends on Physics, because we found that

Physics  must  assume  a  knowledge  of  Geometry  before  it  can  become

possible. But we admitted, in Geometry, a reference to matter—not, however,

to matter as empirically known in Physics, but to a more abstract matter,

whose sole function is to appear in space, and supply the terms for spatial

relations. We admitted, however, besides this, that all actual measurement

must be effected by means of actual matter, and is only empirically possible,

through the empirical knowledge of approximately rigid bodies. In criticizing

Lotze, we saw that the most important sense, in which non-Euclidean spaces

are possible, is a philosophical sense, namely, that they are not condemned by

any à priori argument as to the necessity of space for experience, and that

consequently, if they are not affirmed, this must be on empirical grounds

alone. Lotze's strictures on the mathematical procedure of Metageometry we

found to be wholly due to ignorance of the subject.

  Proceeding, in the third chapter, to a constructive theory of Geometry, we

saw  that  projective  Geometry,  which  has  no  reference  to  quantity,  is

necessarily true of any form of externality. Its three axioms—homogeneity,

dimensions, and the straight line—were all deduced from the conception of a

form of externality, and, since some such form is necessary to experience,

were all declared à priori. In metrical Geometry, on the contrary, we found

an empirical element, arising out of the alternatives of Euclidean and non-

Euclidean  space.  Three à  priori  axioms,  common  to  these  spaces,  and

necessary conditions of the possibility of measurement, still remained; these

were the axiom of Free Mobility, the axiom that space has a finite integral

number of dimensions, and the axiom of distance. Except for the new idea of

motion,  these  were  found  equivalent  to  the  projective  triad,  and  thus

necessarily  true  of  any  form  of  externality.  But  the  remaining  axioms  of

Euclid—the axiom of three dimensions, the axiom that two straight lines can

never  enclose  a  space,  and  the  axiom  of  parallels—were  regarded  asempirical laws, derived from the investigation and measurement of our actual

space, and true only, as far as the last two are concerned, within the limits set

by errors of observation.

  In  the  present  chapter,  we  completed  our  proof  of  the  apriority  of  the

projective  and  equivalent  metrical  axioms,  by  showing  the  necessity,  for

experience, of some form of externality, given by sensation or intuition, and

not merely inferred from other data. Without this, we said, a knowledge of

diverse but interrelated things, the corner-stone of all experience, would be

impossible.  Finally,  we  discussed  the  contradictions  arising  out  of  the

relativity and continuity of space, and endeavoured to overcome them by a

reference to matter. This matter, we found, must consist of unextended atoms,

localized by their spatial relations, and appearing, in Geometry, as points. But

the  non-spatial  adjectives  of  matter,  we  contended,  are  irrelevant  to

Geometry, and its causal properties may be left out of account. To deal with

the new contradictions, involved in such a notion of matter, would demand a

fresh treatise, leading us, through Kinematics, into the domains of Dynamics

and  Physics.  But  to  discuss  the  special  difficulties  of  space  is  all  that  is

possible in an essay on the Foundations of Geometry.

  FOOTNOTES:

  [178] Compare, with the following paragraphs, the admirable discussion

in Mr Hobhouse's Theory of Knowledge (Methuen 1896), Part I. Chapter II.

  [179]  I  speak  of  sense-perception  instead  of  sensation,  so  as  not  to

prejudge the issue as to the sensational nature of space.

  [180] See Vaihinger's Commentar, II. pp. 86–7, 168–171.

  [181] See Caird, Critical Philosophy of Kant, Vol. I. p. 287.

  [182] Ursprung der Raumvorstellung, pp. 12–30.

  [183] See the references in Vaihinger's Commentar, II. p. 76 ff.

  [184] Commentar, II. p. 71 ff.

  [185] E.g. by Caird, op. cit. Vol. I. p. 286.

  [186]  I  have  no  wish  to  deny,  however,  that  space  is  essential  in  the

subsequent distinction of Self and not-Self.

  [187] See also Book I. Chap II. passim; especially p. 51 ff. and pp. 70–1.

  [188] Logic, p. 51 ff.

  [189]  For  the This,  on  such  a  hypothesis,  has  a  purely  temporal

complexity, and is not resolvable into coexisting Thises.

  [190] Chapter III. Section A, (§ 131).  [191]  Cf.  Hannequin,  Essai  critique  sur  l'hypothèse  des  atomes,  Paris

1895, Chap. I. Section III.; especially p. 43.

  [192] See Chapter II. § 69 ff.

  [193] See third antinomy below, § 201 ff.

  [194] This atom, of course, must not be confounded with the atom of

Chemistry.

  [195] Ursprung der Raumvorstellung, p. 15.

  [196] See Vaihinger's Commentar, II. pp. 189–190.

  [197] See ibid. p. 224 ff. for Kant's inconsistencies on this point.

  [198] The fourth and fifth in the first edition, the third and fourth in the

second.

  [199] Cf. Vaihinger's Commentar, II. p. 218.

  [200] Cf. Vaihinger's Commentar, II. p. 207.

  [201] Cf. James, Psychology, Vol. II., p. 148 ff.

  THE END,

 
 

     Our Knowledge of the External World as a Field

                                       Contents

 
 

PREFACE

LECTURE I  

CURRENT TENDENCIES

LECTURE II  

LOGIC AS THE ESSENCE OF PHILOSOPHY

LECTURE III  

ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD

LECTURE IV  

THE WORLD OF PHYSICS AND THE WORLD OF SENSE

LECTURE V  

THE THEORY OF CONTINUITY

LECTURE VI  

THE PROBLEM OF INFINITY CONSIDERED HISTORICALLY

LECTURE VII  

THE POSITIVE THEORY OF INFINITY

LECTURE VIII  

ON THE NOTION OF CAUSE, WITH APPLICATIONS TO THE FREE-

WILL PROBLEM

 

                                     PREFACE

THE following lectures[1] are an attempt to show, by means of examples, the

nature, capacity, and limitations of the logical-analytic method in philosophy.

This  method,  of  which  the  first  complete  example  is  to  be  found  in  the

writings of Frege, has gradually, in the course of actual research, increasingly

forced itself upon me as something perfectly definite, capable of embodiment

in maxims, and adequate, in all branches of philosophy, to yield whatever

objective scientific knowledge it is possible to obtain. Most of the methods

hitherto practised have professed to lead to more ambitious results than any

that logical analysis can claim to reach, but unfortunately these results have

always been such as many competent philosophers considered inadmissible.

Regarded merely as hypotheses and as aids to imagination, the great systems

of the past serve a very useful purpose, and are abundantly worthy of study.

But something different is required if philosophy is to become a science, and

to  aim  at  results  independent  of  the  tastes  and  temperament  of  the

philosopher who advocates them. In what follows, I have endeavoured to

show, however imperfectly, the way by which I believe that this desideratum

is to be found.

  The central problem by which I have sought to illustrate method is the

problem of the relation between the crude data of sense and the space, time,

and  matter of  mathematical  physics.  I  have  been  made  aware  of  the

importance of this problem by my friend and collaborator Dr Whitehead, to

whom are due almost all the differences between the views advocated here

and  those  suggested  in The  Problems  of  Philosophy.[2]  I  owe  to  him  the

definition of points, the suggestion for the treatment of instants and “things,”

and the whole conception of the world of physics as a construction rather

than  an inference.  What  is  said  on  these  topics  here  is,  in  fact,  a  rough

preliminary account of the more precise results which he is giving in the

fourth volume of our Principia Mathematica.[3] It will be seen that if his way

of dealing with these topics is capable of being successfully carried through,

a wholly new light is thrown on the time-honoured controversies of realists

and idealists, and a method is obtained of solving all that is soluble in their

problem.

  The speculations of the past as to the reality or unreality of the world of

physics were baffled, at the outset, by the absence of any satisfactory theory

of the mathematical infinite. This difficulty has been removed by the work ofGeorg Cantor. But the positive and detailed solution of the problem by means

of mathematical constructions based upon sensible objects as data has only

been rendered possible by the growth of mathematical logic, without which it

is practically impossible to manipulate ideas of the requisite abstractness and

complexity. This aspect, which is somewhat obscured in a merely popular

outline such as is contained in the following lectures, will become plain as

soon as Dr Whitehead's work is published. In pure logic, which, however,

will be very briefly discussed in these lectures, I have had  the  benefit  of

vitally important discoveries, not yet published, by my friend Mr Ludwig

Wittgenstein.

  Since my purpose was to illustrate method, I have included much that is

tentative and incomplete, for it is not by the study of finished structures alone

that  the  manner  of  construction  can  be  learnt.  Except  in  regard  to  such

matters as Cantor's theory of infinity, no finality is claimed for the theories

suggested; but I believe that where they are found to require modification,

this will be discovered by substantially the same method as that which at

present makes them appear probable, and it is on this ground that I ask the

reader to be tolerant of their incompleteness.

  CAMBRIDGE,

June 1914.

                                   LECTURE I

                      CURRENT TENDENCIES

PHILOSOPHY, from the earliest times, has made greater claims, and achieved

fewer results, than any other branch of learning. Ever since Thales said that

all is water, philosophers have been ready with glib assertions about the sum-

total of things; and equally glib denials have come from other philosophers

ever since Thales was contradicted by Anaximander. I believe that the time

has now arrived when this unsatisfactory state of things can be brought to an

end. In the following course of lectures I shall try, chiefly by taking certain

special problems as examples, to indicate wherein the claims of philosophers

have been excessive, and why their achievements have not been greater. The

problems and the method of philosophy have, I believe, been misconceived

by  all  schools,  many  of  its  traditional  problems  being  insoluble  with  our

means  of  knowledge,  while  other  more  neglected  but  not  less  important

problems can, by a more patient and more adequate method, be solved with

all the precision and certainty to which the most advanced sciences have

attained.

  Among  present-day  philosophies,  we  may  distinguish  three  principal

types, often combined in varying proportions by a single philosopher, but in

essence  and  tendency  distinct.  The  first  of  these,  which  I  shall  call  the

classical tradition, descends in the main from Kant and Hegel;  it  represents

the attempt to adapt to present needs the methods and results of the great

constructive philosophers from Plato downwards. The second type, which

may  be  called  evolutionism,  derived  its  predominance  from  Darwin,  and

must be reckoned as having had Herbert Spencer for its first philosophical

representative; but in recent times it has become, chiefly through William

James and M. Bergson, far bolder and far more searching in its innovations

than it was in the hands of Herbert Spencer. The third type, which may be

called “logical atomism” for want of a better name, has gradually crept into

philosophy  through  the  critical  scrutiny  of  mathematics.  This  type  of

philosophy, which is the one that I wish to advocate, has not as yet many

whole-hearted adherents, but the “new realism” which owes its inception to

Harvard is very largely impregnated with its spirit. It represents, I believe, the

same  kind  of  advance  as  was  introduced  into  physics  by  Galileo:  the

substitution of piecemeal, detailed, and verifiable results for large untestedgeneralities recommended only by a certain appeal to imagination. But before

we can understand the changes advocated by this new philosophy, we must

briefly examine and criticise the other two types with which it has to contend.

                        A. THE CLASSICAL TRADITION

  Twenty years ago, the classical tradition, having vanquished the opposing

tradition of the English empiricists, held almost unquestioned sway in all

Anglo-Saxon  universities.  At  the  present  day,  though  it  is  losing  ground,

many of the most prominent teachers still adhere to it. In academic France, in

spite of M. Bergson, it is far stronger than all its opponents combined; and in

Germany it has many vigorous advocates. Nevertheless,  it represents on the

whole a decaying force, and it has failed to adapt itself to the temper of the

age.  Its  advocates  are,  in  the  main,  those  whose  extra-philosophical

knowledge  is  literary,  rather  than  those  who  have  felt  the  inspiration  of

science.  There  are,  apart  from  reasoned  arguments,  certain  general

intellectual  forces  against  it—the  same  general  forces  which  are  breaking

down  the  other  great  syntheses  of  the  past,  and  making  our  age  one  of

bewildered  groping  where  our  ancestors  walked  in  the  clear  daylight  of

unquestioning certainty.

  The original impulse out of which the classical tradition developed was

the naïve faith of the Greek philosophers in the omnipotence of reasoning.

The discovery of geometry had intoxicated them, and its a priori deductive

method  appeared  capable  of  universal  application.  They  would  prove,  for

instance, that all reality is one, that there is no such thing as change, that the

world of sense is a world of mere illusion; and the strangeness of their results

gave  them  no  qualms  because  they  believed  in  the  correctness  of  their

reasoning.  Thus  it  came  to  be  thought  that  by  mere  thinking  the  most

surprising  and  important  truths  concerning  the  whole  of  reality  could  be

established with a certainty which no contrary observations could shake. As

the vital impulse of the early philosophers died away, its place was taken by

authority and tradition, reinforced, in the Middle Ages and almost to our own

day, by systematic theology. Modern philosophy, from Descartes onwards,

though not bound by authority like that of the Middle Ages, still accepted

more or less uncritically the Aristotelian logic. Moreover, it still believed,

except  in  Great  Britain,  that a  priori  reasoning  could  reveal  otherwise

undiscoverable secrets about the universe, and could prove reality to be quite

different from what, to direct observation, it appears to be. It is  this  belief,

rather  than  any  particular  tenets  resulting  from  it,  that  I  regard  as  thedistinguishing characteristic of the classical tradition, and as hitherto the main

obstacle to a scientific attitude in philosophy.

  The nature of the philosophy embodied in the classical tradition may be

made  clearer  by  taking  a  particular  exponent  as  an  illustration.  For  this

purpose, let us consider for a moment the doctrines of Mr Bradley, who is

probably  the  most  distinguished  living  representative  of  this  school.  Mr

Bradley's Appearance and Reality is a book consisting of two parts, the first

called Appearance, the second Reality. The first part examines and condemns

almost all that makes up our everyday world: things and qualities, relations,

space  and  time,  change,  causation,  activity,  the  self.  All  these,  though  in

some sense facts which qualify reality, are not real as they appear. What is

real is one single, indivisible, timeless whole, called the Absolute, which is in

some sense spiritual, but does not consist of souls, or of thought and will as

we  know  them.  And  all  this  is  established  by  abstract  logical  reasoning

professing to find self-contradictions in the categories condemned as mere

appearance, and to leave no tenable alternative to the kind of Absolute which

is finally affirmed to be real.

  One  brief  example  may  suffice  to  illustrate  Mr  Bradley's  method.  The

world appears to be full of many things with various relations to each other—

right  and  left,  before  and  after,  father  and  son,  and  so  on.  But  relations,

according to Mr Bradley, are found on examination to be self-contradictory

and therefore impossible. He first argues that, if there are relations, there

must be qualities between which they hold. This part of his argument need

not detain us. He then proceeds:

  “But how the relation can stand to the qualities is,  on  the  other  side,

unintelligible. If it is nothing to the qualities, then they are not related at all;

and, if so, as we saw, they have ceased to be qualities, and their relation is a

nonentity. But if it is to be something to them, then clearly we shall require a

new connecting relation. For the relation hardly can be the mere adjective of

one or both of its terms; or, at least, as such it seems indefensible. And, being

something itself, if it does not itself bear a relation to the terms, in what

intelligible way will it succeed in being anything to them? But here again we

are hurried off into the eddy of a hopeless process, since we are forced to go

on finding new relations without end. The links are united by a link, and this

bond of union is a link which also has two ends; and these require each a

fresh  link  to  connect  them  with  the  old.  The  problem  is  to  find  how  the

relation can stand to its qualities, and this problem is insoluble.”[4]  I do not propose to examine this argument in detail, or to show the exact

points where, in my opinion, it is fallacious. I have quoted it only as an

example of method. Most people will admit, I think, that it is calculated to

produce  bewilderment  rather  than  conviction,  because  there  is  more

likelihood of error in a very subtle, abstract, and difficult argument than in so

patent a fact as the interrelatedness of the things in the world. To the early

Greeks, to whom geometry was practically the only known science, it was

possible to follow reasoning with assent even when it led to the strangest

conclusions. But to us, with our methods of experiment and observation, our

knowledge of the long history of a priori errors refuted by empirical science,

it has become natural to suspect a fallacy in any deduction of which the

conclusion  appears  to  contradict  patent  facts.  It  is  easy  to carry  such

suspicion too far, and it is very desirable, if possible, actually to discover the

exact nature of the error when it exists. But there is no doubt that what we

may call the empirical outlook has become part of most educated people's

habit  of  mind;  and  it  is  this,  rather  than  any  definite  argument,  that  has

diminished the hold of the classical tradition upon students of philosophy and

the instructed public generally.

  The function of logic in philosophy, as I shall try to show at a later stage,

is all-important; but I do not think its function is that which it has in the

classical  tradition.  In  that  tradition,  logic  becomes  constructive  through

negation. Where a number of alternatives seem, at first sight, to be equally

possible, logic is made to condemn all of them except one, and that one is

then  pronounced  to  be  realised  in  the  actual  world.  Thus  the  world  is

constructed by means of logic, with little or no appeal to concrete experience.

The true function of logic is, in my opinion, exactly the opposite of this. As

applied to matters of experience, it is analytic rather than constructive; taken

a priori, it shows the possibility of hitherto unsuspected alternatives more

often  than  the  impossibility  of  alternatives  which  seemed primâ  facie

possible. Thus, while it liberates imagination as to what the world may be, it

refuses to legislate as to what the world is. This change, which has been

brought  about  by  an  internal  revolution  in  logic,  has  swept  away  the

ambitious  constructions  of  traditional  metaphysics,  even  for  those  whose

faith in logic is greatest; while to the many who regard logic as a chimera the

paradoxical systems to which it has given rise do not seem worthy even of

refutation. Thus on all sides these systems have ceased to attract, and even

the philosophical world tends more and more to pass them by.  One or two of the favourite doctrines of the school we are considering

may be mentioned to illustrate the nature of its claims. The universe, it tells

us, is an “organic unity,” like an animal or a perfect work of art. By this it

means,  roughly  speaking,  that  all  the  different  parts  fit  together  and  co-

operate, and are what they are because of their place in the whole. This belief

is sometimes advanced dogmatically, while at other times it is defended by

certain  logical  arguments.  If  it  is  true,  every  part  of  the  universe  is  a

microcosm,  a  miniature  reflection  of  the  whole.  If  we  knew  ourselves

thoroughly, according to this doctrine, we should know everything. Common

sense  would  naturally  object  that  there  are  people—say  in  China—with

whom our relations are so indirect and trivial that we cannot infer anything

important as to them from any fact about ourselves. If there are living beings

in Mars or in more distant parts of the universe, the same argument becomes

even stronger. But further, perhaps the whole contents of the space and time

in which we live form only one of many universes, each seeming to itself

complete.  And  thus  the  conception  of  the  necessary  unity  of  all  that  is

resolves itself into the poverty of imagination, and a freer logic emancipates

us from the strait-waistcoated benevolent institution which idealism palms off

as the totality of being.

  Another  very  important  doctrine  held  by  most,  though  not  all,  of  the

school  we  are  examining  is  the  doctrine  that  all  reality  is  what  is  called

“mental” or “spiritual,” or that, at any rate, all reality is dependent for its

existence upon what is mental. This view is often particularised into the form

which states that the relation of knower and known is fundamental, and that

nothing can exist unless it either knows or is known. Here again the same

legislative function is ascribed to a priori argumentation:  it is thought that 

there are contradictions in an unknown reality. Again, if I am not mistaken, 

the argument is fallacious, and a better logic will show that no limits can be 

set to the extent and nature of the unknown. And when I speak of the 

unknown, I do not mean merely what we personally do not know, but what is 

not known to any mind. Here as elsewhere, while the older logic shut out 

possibilities and imprisoned imagination within the walls of the familiar, the 

newer logic shows rather what may happen, and refuses to decide as to what

 must happen.

  The classical tradition in philosophy is the last surviving child of two very

diverse parents: the Greek belief in reason, and the mediæval belief in the

tidiness of the universe. To the schoolmen, who lived amid wars, massacres,and pestilences, nothing appeared so delightful as safety and order. In their

idealising dreams, it was safety and order that they sought: the universe of

Thomas Aquinas or Dante is as small and neat as a Dutch interior. To us, to

whom safety has become monotony, to whom the primeval savageries of

nature are so remote as to become a mere pleasing condiment to our ordered

routine, the world of dreams is very different from what it was amid the wars

of Guelf and Ghibelline. Hence William James's protest against what he calls

the “block universe” of the classical tradition; hence Nietzsche's worship of

force;  hence  the  verbal  bloodthirstiness  of  many  quiet  literary  men.  The

barbaric substratum of human nature, unsatisfied in action, finds an outlet in

imagination. In philosophy, as elsewhere, this tendency is visible; and it is

this, rather than formal argument, that has thrust aside the classical tradition

for a philosophy which fancies itself more virile and more vital.

                                B. EVOLUTIONISM

  Evolutionism, in one form or another, is the prevailing creed of our time.

It  dominates  our  politics,  our  literature,  and  not  least  our  philosophy.

Nietzsche, pragmatism, Bergson, are phases in its philosophic development,

and their popularity far beyond the circles of professional philosophers shows

its consonance with the spirit of the age. It believes itself firmly based on

science, a liberator of hopes, an inspirer of an invigorating faith in human

power, a sure antidote to the ratiocinative authority of the Greeks and the

dogmatic  authority  of  mediæval  systems.  Against  so  fashionable  and  so

agreeable a creed it may seem useless to raise a protest; and with much of its

spirit  every  modern  man  must  be  in  sympathy.  But  I  think  that,  in  the

intoxication of a quick success, much that is important and vital to a true

understanding of the universe has been forgotten. Something of Hellenism

must be combined with the new spirit before it can emerge from the ardour of

youth into the wisdom of manhood. And it is time to remember that biology

is neither the only science, nor yet the model to which all other sciences must

adapt themselves. Evolutionism, as I shall try to show, is not a truly scientific

philosophy, either in its method or in the problems which it considers. The

true  scientific  philosophy  is  something  more  arduous  and  more  aloof,

appealing to less mundane hopes, and requiring a severer discipline for its

successful practice.

  Darwin's Origin  of  Species  persuaded  the  world  that  the  difference

between different species of animals and plants is not the fixed, immutable

difference that it appears to be. The doctrine of natural kinds, which hadrendered  classification  easy  and  definite,  which  was  enshrined in  the

Aristotelian tradition, and protected by its supposed necessity for orthodox

dogma, was suddenly swept away for ever out of the biological world. The

difference between man and the lower animals, which to our human conceit

appears  enormous,  was  shown  to  be  a  gradual  achievement,  involving

intermediate beings who could not with certainty be placed either within or

without the human family. The sun and planets had already been shown by

Laplace  to  be  very  probably  derived  from  a  primitive  more  or  less

undifferentiated nebula. Thus the old fixed landmarks became wavering and

indistinct, and all sharp outlines were blurred. Things and species lost their

boundaries, and none could say where they began or where they ended.

  But if human conceit was staggered for a moment by its kinship with the

ape, it soon found a way to reassert itself, and that way is the “philosophy” of

evolution.  A  process  which  led  from  the  amœba  to  man  appeared  to  the

philosophers to be obviously a progress—though whether the amœba would

agree  with  this  opinion  is  not  known.  Hence  the  cycle  of  changes  which

science had shown to be the probable history of the past was welcomed as

revealing a law of development towards good in the universe—an evolution

or unfolding of an ideal slowly embodying itself in the actual. But such a

view, though it might satisfy Spencer and those whom we may call Hegelian

evolutionists, could not be accepted as adequate by the more whole-hearted

votaries of change. An ideal to which the world continuously approaches is,

to these minds, too dead and static to be inspiring. Not only the aspirations,

but the ideal too, must change and develop with the course of evolution; there

must  be  no  fixed  goal,  but  a  continual  fashioning  of  fresh  needs  by  the

impulse which is life and which alone gives unity to the process.

  Ever since the seventeenth century, those whom William James described

as the “tender-minded” have been engaged in a desperate struggle with the

mechanical view of the course of nature which physical science seems to

impose. A great part of the attractiveness of the classical tradition was due to

the  partial  escape  from  mechanism  which  it  provided.  But  now,  with  the

influence of biology, the “tender-minded” believe that a more radical escape

is possible, sweeping aside not merely the laws of physics, but the whole

apparently immutable apparatus of logic, with its fixed concepts, its general

principles,  and  its  reasonings  which  seem  able  to  compel  even  the  most

unwilling assent. The older kind of teleology, therefore, which regarded the

End  as  a  fixed  goal,  already  partially  visible,  towards  which  we  weregradually approaching, is rejected by M. Bergson as not allowing enough for

the absolute dominion of change. After explaining why he does not accept

mechanism, he proceeds:[5]

  “But radical finalism is quite as unacceptable, and for the same reason.

The doctrine of teleology, in its extreme form, as we find it in Leibniz for

example,  implies  that  things  and  beings  merely  realise  a  programme

previously  arranged.  But  if  there  is  nothing  unforeseen,  no  invention  or

creation  in  the  universe,  time  is  useless  again.  As  in  the  mechanistic

hypothesis,  here  again  it  is  supposed  that all  is  given.  Finalism  thus

understood is only inverted mechanism. It springs from the same postulate,

with this sole difference, that in the movement of our finite intellects along

successive things, whose successiveness is reduced to a mere appearance, it

holds in front of us the light with which it claims to guide us, instead of

putting it behind. It substitutes the attraction  of the future for the impulsion

of  the  past.  But  succession  remains  none  the  less  a  mere  appearance,  as

indeed does movement itself. In the doctrine of Leibniz, time is reduced to a

confused perception, relative to the human standpoint, a perception which

would vanish, like a rising mist, for a mind seated at the centre of things.

  “Yet finalism is not, like mechanism, a doctrine with fixed rigid outlines.

It admits of as many inflections as we like. The mechanistic philosophy is to

be taken or left: it must be left if the least grain of dust, by straying from the

path foreseen by mechanics, should show the slightest trace of spontaneity.

The  doctrine  of  final  causes,  on  the  contrary,  will  never  be  definitively

refuted. If one form of it be put aside, it will take another. Its principle, which

is essentially psychological, is very flexible. It is so extensible, and thereby

so comprehensive, that one accepts something of it as soon as one rejects

pure mechanism. The theory we shall put forward in this book will therefore

necessarily partake of finalism to a certain extent.”

  M. Bergson's form of finalism depends upon his conception of life. Life,

in his philosophy, is a continuous stream, in which all divisions are artificial

and unreal. Separate things, beginnings and endings, are mere convenient

fictions: there is only smooth, unbroken transition. The beliefs of to-day may

count as true to-day, if they carry us along the stream; but to-morrow they

will be false, and must be replaced by new beliefs to meet the new situation.

All our thinking consists of convenient fictions, imaginary congealings of the

stream: reality flows on in spite of all our fictions, and though it can be lived,

it cannot be conceived in thought. Somehow, without explicit statement, theassurance is slipped  in that the future, though we cannot foresee it, will be

better than the past or the present: the reader is like the child who expects a

sweet because it has been told to open its mouth and shut its eyes. Logic,

mathematics,  physics  disappear  in  this  philosophy,  because  they  are  too

“static”; what is real is an impulse and movement towards a goal which, like

the rainbow, recedes as we advance, and makes every place different when

we reach it from what it appeared to be at a distance.

  Now I do not propose at present to enter upon a technical examination of

this philosophy. At present I wish to make only two criticisms of it—first,

that  its  truth  does  not  follow  from  what  science  has  rendered  probable

concerning the facts of evolution, and secondly, that the motives and interests

which inspire it are so exclusively practical, and the problems with which it

deals are so special, that it can hardly be regarded as really touching any of

the questions that to my mind constitute genuine philosophy.

  (1) What biology has rendered probable is that the diverse species arose by

adaptation  from  a  less  differentiated  ancestry.  This  fact  is  in  itself

exceedingly interesting, but it is not the kind of fact from which philosophical

consequences follow. Philosophy is general, and takes an impartial interest in

all  that  exists.  The  changes  suffered  by  minute  portions  of  matter  on  the

earth's surface are very important to us as active sentient beings; but to us as

philosophers they have no greater interest than other changes in portions of

matter elsewhere. And if the changes on the earth's surface during the last

few millions of years appear to our present ethical notions to be in the nature

of a progress, that gives no ground for believing that progress is a general law

of the universe. Except under the influence of desire, no one would  admit for

a moment so crude a generalisation from such a tiny selection of facts. What

does result, not specially from biology, but from all the sciences which deal

with  what  exists,  is  that  we  cannot  understand  the  world  unless  we  can

understand change and continuity. This is even more evident in physics than

it is in biology. But the analysis of change and continuity is not a problem

upon which either physics or biology throws any light: it is a problem of a

new  kind,  belonging  to  a  different  kind  of  study.  The  question  whether

evolutionism offers a true or a false answer to this problem is not, therefore, a

question  to  be  solved  by  appeals  to  particular  facts,  such  as  biology  and

physics reveal. In assuming dogmatically a certain answer to this question,

evolutionism ceases to be scientific, yet it is only in touching on this question

that  evolutionism  reaches  the  subject-matter  of  philosophy.  Evolutionismthus  consists  of  two  parts:  one  not  philosophical,  but  only  a  hasty

generalisation of the kind which the special sciences might hereafter confirm

or confute; the other not scientific, but a mere unsupported dogma, belonging

to philosophy by its subject-matter, but in no way deducible from the facts

upon which evolution relies.

  (2) The predominant interest of evolutionism is in the question of human

destiny, or at least of the destiny of Life. It is more interested in morality and

happiness than in knowledge for its own sake. It must be admitted that the

same may be said of many other philosophies, and that a desire for the kind

of  knowledge  which  philosophy  really  can  give  is  very  rare.  But  if

philosophy is to become scientific—and it is our object to discover how this

can be achieved—it is necessary first and foremost that philosophers should

acquire the disinterested intellectual curiosity which characterises the genuine

man  of  science.  Knowledge  concerning  the  future—which  is  the  kind  of

knowledge that must be sought if we are to know about human destiny—is

possible within certain narrow limits. It is impossible to say how much the

limits may be enlarged with the progress of science. But what is evident is

that any proposition about the future belongs by its subject-matter to some

particular science, and is to be ascertained, if at all, by the methods of that

science. Philosophy is not a short cut to the same kind of results as those of

the other sciences: if it is to be a genuine study, it must have a province of its

own,  and  aim  at  results  which  the  other  sciences  can  neither  prove  nor

disprove.

  The consideration that philosophy, if there is such a study, must consist of

propositions which could not occur in the other sciences, is one which has

very far-reaching consequences. All the questions which have what is called

a human interest—such, for example, as the question of a future life—belong,

at least in theory, to special sciences, and are capable, at least in theory, of

being decided by empirical evidence. Philosophers have too often, in the past,

permitted  themselves  to  pronounce  on  empirical  questions,  and  found

themselves, as a result, in disastrous conflict with well-attested facts. We

must, therefore, renounce the hope that philosophy can promise satisfaction

to our mundane desires. What it can do, when it is purified from all practical

taint, is to help us to understand the general aspects of the world and the

logical analysis of familiar but complex things. Through this achievement, by

the  suggestion  of  fruitful  hypotheses,  it  may  be  indirectly  useful  in  other

sciences,  notably  mathematics,  physics,  and  psychology.  But  a  genuinelyscientific philosophy cannot hope to appeal to any except those who have the

wish to understand, to escape from  intellectual bewilderment. It offers, in its

own domain, the kind of satisfaction which the other sciences offer. But it

does  not  offer,  or  attempt  to  offer,  a  solution  of  the  problem  of  human

destiny, or of the destiny of the universe.

  Evolutionism, if what has been said is true, is to be regarded as a hasty

generalisation from certain rather special facts, accompanied by a dogmatic

rejection  of  all  attempts  at  analysis,  and  inspired  by  interests  which  are

practical rather than theoretical. In spite, therefore, of its appeal to detailed

results  in  various  sciences,  it  cannot  be  regarded  as  any  more  genuinely

scientific than the classical tradition which it has replaced. How philosophy is

to be rendered scientific, and what is the true subject-matter of philosophy, I

shall try to show first by examples of certain achieved results, and then more

generally. We will begin with the problem of the physical conceptions of

space and time and matter, which, as we have seen, are challenged by the

contentions  of  the  evolutionists.  That  these  conceptions  stand  in  need  of

reconstruction  will  be  admitted,  and  is  indeed  increasingly  urged  by

physicists themselves. It will also be admitted that the reconstruction must

take more account of change and the universal flux than is done in the older

mechanics with its fundamental conception of an indestructible matter. But I

do not think the reconstruction required is on Bergsonian lines, nor do I think

that his rejection of logic can be anything but harmful. I shall not, however,

adopt  the  method  of  explicit  controversy,  but  rather  the  method  of

independent inquiry, starting from what, in a pre-philosophic stage, appear to

be facts, and keeping always as close to these initial data as the requirements

of consistency will permit.

  Although explicit controversy is almost always fruitless  in  philosophy,

owing to the fact that no two philosophers ever understand one another, yet it

seems  necessary  to  say  something  at  the  outset  in  justification  of  the

scientific as against the mystical attitude. Metaphysics, from the first, has

been developed by the union or the conflict of these two attitudes. Among the

earliest Greek philosophers, the Ionians were more scientific and the Sicilians

more  mystical.[6]  But  among  the  latter,  Pythagoras,  for  example,  was  in

himself a curious mixture of the two tendencies: the scientific attitude led him

to his proposition on right-angled triangles, while his mystic insight showed

him that it is wicked to eat beans. Naturally enough, his followers divided

into two sects, the lovers of right-angled triangles and the abhorrers of beans;but  the  former  sect  died  out,  leaving,  however,  a  haunting  flavour  of

mysticism over much Greek mathematical speculation, and in particular over

Plato's views on mathematics. Plato, of course, embodies both the scientific

and the mystical attitudes in a higher form than his predecessors, but the

mystical attitude is distinctly the stronger of the two, and secures ultimate

victory whenever the conflict is sharp. Plato, moreover, adopted from the

Eleatics the device of using logic to defeat common sense, and thus to leave

the field clear for mysticism—a device still employed in our own day by the

adherents of the classical tradition.

  The logic used in defence of mysticism seems to me faulty as logic, and in

a later lecture I shall criticise it on this ground. But the more thorough-going

mystics do not employ logic, which they despise: they appeal instead directly

to the immediate deliverance of their insight. Now, although fully developed

mysticism is rare in the West, some tincture of it colours the thoughts of 

many  people,  particularly  as  regards  matters  on  which  they  have  strong

convictions  not  based  on  evidence.  In  all  who  seek  passionately  for  the

fugitive and difficult goods, the conviction is almost irresistible that there is

in the world something deeper, more significant, than the multiplicity of little

facts chronicled and classified by science. Behind the veil of these mundane

things, they feel, something quite different obscurely shimmers, shining forth

clearly  in  the  great  moments  of  illumination,  which  alone  give  anything

worthy  to  be  called  real  knowledge  of  truth.  To  seek  such  moments,

therefore, is to them the way of wisdom, rather than, like the man of science,

to observe coolly, to analyse without emotion, and to accept without question

the equal reality of the trivial and the important.

  Of the reality or unreality of the mystic's world I know nothing. I have no

wish to deny it, nor even to declare that the insight which reveals it is not a

genuine insight. What I do wish to maintain—and it is here that the scientific

attitude becomes imperative—is that insight, untested and unsupported, is an

insufficient guarantee of truth, in spite of the fact that much of the most

important truth is first suggested by its means. It is common to speak of an

opposition  between  instinct  and  reason;  in  the  eighteenth  century,  the

opposition  was  drawn  in  favour  of  reason,  but  under  the  influence  of

Rousseau and the romantic movement instinct was given the preference, first

by those who rebelled against artificial forms of government and thought, and

then,  as  the  purely  rationalistic  defence  of  traditional  theology  became

increasingly difficult, by all who felt in science a menace to creeds whichthey associated with a spiritual outlook on life and the world. Bergson, under

the name of “intuition,” has raised instinct to the position of sole  arbiter  of

metaphysical truth. But in fact the opposition of instinct and reason is mainly

illusory. Instinct, intuition, or insight is what first leads to the beliefs which

subsequent reason confirms or confutes; but the confirmation, where it is

possible, consists, in the last analysis, of agreement with other beliefs no less

instinctive. Reason is a harmonising, controlling force rather than a creative

one. Even in the most purely logical realms, it is insight that first arrives at

what is new.

  Where instinct and reason do sometimes conflict is in regard to single

beliefs, held instinctively, and held with such determination that no degree of

inconsistency with other beliefs leads to their abandonment. Instinct, like all

human faculties, is liable to error. Those in whom reason is weak are often

unwilling to admit this as regards themselves, though all admit it in regard to

others. Where instinct is least liable to error is in practical matters as to which

right judgment is a help to survival; friendship and hostility in others, for

instance, are often felt with extraordinary discrimination through very careful

disguises. But even in such matters a wrong impression may be given by

reserve or flattery; and in matters less directly practical, such as philosophy

deals with, very strong instinctive beliefs may be wholly mistaken, as we

may come to know through their perceived inconsistency with other equally

strong  beliefs.  It  is  such  considerations  that  necessitate  the  harmonising

mediation of reason, which tests our beliefs by their mutual compatibility,

and examines, in doubtful cases, the possible sources of error on the one side

and on the other. In this there is no opposition to instinct as a whole, but only

to blind reliance upon some one interesting aspect of instinct to the exclusion

of  other  more  commonplace  but  not  less  trustworthy  aspects.  It is  such

onesidedness, not instinct itself, that reason aims at correcting.

  These  more  or  less  trite  maxims  may  be  illustrated  by  application  to

Bergson's advocacy of “intuition” as against “intellect.” There are, he says,

“two profoundly different ways of knowing a thing. The first implies that we

move round the object; the second that we enter into it. The first depends on

the point of view at which we are placed and on the symbols by which we

express ourselves. The second neither depends on a point of view nor relies

on  any  symbol.  The  first  kind  of  knowledge  may  be  said  to  stop  at  the

relative;  the  second,  in  those  cases  where  it  is  possible,  to  attain  the

absolute.”[7] The second of these, which is intuition, is, he says, “the kind ofintellectual sympathy by which one places oneself within an object in order to

coincide  with  what  is  unique  in  it  and  therefore  inexpressible”  (p.  6).  In

illustration, he mentions self-knowledge: “there is one reality, at least, which

we all seize from within, by intuition and not by simple analysis. It is our

own personality in its flowing through time—our self which endures” (p. 8).

The rest of Bergson's philosophy consists in reporting, through the imperfect

medium of words, the knowledge gained by intuition, and the consequent

complete condemnation of all the pretended knowledge derived from science

and common sense.

  This  procedure,  since  it  takes  sides  in  a  conflict  of  instinctive  beliefs,

stands in need of justification by proving the greater trustworthiness of the

beliefs  on  one  side  than  of  those  on  the  other.  Bergson  attempts  this

justification  in  two  ways—first,  by  explaining  that  intellect  is  a  purely

practical  faculty  designed  to  secure  biological  success;  secondly,  by

mentioning  remarkable  feats of  instinct  in  animals,  and  by  pointing  out

characteristics of the world which, though intuition can apprehend them, are

baffling to intellect as he interprets it.

  Of Bergson's theory that intellect is a purely practical faculty developed in

the struggle for survival, and not a source of true beliefs, we may say, first,

that it is only through intellect that we know of the struggle for survival and

of the biological ancestry of man: if the intellect is misleading, the whole of

this merely inferred history is presumably untrue. If, on the other hand, we

agree  with  M.  Bergson  in  thinking  that  evolution  took  place  as  Darwin

believed, then it is not only intellect, but all our faculties, that have been

developed under the stress of practical utility. Intuition is seen at its best

where it is directly useful—for example, in regard to other people's characters

and  dispositions.  Bergson  apparently  holds  that  capacity  for  this  kind  of

knowledge is less explicable by the struggle for existence than, for example,

capacity for pure mathematics. Yet the savage deceived by false friendship is

likely to pay for his mistake with his life; whereas even in the most civilised

societies men are not put to death for mathematical incompetence. All the

most  striking  of  his  instances  of  intuition  in  animals  have  a  very  direct

survival value. The fact is, of course, that both intuition and intellect have

been developed because they are useful, and that, speaking broadly, they are

useful when they give truth and become harmful when they give falsehood.

Intellect,  in  civilised  man,  like  artistic  capacity,  has  occasionally  been

developed beyond the point where it is useful to the individual; intuition, onthe  other  hand,  seems  on  the  whole  to  diminish  as  civilisation  increases.

Speaking broadly, it is greater in children than in adults, in the uneducated

than in the educated. Probably in dogs it exceeds anything to be found in  

human  beings.  But  those  who  find  in  these  facts  a  recommendation  of

intuition ought to return to running wild in the woods, dyeing themselves

with woad and living on hips and haws.

  Let us next examine whether intuition possesses any such infallibility as

Bergson  claims  for  it.  The  best  instance  of  it,  according  to  him,  is  our

acquaintance  with  ourselves;  yet  self-knowledge  is  proverbially  rare  and

difficult. Most men, for example, have in their nature meannesses, vanities,

and  envies  of  which  they  are  quite  unconscious,  though  even  their  best

friends can perceive them without any difficulty. It is true that intuition has a

convincingness which is lacking to intellect: while it is present, it is almost

impossible to doubt its truth. But if it should appear, on examination, to be at

least as fallible as intellect, its greater subjective certainty becomes a demerit,

making it only the more irresistibly deceptive. Apart from self-knowledge,

one  of  the  most  notable  examples  of  intuition  is  the  knowledge  people

believe themselves to possess of those with whom they are in love: the wall

between  different  personalities  seems  to  become  transparent,  and  people

think they see into another soul as into their own. Yet deception in such cases

is constantly practised with success; and even where there is no intentional

deception, experience gradually proves, as a rule, that the supposed insight

was illusory, and that the slower, more groping methods of the intellect are in

the long run more reliable.

  Bergson maintains that intellect can only deal with things in so far as they

resemble what has been experienced in the past, while intuition has the power

of apprehending the uniqueness and novelty that always belong to each fresh

moment.  That  there  is  something  unique  and  new  at  every  moment,  is

certainly true; it is also true that  this cannot be fully expressed by means of

intellectual concepts. Only direct acquaintance can give knowledge of what is

unique  and  new.  But  direct  acquaintance  of  this  kind  is  given  fully  in

sensation, and does not require, so far as I can see, any special faculty of

intuition  for  its  apprehension.  It  is  neither  intellect  nor  intuition,  but

sensation,  that  supplies  new  data;  but  when  the  data  are  new  in  any

remarkable manner, intellect is much more capable of dealing with them than

intuition would be. The hen with a brood of ducklings no doubt has intuitions

which  seem  to  place  her  inside  them,  and  not  merely  to  know  themanalytically; but when the ducklings take to the water, the whole apparent

intuition  is  seen  to  be  illusory,  and  the  hen  is  left  helpless  on  the  shore.

Intuition,  in  fact,  is  an  aspect  and  development  of  instinct,  and,  like  all

instinct, is admirable in those customary surroundings which have moulded

the habits of the animal in question, but totally incompetent as soon as the

surroundings are changed in a way which demands some non-habitual mode

of action.

  The  theoretical  understanding  of  the  world,  which  is  the  aim  of

philosophy, is not a matter of great practical importance to animals, or to

savages, or even to most civilised men. It is hardly to be supposed, therefore,

that the rapid, rough and ready methods of instinct or intuition will find in

this field a favourable ground for their application. It is the older kinds of

activity, which bring out our kinship with remote generations of animal and

semi-human ancestors, that show intuition at its best. In such matters as self-

preservation and love, intuition will act sometimes (though not always) with

a swiftness and precision which are astonishing to the critical intellect. But

philosophy is not one of the pursuits which illustrate our affinity with the

past:  it  is  a  highly  refined, highly  civilised  pursuit,  demanding,  for  its

success, a certain liberation from the life of instinct, and even, at times, a

certain aloofness from all mundane hopes and fears. It is not in philosophy,

therefore, that we can hope to see intuition at its best. On the contrary, since

the true objects of philosophy, and the habits of thought demanded for their

apprehension, are strange, unusual, and remote, it is here, more almost than

anywhere  else,  that  intellect  proves  superior  to  intuition,  and  that  quick

unanalysed convictions are least deserving of uncritical acceptance.

  Before embarking upon the somewhat difficult and abstract discussions

which lie before us, it will be well to take a survey of the hopes we may

retain and the hopes we must abandon. The hope of satisfaction to our more

human desires—the hope of demonstrating that the world has this or that

desirable  ethical  characteristic—is  not  one  which,  so  far  as  I  can  see,

philosophy can do anything whatever to satisfy. The difference between a

good world and a bad one is a difference in the particular characteristics of

the particular things that exist in these worlds: it is not a sufficiently abstract

difference to come within the province of philosophy. Love and hate, for

example, are ethical opposites, but to philosophy they are closely analogous

attitudes towards objects. The general form and structure of those attitudes

towards  objects  which  constitute  mental  phenomena  is  a  problem  forphilosophy; but the difference between love and hate is not a difference of

form  or  structure,  and  therefore  belongs  rather  to  the  special  science  of

psychology than to philosophy. Thus the ethical interests which have often

inspired philosophers must remain in the background: some kind of ethical

interest may inspire the whole study, but none must  obtrude in the detail or

be expected in the special results which are sought.

  If this view seems at first sight disappointing, we may remind ourselves

that a similar change has been found necessary in all the other sciences. The

physicist or chemist is not now required to prove the ethical importance of his

ions or atoms; the biologist is not expected to prove the utility of the plants or

animals  which  he  dissects.  In  pre-scientific  ages  this  was  not  the  case.

Astronomy, for example, was studied because men believed in astrology: it

was  thought  that  the  movements  of  the  planets  had  the  most  direct  and

important bearing upon the lives of human beings. Presumably, when this

belief decayed and the disinterested study of astronomy began, many who

had found astrology absorbingly interesting decided that astronomy had too

little human interest to be worthy of study. Physics, as it appears in Plato's

Timæus for example, is full of ethical notions: it is an essential part of its

purpose to show that the earth is worthy of admiration. The modern physicist,

on the contrary, though he has no wish to deny that the earth is admirable, is

not concerned, as physicist, with its ethical attributes: he is merely concerned

to find out facts, not to consider whether they are good or bad. In psychology,

the  scientific  attitude  is  even  more  recent  and  more  difficult  than  in  the

physical sciences: it is natural to consider that human nature is either good or

bad,  and  to  suppose  that  the  difference  between  good  and  bad,  so  all-

important in practice, must be important in theory also. It is only during the

last century that an ethically neutral science of psychology has grown up; and

here too ethical neutrality has been essential to scientific success.

  In philosophy, hitherto, ethical neutrality has been  seldom  sought  and

hardly ever achieved. Men have remembered their wishes, and have judged

philosophies in relation to their wishes. Driven from the particular sciences,

the  belief  that  the  notions  of  good  and  evil  must  afford  a  key  to  the

understanding of the world has sought a refuge in philosophy. But even from

this last refuge, if philosophy is not to remain a set of pleasing dreams, this

belief must be driven forth. It is a commonplace that happiness is not best

achieved by those who seek it directly; and it would seem that the same is

true of the good. In thought, at any rate, those who forget good and evil andseek only to know the facts are more likely to achieve good than those who

view the world through the distorting medium of their own desires.

  The immense extension of our knowledge of facts in recent times has had,

as it had in the Renaissance, two effects upon the general intellectual outlook.

On the one hand, it has made men distrustful of the truth of wide, ambitious

systems:  theories  come  and  go  swiftly,  each  serving,  for  a  moment,  to

classify known facts and promote the search for new ones, but each in turn

proving inadequate to deal with the new facts when they have been found.

Even  those  who  invent  the  theories  do  not,  in  science,  regard  them  as

anything but a temporary makeshift. The ideal of an all-embracing synthesis,

such  as  the  Middle  Ages  believed  themselves  to  have  attained,  recedes

further and further beyond the limits of what seems feasible. In such a world,

as  in  the  world  of  Montaigne,  nothing  seems  worth  while  except  the

discovery  of  more  and  more  facts,  each  in  turn  the  deathblow  to  some

cherished theory; the ordering intellect grows weary, and becomes slovenly

through despair.

  On the other hand, the new facts have brought new powers; man's physical

control over natural forces has  been  increasing  with  unexampled  rapidity,

and promises to increase in the future beyond all easily assignable limits.

Thus alongside of despair as regards ultimate theory there is an immense

optimism as regards practice: what man can do seems almost boundless. The

old fixed limits of human power, such as death, or the dependence of the race

on  an  equilibrium  of  cosmic  forces,  are  forgotten,  and  no  hard  facts  are

allowed  to  break  in  upon  the  dream  of  omnipotence.  No  philosophy  is

tolerated which sets bounds to man's capacity of gratifying his wishes; and

thus the very despair of theory is invoked to silence every whisper of doubt

as regards the possibilities of practical achievement.

  In  the  welcoming  of  new  fact,  and  in  the  suspicion  of  dogmatism  as

regards the universe at large, the modern spirit should, I think, be accepted as

wholly an advance. But both in its practical pretensions and in its theoretical

despair it seems to me to go too far. Most of what is greatest in man is called

forth  in  response  to  the  thwarting  of  his  hopes  by  immutable  natural

obstacles; by the pretence of omnipotence, he becomes trivial and a little

absurd. And on the theoretical side, ultimate metaphysical truth, though less

all-embracing and harder of attainment than it appeared to some philosophers

in the past, can, I believe, be discovered by those who are willing to combine

the hopefulness, patience, and open-mindedness of science with something ofthe Greek feeling for beauty in the abstract world of logic and for the ultimate

intrinsic value in the contemplation of truth.

  The  philosophy,  therefore,  which  is  to  be  genuinely  inspired  by  the

scientific spirit, must deal with somewhat dry and abstract matters, and must

not hope to find an answer to the practical problems of life. To those who

wish to understand much of what has in the past been  most  difficult  and

obscure in the constitution of the universe, it has great rewards to offer—

triumphs as noteworthy as those of Newton and Darwin, and as important in

the long run, for the moulding of our mental habits. And it brings with it—as

a new and powerful method of investigation always does—a sense of power

and a hope of progress more reliable and better grounded than any that rests

on hasty and fallacious generalisation as to the nature of the universe at large.

Many hopes which inspired philosophers in the past it cannot claim to fulfil;

but other hopes, more purely intellectual, it can satisfy more fully than former

ages could have deemed possible for human minds.

                                   LECTURE II

  LOGIC AS THE ESSENCE OF PHILOSOPHY

THE topics we discussed in our first lecture, and the topics we shall discuss

later, all reduce themselves, in so far as they are genuinely philosophical, to

problems of logic. This is not due to any accident, but to the fact that every

philosophical problem, when it is subjected to the necessary analysis and

purification, is found either to be not really philosophical at all, or else to be,

in the sense in which we are using the word, logical. But as the word “logic”

is  never  used  in  the  same  sense  by  two  different  philosophers,  some

explanation of what I mean by the word is indispensable at the outset.

  Logic, in the Middle Ages, and down to the present day in teaching, meant

no more than a scholastic collection of technical terms and rules of syllogistic

inference. Aristotle had spoken, and it was the part of humbler men merely to

repeat the lesson after him. The trivial nonsense embodied in this tradition is

still set in examinations, and defended by eminent authorities as an excellent

“propædeutic,” i.e. a training in those habits of solemn humbug which are so

great a help in later life. But it is not this that I mean to praise in saying that

all philosophy is logic. Ever since the beginning of the seventeenth century,

all  vigorous  minds  that  have  concerned  themselves  with  inference  have

abandoned the mediæval  tradition, and in one way or other have widened the

scope of logic.

  The first extension was the introduction of the inductive method by Bacon

and Galileo—by the former in a theoretical and largely mistaken form, by the

latter in actual use in establishing the foundations of modern physics and

astronomy. This is probably the only extension of the old logic which has

become familiar to the general educated public. But induction, important as it

is when regarded as a method of investigation, does not seem to remain when

its work is done: in the final form of a perfected science, it would seem that

everything  ought  to  be  deductive.  If  induction  remains  at  all,  which  is  a

difficult question, it will remain merely as one of the principles according to

which deductions are effected. Thus the ultimate result of the introduction of

the inductive method seems not the creation of a new kind of non-deductive

reasoning, but rather the widening of the scope of deduction by pointing out a

way of deducing which is certainly not syllogistic, and does not fit into the

mediæval scheme.  The question of the scope and validity of induction is of great difficulty,

and of great importance to our knowledge. Take such a question as, “Will the

sun rise to-morrow?” Our first instinctive feeling is that we have abundant

reason  for  saying  that  it  will,  because  it  has  risen  on  so  many  previous

mornings. Now, I do not myself know whether this does afford a ground or

not, but I am willing to suppose that it does. The question which then arises

is: What is the principle of inference by which we pass from past sunrises to

future ones? The answer given by Mill is that the inference depends upon the

law of causation. Let us suppose this to be true; then what is the reason for

believing in the law of  causation? There are broadly three possible answers:

(1) that it is itself known a priori; (2) that it is a postulate; (3) that it is an

empirical generalisation from past instances in which it has been found to

hold. The theory that causation is known a priori cannot be definitely refuted,

but it can be rendered very unplausible by the mere process of formulating

the law exactly, and thereby showing that it is immensely more complicated

and less obvious than is generally supposed. The theory that causation is a

postulate, i.e. that it is something which we choose to assert although we

know  that  it  is  very  likely  false,  is  also  incapable  of  refutation;  but  it  is

plainly also incapable of justifying any use of the law in inference. We are

thus brought to the theory that the law is an empirical generalisation, which is

the view held by Mill.

  But if so, how are empirical generalisations to be justified? The evidence

in their favour cannot be empirical, since we wish to argue from what has

been observed to what has not been observed, which can only be done by

means of some known relation of the observed and the unobserved; but the

unobserved, by definition, is not known empirically, and therefore its relation

to the observed, if known at all, must be known independently of empirical

evidence. Let us see what Mill says on this subject.

  According to Mill, the law of causation is proved by an admittedly fallible

process  called  “induction  by  simple  enumeration.”  This  process,  he  says,

“consists in ascribing the nature of general truths to all propositions which

are  true  in  every  instance  that  we  happen  to  know  of.”[8]  As  regards  its

fallibility,  he  asserts  that  “the  precariousness  of  the  method  of  simple

enumeration is in  an inverse ratio to the largeness of the generalisation. The

process  is  delusive  and  insufficient,  exactly  in  proportion  as  the  subject-

matter  of  the  observation  is  special  and  limited  in  extent.  As  the  sphere

widens, this unscientific method becomes less and less liable to mislead; andthe most universal class of truths, the law of causation for instance, and the

principles of number and of geometry, are duly and satisfactorily proved by

that method alone, nor are they susceptible of any other proof.”[9]

  In  the  above  statement,  there  are  two  obvious  lacunæ:  (1)  How  is  the

method of simple enumeration itself justified? (2) What logical principle, if

any,  covers  the  same  ground  as  this  method,  without  being  liable  to  its

failures? Let us take the second question first.

  A method of proof which, when used as directed, gives sometimes truth

and sometimes falsehood—as the method of simple enumeration does—is

obviously not a valid method, for validity demands invariable truth. Thus, if

simple enumeration is to be rendered valid, it must not be stated as Mill states

it. We shall have to say, at most, that the data render the result probable.

Causation holds, we shall say, in every instance we have been able to test;

therefore  it probably  holds  in  untested  instances.  There  are  terrible

difficulties in the notion of probability, but we may ignore them at present.

We thus have what at least may be a logical principle, since it is without

exception. If a proposition is true in every instance that we happen to know

of, and if the instances are very numerous, then, we shall say, it becomes very

probable, on the data, that it will be true in any further instance. This is not

refuted  by  the  fact  that  what  we  declare  to  be  probable  does  not  always

happen, for an event may be  probable on the data and yet not occur. It is,

however, obviously capable of further analysis, and of more exact statement.

We  shall  have  to  say  something  like  this:  that  every  instance  of  a

proposition[10] being true increases the probability of its being true in a fresh

instance, and that a sufficient number of favourable instances will, in the

absence of instances to the contrary, make the probability of the truth of a

fresh instance approach indefinitely near to certainty. Some such principle as

this is required if the method of simple enumeration is to be valid.

  But  this  brings  us  to  our  other  question,  namely,  how  is  our  principle

known  to  be  true?  Obviously,  since  it  is  required  to  justify  induction,  it

cannot be proved by induction; since it goes beyond the empirical data, it

cannot be proved by them alone; since it is required to justify all inferences

from  empirical  data  to  what  goes  beyond  them,  it  cannot  itself  be  even

rendered in any degree probable by such data. Hence, if it is known, it is not

known by experience, but independently of experience. I do not say that any

such principle is known: I only say that it is required to justify the inferences

from experience which empiricists allow, and that it cannot itself be justifiedempirically.[11]

  A similar conclusion can be proved by similar arguments concerning any

other  logical  principle.  Thus  logical  knowledge  is  not  derivable  from

experience  alone,  and  the  empiricist's  philosophy  can  therefore  not  be

accepted in its entirety, in spite of its excellence in many matters which lie

outside logic.

  Hegel and his followers widened the scope of logic in quite a different

way—a way which I believe to be  fallacious, but which requires discussion

if only to show how their conception of logic differs from the conception

which I wish to advocate. In their writings, logic is practically identical with

metaphysics. In broad outline, the way this came about is as follows. Hegel

believed that, by means of a priori reasoning, it could be shown that the

world must have various important and interesting characteristics, since any

world  without  these  characteristics  would  be  impossible  and  self-

contradictory. Thus what he calls “logic” is an investigation of the nature of

the universe, in so far as this can be inferred merely from the principle that

the universe must be logically self-consistent. I do not myself believe that

from this principle alone anything of importance can be inferred as regards

the existing universe. But, however that may be, I should not regard Hegel's

reasoning,  even  if  it  were  valid,  as  properly  belonging  to  logic:  it  would

rather be an application of logic to the actual world. Logic itself would be

concerned  rather  with  such  questions  as  what  self-consistency  is,  which

Hegel,  so  far  as  I  know,  does  not  discuss.  And  though  he  criticises  the

traditional logic, and professes to replace it by an improved logic of his own,

there  is  some  sense  in  which  the  traditional  logic,  with  all  its  faults,  is

uncritically and unconsciously assumed throughout his reasoning. It is not in

the direction advocated by him, it seems to me, that the reform of logic is to

be  sought,  but  by  a  more  fundamental,  more  patient,  and  less  ambitious

investigation into the presuppositions which his system shares with those of

most other philosophers.

  The way in which, as it seems to me, Hegel's system assumes the ordinary

logic  which  it  subsequently  criticises,  is  exemplified  by  the  general

conception  of  “categories”  with  which  he  operates  throughout.  This

conception is,  I think, essentially a product of logical confusion, but it seems

in some way to stand for the conception of “qualities of Reality as a whole.”

Mr Bradley has worked out a theory according to which, in all judgment, we

are ascribing a predicate to Reality as a whole; and this theory is derived fromHegel.  Now  the  traditional  logic  holds  that  every  proposition  ascribes  a

predicate to a subject, and from this it easily follows that there can be only

one subject, the Absolute, for if there were two, the proposition that there

were two would not ascribe a predicate to either. Thus Hegel's doctrine, that

philosophical propositions must be of the form, “the Absolute is such-and-

such,” depends upon the traditional belief in the universality of the subject-

predicate form. This belief, being traditional, scarcely self-conscious, and not

supposed  to  be  important,  operates  underground,  and  is  assumed  in

arguments which, like the refutation of relations, appear at first sight such as

to  establish  its  truth.  This  is  the  most  important  respect  in  which  Hegel

uncritically  assumes  the  traditional  logic.  Other  less  important  respects—

though  important  enough  to  be  the  source  of  such  essentially  Hegelian

conceptions  as  the  “concrete  universal”  and  the  “union  of  identity  in

difference”—will be found where he explicitly deals with formal logic.[12]

  There is quite another direction in which a large  technical development of

logic  has  taken  place:  I  mean  the  direction  of  what  is  called  logistic  or

mathematical  logic.  This  kind  of  logic  is  mathematical  in  two  different

senses:  it  is  itself  a  branch  of  mathematics,  and  it  is  the  logic  which  is

specially  applicable  to  other  more  traditional  branches  of  mathematics.

Historically,  it  began  as merely  a  branch  of  mathematics:  its  special

applicability  to  other  branches  is  a  more  recent  development.  In  both

respects, it is the fulfilment of a hope which Leibniz cherished throughout his

life, and pursued with all the ardour of his amazing intellectual energy. Much

of his work on this subject has been published recently, since his discoveries

have been remade by others; but none was published by him, because his

results persisted in contradicting certain points in the traditional doctrine of

the syllogism. We now know that on these points the traditional doctrine is

wrong, but respect for Aristotle prevented Leibniz from realising that this was

possible.[13]

  The modern development of mathematical logic dates from Boole's Laws

of Thought (1854). But in him and his successors, before Peano and Frege,

the only thing really achieved, apart from certain details, was the invention of

a mathematical symbolism for deducing consequences from the premisses

which the newer methods shared with those of Aristotle. This subject has

considerable interest as an independent branch of mathematics, but it has

very little to do with real logic. The first serious advance in real logic since

the time of  the Greeks was made independently by Peano and Frege—bothmathematicians. They both arrived at their logical results by an analysis of

mathematics. Traditional logic regarded the two propositions, “Socrates is

mortal” and “All men are mortal,” as being of the same form;[14] Peano and

Frege  showed  that  they  are  utterly  different  in  form.  The  philosophical

importance of logic may be illustrated by the fact that this confusion—which

is still committed by most writers—obscured not only the whole study of the

forms of judgment and inference, but also the relations of things to their

qualities, of concrete existence to abstract concepts, and of the world of sense

to the world of Platonic ideas. Peano and Frege, who pointed out the error,

did  so  for  technical  reasons,  and  applied  their  logic  mainly  to  technical

developments; but the philosophical importance of the advance which they

made is impossible to exaggerate.  Mathematical  logic,  even  in  its  most  modern  form,  is  not directly  of

philosophical importance except in its beginnings. After the beginnings, it

belongs rather to mathematics than to philosophy. Of its beginnings, which

are the only part of it that can properly be called philosophical logic, I shall

speak  shortly.  But  even  the  later  developments,  though  not  directly

philosophical, will be found of great indirect use in philosophising. They

enable us to deal easily with more abstract conceptions than merely verbal

reasoning can enumerate; they suggest fruitful hypotheses which otherwise

could hardly be thought of; and they enable us to see quickly what is the

smallest store of materials with which a given logical or scientific edifice can

be constructed. Not only Frege's  theory of number, which we shall deal with

in Lecture VII., but the whole theory of physical concepts  which will be

outlined in our next two lectures, is inspired by mathematical logic, and could

never have been imagined without it.

  In  both  these  cases,  and  in  many  others,  we  shall  appeal  to  a  certain

principle called “the principle of abstraction.” This principle, which might

equally well be called “the principle which dispenses with abstraction,” and is

one which clears away incredible accumulations of metaphysical lumber, was

directly suggested by mathematical logic, and could hardly have been proved

or practically used without its help. The principle will be explained in our

fourth lecture, but its use may be briefly indicated in advance. When a group

of objects have that kind of similarity which we are inclined to attribute to

possession  of  a  common  quality,  the  principle  in  question  shows  that

membership of the group will serve all the purposes of the supposed common

quality, and that therefore, unless some common quality is actually known,

the group or class of similar objects may be used to replace the common

quality,  which  need  not  be  assumed  to  exist.  In  this  and  other  ways,  the

indirect uses of even the later parts of mathematical logic are very great; but

it is now time to turn our attention to its philosophical foundations.

  In every proposition and in every inference there is, besides the particular

subject-matter concerned, a certain form, a way in which the constituents of

the proposition or inference are put together. If I say, “Socrates is mortal,”

“Jones is angry,” “The sun is hot,” there is something in common in these

three cases, something indicated by the word “is.” What is in common is the

form of the proposition, not an actual constituent. If I say a number  of things

about Socrates—that he was an Athenian, that he married Xantippe, that he

drank the hemlock—there is a common constituent, namely Socrates, in allthe propositions I enunciate, but they have diverse forms. If, on the other

hand, I take any one of these propositions and replace its constituents, one at

a time, by other constituents, the form remains constant, but no constituent

remains. Take (say) the series of propositions, “Socrates drank the hemlock,”

“Coleridge  drank  the  hemlock,”  “Coleridge  drank  opium,”  “Coleridge  ate

opium.”  The  form  remains  unchanged  throughout  this  series,  but  all  the

constituents are altered. Thus form is not another constituent, but is the way

the constituents are put together. It is forms, in this sense, that are the proper

object of philosophical logic.

  It  is  obvious  that  the  knowledge  of  logical  forms  is  something  quite

different from knowledge of existing things. The form of “Socrates drank the

hemlock” is not an existing thing like Socrates or the hemlock, nor does it

even  have  that  close  relation  to  existing  things  that  drinking  has.  It  is

something altogether more abstract and remote. We might understand all the

separate  words  of  a  sentence  without  understanding  the  sentence:  if  a

sentence is long and complicated, this is apt to happen. In such a case we

have knowledge of the constituents, but not of the form. We may also have

knowledge of the form without having knowledge of the constituents. If I

say, “Rorarius drank the hemlock,” those among you who have never heard

of  Rorarius  (supposing  there  are  any)  will  understand  the  form,  without

having knowledge of all the constituents. In order to understand a sentence, it

is necessary to have knowledge both of the constituents and of the particular

instance of the form. It is in this way that a sentence conveys  information,

since it tells us that certain known objects are related according to a certain

known form. Thus some kind of knowledge of logical forms, though with

most people it is not explicit, is involved in all understanding of discourse. It

is  the  business  of  philosophical  logic  to  extract  this  knowledge  from  its

concrete integuments, and to render it explicit and pure.

  In all inference, form alone is essential: the particular subject-matter is

irrelevant except as securing the truth of the premisses. This is one reason for

the great importance of logical form. When I say, “Socrates was a man, all

men are mortal, therefore Socrates was mortal,” the connection of premisses

and conclusion does not in any way depend upon its being Socrates and man

and mortality that I am mentioning. The general form of the inference may be

expressed in some such words as, “If a thing has a certain property, and

whatever has this property has a certain other property, then the thing in

question also has that other property.” Here no particular things or propertiesare mentioned: the proposition is absolutely general. All inferences, when

stated fully, are instances of propositions having this kind of generality. If

they seem to depend upon the subject-matter otherwise than as regards the

truth  of  the  premisses,  that  is  because  the  premisses  have  not  been  all

explicitly  stated.  In  logic,  it  is  a  waste  of  time  to  deal  with  inferences

concerning particular cases: we deal throughout with completely general and

purely formal implications, leaving it to other sciences to discover when the

hypotheses are verified and when they are not.

  But the forms of propositions giving rise to inferences are not the simplest

forms: they are always hypothetical, stating that if one proposition is true,

then  so  is  another.  Before  considering  inference,  therefore,  logic  must 

consider  those  simpler  forms  which  inference  presupposes.  Here  the

traditional logic failed completely: it believed that there was only one form of

simple proposition (i.e. of proposition not stating a relation between two or

more other propositions), namely, the form which ascribes a predicate to a

subject. This is the appropriate form in assigning the qualities of a given

thing—we  may  say  “this  thing  is  round,  and  red,  and  so  on.”  Grammar

favours this form, but philosophically it is so far from universal that it is not

even very common. If we say “this thing is bigger than that,” we are not

assigning a mere quality of “this,” but a relation of “this” and “that.” We

might express the same fact by saying “that thing is smaller than this,” where

grammatically  the  subject  is  changed.  Thus  propositions  stating  that  two

things have a certain relation have a different form from subject-predicate

propositions, and the failure to perceive this difference or to allow for it has

been the source of many errors in traditional metaphysics.

  The  belief  or  unconscious  conviction  that  all  propositions  are  of  the

subject-predicate form—in other words, that every fact consists in some thing

having some quality—has rendered most philosophers incapable of giving

any account of the world of science and daily life. If they had been honestly

anxious to give such an account, they would probably have discovered their

error very quickly; but most of them were less anxious to understand the

world of science and daily life, than to convict it of unreality in the interests

of a super-sensible “real” world. Belief in the unreality of the world of sense

arises with irresistible force in certain moods—moods which, I imagine, have

some simple physiological basis, but are none the less powerfully persuasive.

The conviction born of these moods is the source of most  mysticism and of

most metaphysics. When the emotional intensity of such a mood subsides, aman who is in the habit of reasoning will search for logical reasons in favour

of the belief which he finds in himself. But since the belief already exists, he

will  be  very  hospitable  to  any  reason  that  suggests  itself.  The  paradoxes

apparently proved by his logic are really the paradoxes of mysticism, and are

the goal which he feels his logic must reach if it is to be in accordance with

insight. It is in this way that logic has been pursued by those of the great

philosophers  who  were  mystics—notably  Plato,  Spinoza,  and  Hegel.  But

since  they  usually  took  for  granted  the  supposed  insight  of  the  mystic

emotion, their logical doctrines were presented with a certain dryness, and

were  believed  by  their  disciples  to  be  quite  independent  of  the  sudden

illumination from which they sprang. Nevertheless their origin clung to them,

and  they  remained—to  borrow  a  useful  word  from  Mr  Santayana

—“malicious” in regard to the world of science and common sense. It is only

so that we can account for the complacency with which philosophers have

accepted  the  inconsistency  of  their  doctrines  with  all  the  common  and

scientific facts which seem best established and most worthy of belief.

  The logic of mysticism shows, as is natural, the defects which are inherent

in anything malicious. While the mystic mood is dominant, the need of logic

is not felt; as the mood fades, the impulse to logic reasserts itself, but with a

desire to retain the vanishing insight, or at least to prove that it was insight,

and that what seems to contradict it is illusion. The logic which thus arises is

not quite disinterested or candid, and is inspired by a certain hatred of the

daily world to which it is to be applied. Such an attitude naturally does not

tend to  the best results. Everyone knows that to read an author simply in

order to refute him is not the way to understand him; and to read the book of

Nature with a conviction that it is all illusion is just as unlikely to lead to

understanding. If our logic is to find the common world intelligible, it must

not be hostile, but must be inspired by a genuine acceptance such as is not

usually to be found among metaphysicians.

  Traditional  logic,  since  it  holds  that  all  propositions  have  the  subject-

predicate form, is unable to admit the reality of relations: all relations, it

maintains,  must  be  reduced  to  properties  of  the  apparently  related  terms.

There are many ways of refuting this opinion; one of the easiest is derived

from the consideration of what are called “asymmetrical” relations. In order

to  explain  this,  I  will  first  explain  two  independent  ways  of  classifying

relations.

  Some relations, when they hold between A and B, also hold between Band A. Such, for example, is the relation “brother or sister.” If A is a brother

or sister of B, then B is a brother or sister of A. Such again is any kind of

similarity, say similarity of colour. Any kind of dissimilarity is also of this

kind: if the colour of A is unlike the colour of B, then the colour of B is

unlike the colour of A. Relations of this sort are called symmetrical. Thus a

relation is symmetrical if, whenever it holds between A and B, it also holds

between B and A.

  All relations that are not symmetrical are called non-symmetrical. Thus

“brother” is non-symmetrical, because, if A is a brother of B, it may happen

that B is a sister of A.

  A relation is called asymmetrical when, if it holds between A and B, it

never holds between B and A. Thus husband, father, grandfather, etc., are 

asymmetrical  relations. So are before, after, greater, above, to the right of,

etc. All the relations that give rise to series are of this kind.

  Classification  into  symmetrical,  asymmetrical,  and  merely  non-

symmetrical relations is the first of the two classifications we had to consider.

The second is into transitive, intransitive, and merely non-transitive relations,

which are defined as follows.

  A relation is said to be transitive, if, whenever it holds between A and B

and also between B and C, it holds between A and C. Thus before, after,

greater, above are transitive. All relations giving rise to series are transitive,

but  so  are  many  others.  The  transitive  relations  just  mentioned  were

asymmetrical, but many transitive relations are symmetrical—for instance,

equality in any respect, exact identity of colour, being equally numerous (as

applied to collections), and so on.

  A relation is said to be non-transitive whenever it is not transitive. Thus

“brother” is non-transitive, because a brother of one's brother may be oneself.

All kinds of dissimilarity are non-transitive.

  A relation is said to be intransitive when, if A has the relation to B, and B

to C, A never has it to C. Thus “father” is intransitive. So is such a relation as

“one inch taller” or “one year later.”

  Let  us  now,  in  the  light  of  this  classification,  return  to  the  question

whether all relations can be reduced to predications.

  In the case of symmetrical relations—i.e. relations which, if they hold

between A and B, also hold between B and A—some kind of plausibility can

be given to this doctrine. A symmetrical relation which is transitive, such as

equality,  can  be  regarded  as  expressing  possession  of  some  commonproperty,  while  one  which  is  not  transitive,  such as  inequality,  can  be

regarded as expressing possession of different properties. But when we come

to asymmetrical relations, such as before and after, greater and less, etc., the

attempt to reduce them to properties becomes obviously impossible. When,

for  example,  two  things  are  merely  known  to  be  unequal,  without  our

knowing which is greater, we may say that the inequality results from their

having different magnitudes, because inequality is a symmetrical relation; but

to say that when one thing is greater than another, and not merely unequal to

it, that means that they have different magnitudes, is formally incapable of

explaining the facts. For if the other thing had been greater than the one, the

magnitudes would also have been different, though the fact to be explained

would not have been the same. Thus mere difference of magnitude is not all

that is involved, since, if it were, there would be no difference between one

thing being greater than another, and the other being greater than the one. We

shall have to say that the one magnitude is greater than the other, and thus we

shall have failed to get rid of the relation “greater.” In short, both possession

of the same property and possession of different properties are symmetrical

relations,  and  therefore  cannot  account  for  the  existence  of asymmetrical

relations.

  Asymmetrical  relations  are  involved  in  all  series—in  space  and  time,

greater  and  less,  whole  and  part,  and  many  others  of  the  most  important

characteristics  of  the  actual  world.  All  these  aspects,  therefore,  the  logic

which reduces everything to subjects and predicates is compelled to condemn

as error and mere appearance. To those whose logic is not malicious, such a

wholesale condemnation appears impossible. And in fact there is no reason

except prejudice, so far as I can discover, for denying the reality of relations.

When once their reality is admitted,  all logical grounds for supposing the

world of sense to be illusory disappear. If this is to be supposed, it must be

frankly and simply on the ground of mystic insight unsupported by argument.

It is impossible to argue against what professes to be insight, so long as it

does not argue in its own favour. As logicians, therefore, we may admit the

possibility of the mystic's world, while yet, so long as we do not have his

insight, we must continue to study the everyday world with which we are

familiar. But when he contends that our world is impossible, then our logic is

ready to repel his attack. And the first step in creating the logic which is to

perform this service is the recognition of the reality of relations.

  Relations which have two terms are only one kind of relations. A relationmay have three terms, or four, or any number. Relations of two terms, being

the simplest, have received more attention than the others, and have generally

been alone considered by philosophers, both those who accepted and those

who denied the reality of relations. But other relations have their importance,

and  are  indispensable  in  the  solution  of  certain  problems.  Jealousy,  for

example, is a relation between three people. Professor Royce mentions the

relation “giving”: when A gives B to C, that is a relation of three terms.[15]

When a man says to his wife: “My dear, I wish you could induce Angelina to

accept Edwin,” his wish constitutes a relation between four people, himself,

his wife, Angelina, and Edwin. Thus such relations are by no means recondite

or rare. But in order to explain exactly how they differ from relations of two

terms, we must embark upon a classification of the logical forms of facts,

which is the first business of logic, and the business in which the traditional

logic has been most deficient.

  The  existing  world  consists  of  many  things  with  many  qualities  and

relations. A complete description of the existing world would require not

only a catalogue of the things, but also a mention of all their qualities and

relations. We should have to know not only this, that, and the other thing, but

also which was red, which yellow, which was earlier than which, which was

between which two others, and so on. When I speak of a “fact,” I do not

mean one of the simple things in the world; I mean that a certain thing has a

certain  quality,  or  that  certain  things  have  a  certain  relation.  Thus,  for

example, I should not call Napoleon a fact, but I should call it a fact that he

was ambitious, or that he married Josephine. Now a fact, in this sense, is

never  simple,  but  always  has  two  or  more  constituents.  When  it  simply

assigns a quality to a thing, it has only two constituents, the thing and the

quality.  When  it  consists  of  a  relation  between  two  things,  it  has  three

constituents,  the  things  and  the  relation.  When  it  consists  of  a  relation

between three things, it has four constituents, and so on. The constituents of

facts, in the sense in which we are using the word “fact,” are not other facts,

but are things and qualities or relations. When we say that there are relations

of more than two terms, we mean that there are single facts consisting of a

single relation and more than two things. I do not mean that one relation of

two terms may hold between A and B, and also between A and C, as, for

example, a man is the son of his father and also the son of his mother. This

constitutes two distinct facts: if we choose to treat it as one fact, it is a fact

which has facts for its constituents. But the facts I am speaking of have nofacts among their constituents, but only things and relations. For example,

when A is jealous of B on account of C, there is only one fact, involving

three people; there are not  two instances of jealousy, but only one. It is in

such  cases  that  I  speak  of  a  relation  of  three  terms,  where  the  simplest

possible fact in which the relation occurs is one involving three things in

addition to the relation. And the same applies to relations of four terms or

five  or  any  other  number.  All  such  relations  must  be  admitted  in  our

inventory of the logical forms of facts: two facts involving the same number

of things have the same form, and two which involve different numbers of

things have different forms.

  Given any fact, there is an assertion which expresses the fact. The fact

itself is objective, and independent of our thought or opinion about it; but the

assertion is something which involves thought, and may be either true or

false. An assertion may be positive or negative: we may assert that Charles I.

was executed, or that he did not die in his bed. A negative assertion may be

said to be a denial. Given a form of words which must be either true or false,

such as “Charles I. died in his bed,” we may either assert or deny this form of

words: in the one case we have a positive assertion, in the other a negative

one.  A  form  of  words  which  must  be  either  true  or  false  I  shall  call  a

proposition. Thus a proposition is the same as what may be significantly

asserted or denied. A proposition which expresses what we have called a fact,

i.e. which, when asserted, asserts that a certain thing has a certain quality, or

that  certain  things  have  a  certain  relation,  will  be  called  an  atomic

proposition,  because,  as  we  shall  see  immediately,  there  are  other

propositions into which atomic propositions enter in a way analogous to that

in  which  atoms  enter  into  molecules.  Atomic  propositions,  although,  like

facts, they may have any one of an infinite number of forms, are only one

kind  of  propositions.  All  other  kinds are  more  complicated.  In  order  to

preserve the parallelism in language as regards facts and propositions, we

shall  give  the  name  “atomic  facts”  to  the  facts  we  have  hitherto  been

considering.  Thus  atomic  facts  are  what  determine  whether  atomic

propositions are to be asserted or denied.

  Whether an atomic proposition, such as “this is red,” or “this is before

that,” is to be asserted or denied can only be known empirically. Perhaps one

atomic fact may sometimes be capable of being inferred from another, though

this seems very doubtful; but in any case it cannot be inferred from premisses

no one of which is an atomic fact. It follows that, if atomic facts are to beknown at all, some at least must be known without inference. The atomic

facts which we come to know in this way are the facts of sense-perception; at

any rate, the facts of sense-perception are those which we most obviously and

certainly come to know in this way. If we knew all atomic facts, and also

knew that there were none except those we knew, we should, theoretically, be

able to infer all truths of whatever form.[16] Thus logic would then supply us

with  the  whole  of  the  apparatus  required.  But  in  the  first  acquisition  of

knowledge concerning atomic facts, logic is useless. In pure logic, no atomic

fact is ever mentioned: we confine ourselves wholly to forms, without asking

ourselves what objects can fill the forms. Thus pure logic is independent of

atomic facts; but conversely, they are, in a sense, independent of logic. Pure

logic and atomic facts are the two poles, the wholly a priori and the wholly  

empirical. But between the two lies a vast intermediate region, which we

must now briefly explore.

  “Molecular” propositions are such as contain conjunctions—if, or, and,

unless,  etc.—and  such  words  are  the  marks  of  a  molecular  proposition.

Consider such an assertion as, “If it rains, I shall bring my umbrella.” This

assertion is just as capable of truth or falsehood as the assertion of an atomic

proposition, but it is obvious that either the corresponding fact, or the nature

of the correspondence with fact, must be quite different from what it is in the

case  of  an  atomic  proposition.  Whether  it  rains,  and  whether  I  bring  my

umbrella,  are  each  severally  matters  of  atomic  fact,  ascertainable  by

observation. But the connection of the two involved in saying that if the one

happens, then the other will happen, is something radically different from

either of the two separately. It does not require for its truth that it should

actually rain, or that I should actually bring my umbrella; even if the weather

is cloudless, it may still be true that I should have brought my umbrella if the

weather  had  been  different.  Thus  we  have  here  a  connection  of  two

propositions, which does not depend upon whether they are to be asserted or

denied,  but  only  upon  the  second  being  inferable  from  the  first.  Such

propositions,  therefore,  have  a  form  which  is  different  from  that  of  any

atomic proposition.

  Such propositions are important to logic, because all inference depends

upon them. If I have told you that if it rains I shall bring my umbrella, and if

you see that there is a steady downpour, you can infer that I shall bring my

umbrella. There can be no inference except where propositions are connected

in some such way, so that from the truth or falsehood of the one somethingfollows as to the truth or falsehood of the other. It  seems to be the case that

we can sometimes know molecular propositions, as in the above instance of

the  umbrella,  when  we  do  not  know  whether  the  component  atomic

propositions are true or false. The practical utility of inference rests upon this

fact.

  The  next  kind  of  propositions  we  have  to  consider  are general

propositions,  such  as  “all  men  are  mortal,”  “all  equilateral  triangles  are

equiangular.” And with these belong propositions in which the word “some”

occurs, such as “some men are philosophers” or “some philosophers are not

wise.” These are the denials of general propositions, namely (in the above

instances), of “all men are non-philosophers” and “all philosophers are wise.”

We  will  call  propositions  containing  the  word  “some” negative  general

propositions,  and  those  containing  the  word  “all” positive  general

propositions.  These  propositions,  it  will  be  seen,  begin  to  have  the

appearance of the propositions in logical text-books. But their peculiarity and

complexity are not known to the text-books, and the problems which they

raise are only discussed in the most superficial manner.

  When we were discussing atomic facts, we saw that we should be able,

theoretically, to infer all other truths by logic if we knew all atomic facts and

also knew that there were no other atomic facts besides those we knew. The

knowledge that there are no other atomic facts is positive general knowledge;

it is the knowledge that “all atomic facts are known to me,” or at least “all

atomic facts are in this collection”—however the collection may be given. It

is easy to see that general propositions, such as “all men are mortal,” cannot

be  known  by  inference  from  atomic  facts  alone.  If  we  could  know  each

individual man, and know that he was mortal, that would not enable us to

know that all men are mortal, unless we knew that  those were all the men

there are, which is a general proposition. If we knew every other existing

thing throughout the universe, and knew that each separate thing was not an

immortal man, that would not give us our result unless we knew that we had

explored the whole universe, i.e. unless we knew “all things belong to this

collection of things I have examined.” Thus general truths cannot be inferred

from particular truths alone, but must, if they are to be known, be either self-

evident, or inferred from premisses of which at least one is a general truth.

But  all empirical  evidence  is  of particular  truths.  Hence,  if  there  is  any

knowledge of general truths at all, there must be some knowledge of general

truths which is independent of empirical evidence, i.e. does not depend uponthe data of sense.

  The above conclusion, of which we had an instance in the case of the

inductive principle, is important, since it affords a refutation of the older

empiricists. They believed that all our knowledge is derived from the senses

and dependent upon them. We see that, if this view is to be maintained, we

must refuse to admit that we know any general propositions. It is perfectly

possible logically that this should be the case, but it does not appear to be so

in fact, and indeed no one would dream of maintaining such a view except a

theorist at the last extremity. We must therefore admit that there is general

knowledge not derived from sense, and that some of this knowledge is not

obtained by inference but is primitive.

  Such general knowledge is to be found in logic. Whether there is any such

knowledge not derived from logic, I do not know; but in logic, at any rate, we

have such knowledge. It will be remembered that we excluded from pure

logic such propositions as, “Socrates is a man, all men are mortal, therefore

Socrates is mortal,” because  Socrates  and man  and mortal  are  empirical

terms,  only  to  be  understood  through  particular  experience.  The

corresponding  proposition  in  pure  logic  is:  “If  anything  has  a  certain

property, and whatever has this property has a certain other property, then the

thing  in  question  has  the  other  property.”  This  proposition  is  absolutely

general: it applies to all things and all properties. And it is quite self-evident.

Thus  in  such  propositions  of  pure  logic  we  have  the  self-evident  general

propositions of which we were in search.

  A proposition such as, “If Socrates is a man, and all men are mortal, then

Socrates  is  mortal,”  is  true  in  virtue  of  its form  alone.  Its  truth,  in  this

hypothetical form, does not depend upon whether Socrates actually is a man,

nor upon whether in fact all men are mortal; thus it is equally true when we

substitute other terms for Socrates and man and mortal. The general truth of

which it is an instance is purely formal, and belongs to logic. Since it does

not mention any particular thing, or even any particular quality or relation, it

is wholly independent of the accidental facts of the existent world, and can be

known,  theoretically,  without  any  experience  of  particular  things  or  their

qualities and relations.

  Logic, we may say, consists of two parts. The first part investigates what

propositions are and what forms they may have; this part enumerates the

different kinds of atomic propositions, of molecular propositions, of general

propositions,  and  so  on.  The  second  part  consists  of  certain  supremelygeneral  propositions,  which  assert  the  truth  of  all  propositions  of  certain

forms. This second part merges into pure mathematics, whose propositions

all  turn  out,  on  analysis,  to  be  such  general  formal  truths.  The  first  part,

which merely enumerates forms, is the more difficult, and philosophically the

more important;  and it is the recent progress in this first part, more than

anything  else,  that  has  rendered  a  truly  scientific  discussion  of  many

philosophical problems possible.

  The  problem  of  the  nature  of  judgment  or  belief  may  be  taken  as  an

example of a problem whose solution depends upon an adequate inventory of

logical forms. We have already seen how the supposed universality of the

subject-predicate form made it impossible to give a right analysis of serial

order, and therefore made space and time unintelligible. But in this case it

was only necessary to admit relations of two terms. The case of judgment

demands the admission of more complicated forms. If all judgments were

true, we might suppose that a judgment consisted in apprehension of a fact,

and that the apprehension was a relation of a mind to the fact. From poverty

in  the  logical  inventory,  this  view  has  often  been  held.  But  it  leads  to

absolutely insoluble difficulties in the case of error. Suppose I believe that

Charles I. died in his bed. There is no objective fact “Charles I.'s death in his

bed” to which I can have a relation of apprehension. Charles I. and death and

his bed are objective, but they are not, except in my thought, put together as

my false belief supposes. It is therefore necessary, in analysing a belief, to

look for some other logical form than a two-term relation. Failure to realise

this necessity has, in my opinion, vitiated almost everything that has hitherto

been  written  on  the  theory  of  knowledge,  making  the  problem  of  error

insoluble and the difference between belief and perception inexplicable.

  Modern logic, as I hope is now evident, has the effect of enlarging our

abstract imagination, and providing an infinite number of possible hypotheses

to be applied in the analysis of any complex fact. In this respect it is the exact

opposite  of  the  logic  practised  by  the classical  tradition.  In  that  logic,

hypotheses  which  seem primâ  facie  possible  are  professedly  proved

impossible,  and  it  is  decreed  in  advance  that  reality  must  have  a  certain

special character. In modern logic, on the contrary, while the primâ facie

hypotheses as a rule remain admissible, others, which only logic would have

suggested,  are  added  to  our  stock,  and  are  very  often  found  to  be

indispensable if a right analysis of the facts is to be obtained. The old logic

put  thought  in  fetters,  while  the  new  logic  gives  it  wings.  It  has,  in  myopinion,  introduced  the  same  kind  of  advance  into  philosophy  as  Galileo

introduced  into  physics,  making  it  possible  at  last  to  see  what  kinds  of

problems may be capable of solution, and what kinds must be abandoned as

beyond human powers. And where a solution appears possible, the new logic

provides  a  method  which  enables  us  to  obtain  results  that  do  not  merely

embody personal idiosyncrasies, but must command the assent of all who are

competent to form an opinion.                                LECTURE III

  ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF THE EXTERNAL

                                      WORLD

PHILOSOPHY may be approached by many roads, but one of the oldest and

most travelled is the road which leads through doubt as to the reality of the

world  of  sense.  In  Indian  mysticism,  in  Greek  and  modern  monistic

philosophy from Parmenides onward, in Berkeley, in modern physics, we

find sensible appearance criticised and condemned for a bewildering variety

of motives. The mystic condemns it on the ground of immediate knowledge

of a more real and significant world behind the veil; Parmenides and Plato

condemn  it  because  its  continual  flux  is  thought  inconsistent  with  the

unchanging  nature  of  the  abstract  entities  revealed  by  logical  analysis;

Berkeley brings several weapons, but his chief is the subjectivity of sense-

data,  their  dependence  upon  the  organisation  and  point  of  view  of  the

spectator;  while  modern  physics,  on  the  basis  of  sensible  evidence  itself,

maintains a mad dance of electrons which has, superficially at least, very

little resemblance to the immediate objects of sight or touch.

  Every one of these lines of attack raises vital and interesting problems.

  The mystic, so long as he merely reports a positive revelation, cannot be

refuted; but when he denies reality to objects of sense, he may be questioned

as to  what  he  means  by  “reality,”  and  may  be  asked  how  their  unreality

follows from the supposed reality of his super-sensible world. In answering

these questions, he is led to a logic which merges into that of Parmenides and

Plato and the idealist tradition.

  The logic of the idealist tradition has gradually grown very complex and

very abstruse, as may be seen from the Bradleian sample considered in our

first lecture. If we attempted to deal fully with this logic, we should not have

time  to  reach  any  other  aspect  of  our  subject;  we  will  therefore,  while

acknowledging that it deserves a long discussion, pass by its central doctrines

with only such occasional criticism as may serve to exemplify other topics,

and  concentrate  our  attention  on  such  matters  as  its  objections  to  the

continuity of motion and the infinity of space and time—objections which

have  been  fully  answered  by  modern  mathematicians  in  a  manner

constituting  an  abiding  triumph  for  the  method  of  logical  analysis  in

philosophy. These objections and the modern answers to them will occupyour fifth, sixth, and seventh lectures.

  Berkeley's attack, as reinforced by the physiology of the sense-organs and

nerves and brain, is very powerful. I think it must be admitted as probable

that  the  immediate  objects  of  sense  depend  for  their  existence  upon

physiological  conditions  in  ourselves,  and  that,  for  example,  the  coloured

surfaces which we see cease to exist when we shut our eyes. But it would be

a mistake to infer that they are dependent upon mind, not real while we see

them, or not the sole basis for our knowledge of the external world. This line

of argument will be developed in the present lecture.

  The discrepancy between the world of physics and the world of sense,

which we shall consider in our fourth lecture,  will be found to be more 

apparent than real, and it will be shown  that  whatever  there  is  reason  to

believe in physics can probably be interpreted in terms of sense.

  The instrument of discovery throughout is modern logic, a very different

science from the logic of the text-books and also from the logic of idealism.

Our second lecture  has  given  a  short  account  of  modern  logic  and  of  its

points of divergence from the various traditional kinds of logic.

  In our last lecture, after a discussion of causality and free will, we shall try

to  reach  a  general  account  of  the  logical-analytic  method  of  scientific

philosophy, and a tentative estimate of the hopes of philosophical progress

which it allows us to entertain.

  In this lecture, I wish to apply the logical-analytic method to one of the

oldest problems of philosophy, namely, the problem of our knowledge of the

external world. What I have to say on this problem does not amount to an

answer of a definite and dogmatic kind; it amounts only to an analysis and

statement of the questions involved, with an indication of the directions in

which evidence may be sought. But although not yet a definite solution, what

can be said at present seems to me to throw a completely new light on the

problem, and to be indispensable, not only in seeking the answer, but also in

the preliminary question as to what parts of our problem may possibly have

an ascertainable answer.

  In every philosophical problem, our investigation starts from what may be

called  “data,”  by  which  I  mean  matters  of  common  knowledge,  vague,

complex,  inexact,  as  common  knowledge  always  is,  but  yet  somehow

commanding our assent as on the whole and in some interpretation pretty

certainly true. In the case of our  present problem, the common knowledge

involved is of various kinds. There is first our acquaintance with particularobjects of daily life—furniture, houses, towns, other people, and so on. Then

there  is  the  extension  of  such  particular  knowledge  to  particular  things

outside our personal experience, through history and geography, newspapers,

etc.  And  lastly,  there  is  the  systematisation  of  all  this  knowledge  of

particulars by means of physical science, which derives immense persuasive

force  from  its  astonishing  power  of  foretelling  the  future.  We  are  quite

willing to admit that there may be errors of detail in this knowledge, but we

believe them to be discoverable and corrigible by the methods which have

given rise to our beliefs, and we do not, as practical men, entertain for a

moment  the  hypothesis  that  the  whole  edifice  may  be  built  on  insecure

foundations. In the main, therefore, and without absolute dogmatism as to

this or that special portion, we may accept this mass of common knowledge

as affording data for our philosophical analysis.

  It may be said—and this is an objection which must be met at the outset—

that it is the duty of the philosopher to call in question the admittedly fallible

beliefs  of  daily  life,  and  to  replace  them  by  something  more  solid  and

irrefragable. In a sense this is true, and in a sense it is effected in the course

of  analysis.  But  in  another  sense,  and  a  very  important  one,  it  is  quite

impossible.  While  admitting  that  doubt  is  possible  with  regard  to  all  our

common knowledge, we must nevertheless accept that knowledge in the main

if philosophy is to be possible at all. There is not any superfine brand of

knowledge, obtainable by the philosopher, which can give us a standpoint

from which to criticise the whole of the knowledge of daily life. The most

that can be done is to examine and purify our common knowledge by an

internal scrutiny,  assuming the canons by which it has been obtained, and

applying them with more care and with more precision. Philosophy cannot

boast of having achieved such a degree of certainty that it can have authority

to condemn the facts of experience and the laws of science. The philosophic

scrutiny, therefore, though sceptical in regard to every detail, is not sceptical

as regards the whole. That is to say, its criticism of details will only be based

upon their relation to other details, not upon some external criterion which

can be applied to all the details equally. The reason for this abstention from a

universal criticism is not any dogmatic confidence, but its exact opposite; it is

not that common knowledge must be true, but that we possess no radically

different  kind  of  knowledge  derived  from  some  other  source.  Universal

scepticism,  though  logically  irrefutable,  is  practically  barren;  it  can  only,

therefore, give a certain flavour of hesitancy to our beliefs, and cannot beused to substitute other beliefs for them.

  Although  data  can  only  be  criticised  by  other  data,  not  by  an  outside

standard, yet we may distinguish different grades of certainty in the different

kinds of common knowledge which we enumerated just now. What does not

go beyond our own personal sensible acquaintance must be for us the most

certain:  the  “evidence  of  the  senses”  is  proverbially  the  least  open  to

question. What depends on testimony, like the facts of history and geography

which are learnt from books, has varying degrees of certainty according to

the  nature  and  extent  of  the  testimony.  Doubts  as  to  the  existence  of

Napoleon  can  only  be  maintained  for  a  joke,  whereas  the  historicity  of

Agamemnon is a legitimate subject of debate. In science, again, we find all

grades of certainty short of the highest. The law of gravitation, at least  as an

approximate truth, has acquired by this time the same kind of certainty as the

existence  of  Napoleon,  whereas  the  latest  speculations  concerning  the

constitution of matter would be universally acknowledged to have as yet only

a rather slight probability in their favour. These varying degrees of certainty

attaching to different data may be regarded as themselves forming part of our

data; they, along with the other data, lie within the vague, complex, inexact

body of knowledge which it is the business of the philosopher to analyse.

  The  first  thing  that  appears  when  we  begin  to  analyse  our  common

knowledge is that some of it is derivative, while some is primitive; that is to

say, there is some that we only believe because of something else from which

it has been inferred in some sense, though not necessarily in a strict logical

sense,  while  other  parts  are  believed  on  their  own  account,  without  the

support of any outside evidence. It is obvious that the senses give knowledge

of the latter kind: the immediate facts perceived by sight or touch or hearing

do  not  need  to  be  proved  by  argument,  but  are  completely  self-evident.

Psychologists, however, have made us aware that what is actually given in

sense is much less than most people would naturally suppose, and that much

of  what  at  first  sight  seems  to  be  given  is  really  inferred.  This  applies

especially in regard to our space-perceptions. For instance, we instinctively

infer the “real” size and shape of a visible object from its apparent size and

shape,  according  to  its  distance  and  our  point  of  view.  When  we  hear  a

person speaking, our actual sensations usually miss a great deal of what he

says,  and  we  supply  its  place  by  unconscious  inference;  in  a  foreign

language, where this process is more difficult, we find ourselves apparently

grown deaf, requiring, for example, to be much nearer the stage at a theatre than  would  be  necessary  in  our  own  country.  Thus  the  first  step  in  the

analysis of data, namely, the discovery of what is really given in sense, is full

of  difficulty.  We  will,  however,  not  linger  on  this  point;  so  long  as  its

existence  is  realised,  the  exact  outcome  does  not  make  any  very  great

difference in our main problem.

  The  next  step  in  our  analysis  must  be  the  consideration  of  how  the

derivative parts of our common knowledge arise. Here we become involved

in  a  somewhat  puzzling  entanglement  of  logic  and  psychology.

Psychologically, a belief may be called derivative whenever it is caused by

one or more other beliefs, or by some fact of sense which is not simply what

the belief asserts. Derivative beliefs in this sense constantly arise without any

process of logical inference, merely by association of ideas or some equally

extra-logical process. From the expression of a man's face we judge as to

what he is feeling: we say we see that he is angry, when in fact we only see a

frown. We do not judge as to his state of mind by any logical process: the

judgment grows up, often without our being able to say what physical mark

of  emotion  we  actually  saw.  In  such  a  case,  the  knowledge  is  derivative

psychologically; but logically it is in a sense primitive, since it is not the

result of any logical deduction. There may or may not be a possible deduction

leading to the same result, but whether there is or not, we certainly do not

employ it. If we call a belief “logically primitive” when it is not actually

arrived  at  by  a  logical  inference,  then  innumerable  beliefs  are  logically

primitive which psychologically are derivative. The separation of these two

kinds of primitiveness is vitally important to our present discussion.

  When  we  reflect  upon  the  beliefs  which  are  logically  but  not

psychologically primitive, we find that, unless  they  can  on  reflection  be

deduced by a logical process from beliefs which are also psychologically

primitive, our confidence in their truth tends to diminish the more we think

about them. We naturally believe, for example, that tables and chairs, trees

and mountains, are still there when we turn our backs upon them. I do not

wish for a moment to maintain that this is certainly not the case, but I do

maintain that the question whether it is the case is not to be settled off-hand

on any supposed ground of obviousness. The belief that they persist is, in all

men  except  a  few  philosophers,  logically  primitive,  but  it  is  not

psychologically primitive; psychologically, it arises only through our having

seen those tables and chairs, trees and mountains. As soon as the question is

seriously raised whether, because we have seen them, we have a right tosuppose that they are there still, we feel that some kind of argument must be

produced, and that if none is forthcoming, our belief can be no more than a

pious opinion. We do not feel this as regards the immediate objects of sense:

there  they  are,  and  as  far  as  their  momentary  existence  is  concerned,  no

further argument is required. There is accordingly more need of justifying our

psychologically derivative beliefs than of justifying those that are primitive.

  We are thus led to a somewhat vague distinction between what we may

call “hard” data and “soft” data. This distinction is a matter of degree, and

must not be pressed; but if not taken too seriously it may help to make the

situation clear. I mean by “hard” data those which resist the solvent influence

of critical reflection, and by “soft” data those which, under the operation of

this process, become to our minds more or less doubtful. The hardest of hard

data are of two sorts: the particular facts of sense, and the general truths of  

logic. The more we reflect upon these, the more we realise exactly what they

are,  and  exactly  what  a  doubt  concerning  them  really  means,  the  more

luminously certain do they become. Verbal doubt concerning even these is

possible, but verbal doubt may occur when what is nominally being doubted

is  not  really  in  our  thoughts,  and  only  words  are  actually  present  to  our

minds. Real doubt, in these two cases, would, I think, be pathological. At any

rate, to me they seem quite certain, and I shall assume that you agree with me

in  this.  Without  this  assumption,  we  are  in  danger  of  falling  into  that

universal scepticism which, as we saw, is as barren as it is irrefutable. If we

are  to  continue  philosophising,  we  must  make  our  bow  to  the  sceptical

hypothesis,  and,  while  admitting  the  elegant  terseness  of  its  philosophy,

proceed to the consideration of other hypotheses which, though perhaps not

certain, have at least as good a right to our respect as the hypothesis of the

sceptic.

  Applying  our  distinction  of  “hard”  and  “soft”  data  to  psychologically

derivative but logically primitive beliefs, we shall find that most, if not all,

are to be classed as soft data. They may be found, on reflection, to be capable

of logical proof, and they then again become believed, but no longer as data.

As data, though entitled to a certain limited respect, they cannot be placed on

a level with the facts of sense or the laws of logic. The kind of respect which

they deserve seems to me such as to warrant us in hoping, though not too

confidently, that the hard data may prove them to be at least probable. Also,

if the hard data are found to throw no light whatever upon their truth or

falsehood,  we  are  justified,  I  think,  in  giving  rather  more  weight  to  thehypothesis of their truth than to the hypothesis of their falsehood. For the

present, however, let us confine ourselves to the hard  data, with a view to

discovering what sort of world can be constructed by their means alone.

  Our data now are primarily the facts of sense (i.e. of our own sense-data)

and  the  laws  of  logic.  But  even  the  severest  scrutiny  will  allow  some

additions to this slender stock. Some facts of memory—especially of recent

memory—seem to have the highest degree of certainty. Some introspective

facts are as certain as any facts of sense. And facts of sense themselves must,

for our present purposes, be interpreted with a certain latitude. Spatial and

temporal relations must sometimes be included, for example in the case of a

swift motion falling wholly within the specious present. And some facts of

comparison, such as the likeness or unlikeness of two shades of colour, are

certainly to be included among hard data. Also we must remember that the

distinction of hard and soft data is psychological and subjective, so that, if

there are other minds than our own—which at our present stage must be held

doubtful—the catalogue of hard data may be different for them from what it

is for us.

  Certain common beliefs are undoubtedly excluded from hard data. Such is

the belief which led us to introduce the distinction, namely, that sensible

objects in general persist when we are not perceiving them. Such also is the

belief in other people's minds: this belief is obviously derivative from our

perception of their bodies, and is felt to demand logical justification as soon

as we become aware of its derivativeness. Belief in what is reported by the

testimony  of  others,  including  all  that  we  learn  from  books,  is  of  course

involved in the doubt as to whether other people have minds at all. Thus the

world from which our reconstruction is to begin is very fragmentary. The best

we can say for it is that it is slightly more extensive than the world at  which

Descartes arrived by a similar process, since that world contained nothing

except himself and his thoughts.

  We  are  now  in  a  position  to  understand  and  state  the  problem  of  our

knowledge of the external world, and to remove various misunderstandings

which have obscured the meaning of the problem. The problem really is: Can

the existence of anything other than our own hard data be inferred from the

existence of those data? But before considering this problem, let us briefly

consider what the problem is not.

  When we speak of the “external” world in this discussion, we must not

mean  “spatially  external,”  unless  “space”  is  interpreted  in  a  peculiar  andrecondite  manner.  The  immediate  objects  of  sight,  the  coloured  surfaces

which make up the visible world, are spatially external in the natural meaning

of this phrase. We feel them to be “there” as opposed to “here”; without

making any assumption of an existence other than hard data, we can more or

less  estimate  the  distance  of  a  coloured  surface.  It  seems  probable  that

distances, provided they are not too great, are actually given more or less

roughly in sight; but whether this is the case or not, ordinary distances can

certainly be estimated approximately by means of the data of sense alone.

The immediately given world is spatial, and is further not wholly contained

within our own bodies. Thus our knowledge of what is external in this sense

is not open to doubt.

  Another form in which the question is often put is: “Can we know of the

existence of any reality which is independent of ourselves?” This form of the

question  suffers  from  the  ambiguity  of  the  two  words  “independent”  and

“self.” To take the Self first: the  question as to what is to be reckoned part of

the Self and what is not, is a very difficult one. Among many other things

which we may mean by the Self, two may be selected as specially important,

namely, (1) the bare subject which thinks and is aware of objects, (2) the

whole assemblage of things that would necessarily cease to exist if our lives

came to an end. The bare subject, if it exists at all, is an inference, and is not

part of the data; therefore this meaning of Self may be ignored in our present

inquiry. The second meaning is difficult to make precise, since we hardly

know what things depend upon our lives for their existence. And in this form,

the definition of Self introduces the word “depend,” which raises the same

questions as are raised by the word “independent.” Let us therefore take up

the word “independent,” and return to the Self later.

  When we say that one thing is “independent” of another, we may mean

either that it is logically possible for the one to exist without the other, or that

there is no causal relation between the two such that the one only occurs as

the effect of the other. The only way, so far as I know, in which one thing can

be logically dependent upon another is when the other is part of the one. The

existence  of  a  book,  for  example,  is  logically  dependent  upon  that  of  its

pages: without the pages there would be no book. Thus in this sense the

question, “Can we know of the existence of any reality which is independent

of ourselves?” reduces to the question, “Can we know of the existence of any

reality of which our Self is not part?” In this form, the question brings us

back to the problem of defining the Self; but I think, however the Self may bedefined, even when it is taken as the bare subject, it cannot be supposed to be

part of the immediate object of sense; thus in this form of the question we  

must admit that we can know of the existence of realities independent of

ourselves.

  The question of causal dependence is much more difficult. To know that

one kind of thing is causally independent of another, we must know that it

actually occurs without the other. Now it is fairly obvious that, whatever

legitimate meaning we give to the Self, our thoughts and feelings are causally

dependent upon ourselves, i.e. do not occur when there is no Self for them to

belong to. But in the case of objects of sense this is not obvious; indeed, as

we saw, the common-sense view is that such objects persist in the absence of

any  percipient.  If  this  is  the  case,  then  they  are  causally  independent  of

ourselves; if not, not. Thus in this form the question reduces to the question

whether we can know that objects of sense, or any other objects not our own

thoughts and feelings, exist at times when we are not perceiving them. This

form, in which the difficult word “independent” no longer occurs, is the form

in which we stated the problem a minute ago.

  Our question in the above form raises two distinct problems, which it is

important to keep separate. First, can we know that objects of sense, or very

similar objects, exist at times when we are not perceiving them? Secondly, if

this cannot be known, can we know that other objects, inferable from objects

of  sense  but  not  necessarily  resembling  them,  exist  either  when  we  are

perceiving  the  objects  of  sense  or  at  any  other  time?  This  latter  problem

arises in philosophy as the problem of the “thing in itself,” and in science as

the problem of matter as assumed in physics. We will consider this latter

problem first.

  Owing to the fact that we feel passive in sensation, we naturally suppose 

that our sensations have outside causes.  Now it is necessary here first  of  all

to distinguish between (1) our sensation, which is a mental event consisting

in our being aware of a sensible object, and (2) the sensible object of which

we are aware in sensation. When I speak of the sensible object, it must be

understood that I do not mean such a thing as a table, which is both visible

and  tangible,  can  be  seen  by  many  people  at  once,  and  is  more  or  less

permanent. What I mean is just that patch of colour which is momentarily

seen when we look at the table, or just that particular hardness which is felt

when we press it, or just that particular sound which is heard when we rap it.

Each  of  these  I  call  a  sensible  object,  and  our  awareness  of  it  I  call  asensation. Now our sense of passivity, if it really afforded any argument,

would only tend to show that the sensation has an outside cause; this cause

we should naturally seek in the sensible object. Thus there is no good reason,

so far, for supposing that sensible objects must have outside causes. But both

the thing-in-itself of philosophy and the matter of physics present themselves

as outside causes of the sensible object as much as of the sensation. What are

the grounds for this common opinion?

  In each case, I think, the opinion has resulted from the combination of a

belief that something which can persist independently of our consciousness

makes  itself  known  in  sensation,  with  the  fact  that  our  sensations  often

change in ways which seem to depend upon us rather than upon anything

which would be supposed to persist independently of us. At first, we believe

unreflectingly that everything is as it seems to be, and that, if we shut our

eyes, the objects we had been seeing remain as they were though we no

longer  see  them.  But  there  are  arguments  against  this  view,  which  have

generally been thought  conclusive. It is extraordinarily difficult to see just

what  the  arguments  prove;  but  if  we  are  to  make  any  progress  with  the

problem of the external world, we must try to make up our minds as to these

arguments.

  A table viewed from one place presents a different appearance from that

which it presents from another place. This is the language of common sense,

but this language already assumes that there is a real table of which we see

the appearances. Let us try to state what is known in terms of sensible objects

alone, without any element of hypothesis. We find that as we walk round the

table,  we  perceive  a  series  of  gradually  changing  visible  objects.  But  in

speaking of “walking round the table,” we have still retained the hypothesis

that there is a single table connected with all the appearances. What we ought

to say is that, while we have those muscular and other sensations which make

us say we are walking, our visual sensations change in a continuous way, so

that,  for  example,  a  striking  patch  of  colour  is  not  suddenly  replaced  by

something  wholly  different,  but  is  replaced  by  an  insensible  gradation  of

slightly different colours with slightly different shapes. This is what we really

know by experience, when we have freed our minds from the assumption of

permanent “things” with changing appearances. What is really known is a

correlation of muscular and other bodily sensations with changes in visual

sensations.

  But walking round the table is not the only way of altering its appearance. We can shut one eye, or put on blue spectacles, or look through a microscope. 

All these operations, in various ways, alter the visual appearance which we 

call that of the table. More distant objects will also alter their appearance if 

(as we say) the state of the atmosphere changes—if there is fog or rain or 

sunshine.  Physiological changes also alter the appearances of things. If we 

assume the world of common sense, all these changes, including those 

attributed to physiological causes, are changes in the intervening medium. It 

is not quite so easy as in the former case to reduce this set of facts to a form 

in which nothing is assumed beyond sensible objects. Anything intervening 

between ourselves and what we see must be invisible: our view in every 

direction is bounded by the nearest visible object. It might be objected that a 

dirty pane of glass, for example, is visible although we can see things through 

it. But in this case we really see a spotted patchwork: the dirtier specks in the

glass are visible, while the cleaner parts are invisible and allow us to see what

is  beyond.  Thus  the  discovery  that  the  intervening  medium  affects  the

appearances of things cannot be made by means of the sense of sight alone.

  Let us take the case of the blue spectacles, which is the simplest, but may

serve as a type for the others. The frame of the spectacles is of course visible,

but the blue glass, if it is clean, is not visible. The blueness, which we say is

in the glass, appears as being in the objects seen through the glass. The glass

itself is known by means of the sense of touch. In order to know that it is

between us and the objects seen through it, we must know how to correlate

the space of touch with the space of sight. This correlation itself, when stated

in terms of the data of sense alone, is by no means a simple matter. But it

presents  no  difficulties  of  principle,  and  may  therefore  be  supposed

accomplished. When it has been accomplished, it becomes possible to attach

a  meaning  to  the  statement  that  the  blue  glass,  which  we  can  touch,  is

between us and the object seen, as we say, “through” it.

  But we have still not reduced our statement completely to what is actually

given in sense. We have fallen into the assumption that the object of which

we are conscious when we touch the blue spectacles still exists after we have

ceased to touch them. So long as we are touching them, nothing except our

finger can be seen through the part touched, which is the only part where we

immediately know that there is something. If we are to account for the blue

appearance of objects other than the spectacles, when seen through them, it

might seem as if we must assume that the spectacles still exist when we are

not  touching  them;  and  if  this  assumption  really  is  necessary,  our  mainproblem is answered: we have means of knowing of the present existence of

objects not given in sense, though of the same kind as objects formerly given

in sense.

  It  may  be  questioned,  however,  whether  this  assumption  is  actually

unavoidable, though it is unquestionably the most natural one to make. We

may  say  that  the  object  of  which  we  become  aware  when  we  touch  the

spectacles continues to have effects afterwards, though perhaps it no longer

exists. In this view, the supposed continued existence of sensible objects after

they have ceased to be sensible will be a fallacious inference from the fact

that they still have effects. It is often supposed that nothing which has ceased

to exist can continue to have effects, but this is a mere prejudice, due to a

wrong  conception  of  causality.  We  cannot,  therefore,  dismiss  our  present

hypothesis on the ground of a priori impossibility, but must examine further

whether it can really account for the facts.

  It may be said that our hypothesis is useless in the case when the blue

glass is never touched at all. How, in that case, are we to account for the blue

appearance of  objects?  And  more  generally,  what  are  we  to  make  of  the

hypothetical sensations of touch which we associate with untouched visible

objects, which we know would be verified if we chose, though in fact we do

not verify them? Must not these be attributed to permanent possession, by the

objects, of the properties which touch would reveal?

  Let us consider the more general question first. Experience has taught us

that where we see certain kinds of coloured surfaces we can, by touch, obtain

certain expected sensations of hardness or softness, tactile shape, and so on.

This leads us to believe that what is seen is usually tangible, and that it has,

whether we touch it or not, the hardness or softness which we should expect

to feel if we touched it. But the mere fact that we are able to infer what our

tactile sensations would be shows that it is not logically necessary to assume

tactile qualities before they are felt. All that is really known is that the visual

appearance in question, together with touch, will lead to certain sensations,

which can necessarily be determined in terms of the visual appearance, since

otherwise they could not be inferred from it.

  We can now give a statement of the experienced facts concerning the blue

spectacles,  which  will  supply  an  interpretation  of  common-sense  beliefs

without assuming anything beyond the existence of sensible objects at the

times when they are sensible. By experience of the correlation of touch and

sight sensations, we become able to associate a certain place in touch-spacewith a certain corresponding place in sight-space. Sometimes, namely in the

case of transparent things, we find that there is a tangible object in a touch-

place without there being any visible object in the corresponding sight-place.

But in such a case as that of the blue spectacles, we find that  whatever object

is  visible  beyond  the  empty  sight-place  in  the  same  line  of  sight  has  a

different  colour  from  what  it  has  when  there  is  no  tangible  object  in  the

intervening touch-place; and as we move the tangible object in touch-space,

the blue patch moves in sight-space. If now we find a blue patch moving in

this  way  in  sight-space,  when  we  have  no  sensible  experience  of  an

intervening tangible object, we nevertheless infer that, if we put our hand at a

certain place in touch-space, we should experience a certain touch-sensation.

If we are to avoid non-sensible objects, this must be taken as the whole of our

meaning when we say that the blue spectacles are in a certain place, though

we have not touched them, and have only seen other things rendered blue by

their interposition.

  I think it may be laid down quite generally that, in so far as physics or

common sense is verifiable, it must be capable of interpretation in terms of

actual sense-data alone. The reason for this is simple. Verification consists

always in the occurrence of an expected sense-datum. Astronomers tell us

there will be an eclipse of the moon: we look at the moon, and find the earth's

shadow biting into it, that is to say, we see an appearance quite different from

that of the usual full moon. Now if an expected sense-datum constitutes a

verification, what was asserted must have been about sense-data; or, at any

rate, if part of what was asserted was not about sense-data, then only the

other part has been verified. There is in fact a certain regularity or conformity

to law about the occurrence of sense-data, but the sense-data that occur at one

time are often causally connected with those that occur at quite other times,

and not, or at least not very closely, with those that occur at neighbouring

times. If I look at the moon and immediately afterwards hear a  train coming,

there is no very close causal connection between my two sense-data; but if I

look at the moon on two nights a week apart, there is a very close causal

connection between the two sense-data. The simplest, or at least the easiest,

statement of the connection is obtained by imagining a “real” moon which

goes on whether I look at it or not, providing a series of possible sense-data

of which only those are actual which belong to moments when I choose to

look at the moon.

  But the degree of verification obtainable in this way is very small. It mustbe remembered that, at our present level of doubt, we are not at liberty to

accept testimony. When we hear certain noises, which are those we should

utter if we wished to express a certain thought, we assume that that thought,

or  one  very  like  it,  has  been  in  another  mind,  and  has  given  rise  to  the

expression which we hear. If at the same time we see a body resembling our

own, moving its lips as we move ours when we speak, we cannot resist the

belief that it is alive, and that the feelings inside it continue when we are not

looking at it. When we see our friend drop a weight upon his toe, and hear

him say—what we should say in similar circumstances, the phenomena can

no doubt be explained without assuming that he is anything but a series of

shapes and noises seen and heard by us, but practically no man is so infected

with philosophy as not to be quite certain that his friend has felt the same

kind of pain as he himself would feel. We will consider the legitimacy of this

belief presently; for the moment, I only wish to point out that it needs the

same kind of justification as our belief that the moon exists when we do not

see it, and that, without it, testimony heard or read is reduced to noises and

shapes, and cannot be regarded as evidence of the facts which it reports. The

verification of physics  which is possible at our present level is, therefore,

only  that  degree  of  verification  which  is  possible  by  one  man's  unaided

observations, which will not carry us very far towards the establishment of a

whole science.

  Before proceeding further, let us summarise the argument so far as it has

gone. The problem is: “Can the existence of anything other than our own

hard data be inferred from these data?” It is a mistake to state the problem in

the form: “Can we know of the existence of anything other than ourselves

and our states?” or: “Can we know of the existence of anything independent

of  ourselves?”  because  of  the  extreme  difficulty  of  defining  “self”  and

“independent” precisely. The felt passivity of sensation is irrelevant, since,

even if it proved anything, it could only prove that sensations are caused by

sensible objects. The natural naïve belief is that things seen persist, when

unseen, exactly or approximately as they appeared when seen; but this belief

tends  to  be  dispelled  by  the  fact  that  what  common  sense  regards  as  the

appearance  of  one  object  changes  with  what  common  sense  regards  as

changes in the point of view and in the intervening medium, including in the

latter our own sense-organs and nerves and brain. This fact, as just stated,

assumes,  however,  the  common-sense  world  of  stable  objects  which  it

professes  to  call  in  question;  hence,  before  we  can  discover  its  precisebearing on our problem, we must find a way of stating it which does not

involve any of the assumptions which it is designed to render doubtful. What

we then find, as the bare outcome of experience, is that gradual changes in

certain sense-data are correlated with gradual changes in certain others, or (in

the case of bodily motions) with the other sense-data themselves.

  The assumption that sensible objects persist after they  have ceased to be

sensible—for example, that the hardness of a visible body, which has been

discovered by touch, continues when the body is no longer touched—may be

replaced by the statement that the effects of sensible objects persist, i.e. that

what  happens  now  can  only  be  accounted  for,  in  many  cases,  by  taking

account of what happened at an earlier time. Everything that one man, by his

own personal experience, can verify in the account of the world given by

common sense and physics, will be explicable by some such means, since

verification consists merely in the occurrence of an expected sense-datum.

But  what  depends  upon  testimony,  whether  heard  or  read,  cannot  be

explained in this way, since testimony depends upon the existence of minds

other than our own, and thus requires a knowledge of something not given in

sense. But before examining the question of our knowledge of other minds,

let us return to the question of the thing-in-itself, namely, to the theory that

what exists at times when we are not perceiving a given sensible object is

something quite unlike that object, something which, together with us and our

sense-organs, causes our sensations, but is never itself given in sensation.

  The thing-in-itself, when we start from common-sense assumptions, is a

fairly natural outcome of the difficulties due to the changing appearances of

what is supposed to be one object. It is supposed that the table (for example)

causes our sense-data of sight and touch, but must, since these are altered by

the point of view and the intervening medium, be quite different from the

sense-data to which it gives rise. There is, in this theory, a tendency to a

confusion  from  which  it  derives  some  of  its  plausibility,  namely,  the

confusion between a sensation as a psychical occurrence and its object. A

patch of colour, even if it  only exists when it is seen, is still something quite

different from the seeing of it: the seeing of it is mental, but the patch of

colour  is  not.  This  confusion,  however,  can  be  avoided  without  our

necessarily abandoning the theory we are examining. The objection to it, I

think,  lies  in  its  failure  to  realise  the  radical  nature  of  the  reconstruction

demanded by the difficulties to which it points. We cannot speak legitimately

of changes in the point of view and the intervening medium until we havealready  constructed  some  world  more  stable  than  that  of  momentary

sensation. Our discussion of the blue spectacles and the walk round the table

has, I hope, made this clear. But what remains far from clear is the nature of

the reconstruction required.  Although we cannot rest content with the above theory, in the terms in

which it is stated, we must nevertheless treat it with a certain respect, for it is

in outline the theory upon which physical science and physiology are built,

and it must, therefore, be susceptible of a true interpretation. Let us see how

this is to be done.

  The first thing to realise is that there are no such things as “illusions of

sense.”  Objects  of  sense,  even  when  they  occur  in  dreams,  are  the  most

indubitably real objects known to us. What, then, makes us call them unreal

in dreams? Merely the unusual nature of their connection with other objects

of sense. I dream that I am in America, but I wake up and find myself in

England  without  those  intervening  days  on  the  Atlantic  which,  alas!  are

inseparably connected with a “real” visit to America. Objects of sense are

called “real” when they have the kind of connection with other objects of

sense which experience has led us to regard as normal; when they fail in this,

they  are  called  “illusions.”  But  what  is  illusory  is  only  the  inferences  to

which they give rise;  in themselves, they are every bit as real as the objects

of waking life. And conversely, the sensible objects of waking life must not

be expected to have any more intrinsic reality than those of dreams. Dreams

and waking life, in our first efforts at construction, must be treated with equal

respect; it is only by some reality not merely sensible that dreams can be

condemned.

  Accepting the indubitable momentary reality of objects of sense, the next

thing  to  notice  is  the  confusion  underlying  objections  derived  from  their

changeableness. As we walk round the table, its aspect changes; but it is

thought  impossible  to  maintain  either  that  the  table  changes,  or  that  its

various  aspects  can  all  “really”  exist  in  the  same  place.  If  we  press  one

eyeball, we shall see two tables; but it is thought preposterous to maintain

that there are “really” two tables. Such arguments, however, seem to involve

the assumption that there can be something more real than objects of sense. If

we see two tables, then there are two visual tables. It is perfectly true that, at

the same moment, we may discover by touch that there is only one tactile

table. This makes us declare the two visual tables an illusion, because usually

one  visual  object  corresponds  to  one  tactile  object.  But  all  that  we  are

warranted in saying is that, in this case, the manner of correlation of touch

and sight is unusual. Again, when the aspect of the table changes as we walk

round it, and we are told there cannot be so many different aspects in the

same place, the answer is simple: what does the critic of the table mean by“the  same  place”?  The  use  of  such  a  phrase  presupposes  that  all  our

difficulties have been solved; as yet, we have no right to speak of a “place”

except with reference to one given set of momentary sense-data. When all are

changed by a bodily movement, no place remains the  same as it was. Thus

the difficulty, if it exists, has at least not been rightly stated.

  We will now make a new start, adopting a different method. Instead of

inquiring what is the minimum of assumption by which we can explain the

world of sense, we will, in order to have a model hypothesis as a help for the

imagination, construct one possible (not necessary) explanation of the facts.

It may perhaps then be possible to pare away what is superfluous in our

hypothesis, leaving a residue which may be regarded as the abstract answer to

our problem.

  Let us imagine that each mind looks out upon the world, as in Leibniz's

monadology,  from  a  point  of  view  peculiar  to  itself;  and  for  the  sake  of

simplicity let us confine ourselves to the sense of sight, ignoring minds which

are  devoid  of  this  sense.  Each  mind  sees  at  each  moment  an  immensely

complex three-dimensional world; but there is absolutely nothing which is

seen by two minds simultaneously. When we say that two people see the

same thing, we always find that, owing to difference of point of view, there

are differences, however slight, between their immediate sensible objects. (I

am here assuming the validity of testimony, but as we are only constructing a

possible theory, that is a legitimate assumption.) The three-dimensional world

seen by one mind therefore contains no place in common with that seen by

another, for places can only be constituted by the things in or around them.

Hence  we  may  suppose,  in  spite  of  the  differences  between  the  different

worlds, that each exists entire exactly as it is perceived, and might be exactly

as it is even if it were not perceived. We may further suppose that there are an

infinite number of such worlds which are in fact unperceived. If two men are

sitting in a room, two somewhat similar worlds are  perceived by them; if a

third man enters and sits between them, a third world, intermediate between

the two previous worlds, begins to be perceived. It is true that we cannot

reasonably  suppose  just  this  world  to  have  existed  before,  because  it  is

conditioned by the sense-organs, nerves, and brain of the newly arrived man;

but we can reasonably suppose that some aspect of the universe existed from

that point of view, though no one was perceiving it. The system consisting of

all views of the universe perceived and unperceived, I shall call the system of

“perspectives”; I shall confine the expression “private worlds” to such viewsof  the  universe  as  are  actually  perceived.  Thus  a  “private  world”  is  a

perceived  “perspective”;  but  there  may  be  any  number  of  unperceived

perspectives.

  Two men are sometimes found to perceive very similar perspectives, so

similar that they can use the same words to describe them. They say they see

the same table, because the differences between the two tables they see are

slight  and  not  practically  important.  Thus  it  is  possible,  sometimes,  to

establish a correlation by similarity between a great many of the things of one

perspective, and a great many of the things of another. In case the similarity

is very great, we say the points of view of the two perspectives are near

together in space; but this space in which they are near together is totally

different from the spaces inside the two perspectives. It is a relation between

the perspectives, and is not in either of them; no one can perceive it, and if it

is  to  be  known  it  can  be  only  by  inference.  Between  two  perceived

perspectives  which  are  similar,  we  can  imagine  a  whole  series  of  other

perspectives,  some  at  least  unperceived,  and  such  that  between  any  two,

however similar, there are others still more similar. In this way the space

which consists  of relations between perspectives can be rendered continuous,

and (if we choose) three-dimensional.

  We can now define the momentary common-sense “thing,” as opposed to

its momentary appearances. By the similarity of neighbouring perspectives,

many objects in the one can be correlated with objects in the other, namely,

with the similar objects. Given an object in one perspective, form the system

of all the objects correlated with it in all the perspectives; that system may be

identified with the momentary common-sense “thing.” Thus an aspect of a

“thing” is a member of the system of aspects which is the “thing” at that

moment. (The correlation of the times of different perspectives raises certain

complications, of the kind considered in the theory of relativity; but we may

ignore these at present.) All the aspects of a thing are real, whereas the thing

is a mere logical construction. It has, however, the merit of being neutral as

between  different  points  of  view,  and  of  being  visible  to  more  than  one

person, in the only sense in which it can ever be visible, namely, in the sense

that each sees one of its aspects.

  It will be observed that, while each perspective contains its own space,

there is only one space in which the perspectives themselves are the elements.

There are as many private spaces as there are perspectives; there are therefore

at least as many as there are percipients, and there may be any number ofothers which have a merely material existence and are not seen by anyone.

But  there  is  only  one  perspective-space,  whose  elements  are  single

perspectives, each with its own private space. We have now to explain how

the private space of a single perspective is correlated with part of the one all-

embracing perspective space.

  Perspective space is the system of “points of view”  of  private  spaces

(perspectives), or, since “points of view” have not been defined, we may say

it is the system of the private spaces themselves. These private spaces will

each count as one point, or at any rate as one element, in perspective space.

They are ordered by means of their similarities. Suppose, for example, that

we start from one which contains the appearance of a circular disc, such as

would be called a penny, and suppose this appearance, in the perspective in

question,  is  circular,  not  elliptic.  We  can  then  form  a  whole  series  of

perspectives containing a graduated series of circular aspects of varying sizes:

for this purpose we only have to move (as we say) towards the penny or away

from it. The perspectives in which the penny looks circular will be said to lie

on a straight line in perspective space, and their order on this line will be that

of the sizes of the circular aspects. Moreover—though this statement must be

noticed  and  subsequently  examined—the  perspectives  in  which  the  penny

looks big will be said to be nearer to the penny than those in which it looks

small. It is to be remarked also that any other “thing” than our penny might

have been chosen to define the relations of our perspectives in perspective

space, and that experience shows that the same spatial order of perspectives

would have resulted.

  In order to explain the correlation of private spaces with perspective space,

we have first to explain what is meant by “the place (in perspective space)

where a thing is.” For this purpose, let us again consider the penny which

appears in many perspectives. We formed a straight line of perspectives in

which the penny looked circular, and we agreed that those in which it looked

larger were to be considered as nearer to the penny. We can form another

straight line of perspectives in which the penny is seen end-on and looks like

a straight line of  a certain thickness. These two lines will meet in a certain

place in perspective space, i.e. in a certain perspective, which may be defined

as “the place (in perspective space) where the penny is.” It is true that, in

order to prolong our lines until they reach this place, we shall have to make

use of other things besides the penny, because, so far as experience goes, the

penny ceases to present any appearance after we have come so near to it thatit touches the eye. But this raises no real difficulty, because the spatial order

of  perspectives  is  found  empirically  to  be  independent  of  the  particular

“things” chosen for defining the order. We can, for example, remove our

penny and prolong each of our two straight lines up to their intersection by

placing other pennies further off in such a way that the aspects of the one are

circular where those of our original penny were circular, and the aspects of

the other are straight where those of our original penny were straight. There

will  then  be  just  one  perspective  in  which  one  of  the  new  pennies  looks

circular and the other straight. This will be, by definition, the place where the

original penny was in perspective space.

  The above is, of course, only a first rough sketch of the way in which our

definition is to be reached. It neglects the size of the penny, and it assumes

that we can remove the penny without being disturbed by any simultaneous

changes in the positions of other things. But it is plain that such niceties

cannot  affect  the  principle,  and  can  only  introduce  complications  in  its

application.

  Having  now  defined  the  perspective  which  is  the  place  where  a  given

thing is, we can understand what is meant by saying that the perspectives in

which a thing looks large are nearer to the thing than those in which it looks

small: they are, in fact, nearer to the perspective which is the place where the

thing is.

  We can now also explain the correlation between a private space and parts

of perspective space. If there is an aspect of a given thing in a certain private

space, then we correlate the place where this aspect is in the private space

with the place where the thing is in perspective space.

  We  may  define  “here”  as  the  place,  in  perspective  space,  which  is

occupied by our private world. Thus we can now understand what is meant

by speaking of a thing as near to or far from “here.” A thing is near to “here”

if the place where it is is near to my private world. We can also understand

what is meant by saying that our private world is inside our head; for our

private world is a place in perspective space, and may be part of the place

where our head is.

  It will be observed that two places in perspective space are associated with

every aspect of a thing: namely, the place where the thing is, and the place

which is the perspective of which the aspect in question forms part. Every

aspect of a thing is a member of two different classes of aspects, namely: (1)

the various aspects of the thing, of which at most one appears in any givenperspective; (2) the perspective of which the given aspect is a member, i.e.

that in which the thing has the given aspect. The physicist naturally classifies

aspects  in  the  first  way,  the  psychologist  in  the  second.  The  two  places

associated with a single aspect correspond to the two ways of classifying it.

We may distinguish the two places as that at which, and that from which, the

aspect appears. The “place at which” is the place of the thing to which the

aspect belongs; the “place from which” is the place of the perspective to

which the aspect belongs.

  Let  us  now  endeavour  to  state  the  fact  that  the  aspect  which  a  thing

presents at a given place is affected by the  intervening medium. The aspects

of a thing in different perspectives are to be conceived as spreading outwards

from the place where the thing is, and undergoing various changes as they get

further  away  from  this  place.  The  laws  according  to  which  they  change

cannot be stated if we only take account of the aspects that are near the thing,

but require that we should also take account of the things that are at the

places from which these aspects appear. This empirical fact can, therefore, be

interpreted in terms of our construction.

  We  have  now  constructed  a  largely  hypothetical  picture  of  the  world,

which  contains  and  places  the  experienced  facts,  including  those  derived

from testimony. The world we have constructed can, with a certain amount of

trouble, be used to interpret the crude facts of sense, the facts of physics, and

the facts of physiology. It is therefore a world which may be actual. It fits the

facts, and there is no empirical evidence against it; it also is free from logical

impossibilities. But have we any good reason to suppose that it is real? This

brings us back to our original problem, as to the grounds for believing in the

existence of anything outside my private world. What we have derived from

our hypothetical construction is that there are no grounds against the truth of

this belief, but we have not derived any positive grounds in its favour. We

will resume this inquiry by taking up again the question of testimony and the

evidence for the existence of other minds.

  It  must  be  conceded  to  begin  with  that  the  argument  in  favour  of  the

existence of other people's minds cannot be conclusive. A phantasm of our

dreams will appear to have a mind—a mind to be annoying, as a rule. It will

give unexpected answers, refuse to conform to our desires, and show all those

other signs of intelligence to  which we are accustomed in the acquaintances

of our waking hours. And yet, when we are awake, we do not believe that the

phantasm was, like the appearances of people in waking life, representativeof a private world to which we have no direct access. If we are to believe this

of the people we meet when we are awake, it must be on some ground short

of demonstration, since it is obviously possible that what we call waking life

may be only an unusually persistent and recurrent nightmare. It may be that

our imagination brings forth all that other people seem to say to us, all that

we read in books, all the daily, weekly, monthly, and quarterly journals that

distract our thoughts, all the advertisements of soap and all the speeches of

politicians. This may be true, since it cannot be shown to be false, yet no one

can really believe it. Is there any logical ground for regarding this possibility

as improbable? Or is there nothing beyond habit and prejudice?

  The minds of other people are among our data, in the very wide sense in

which we used the word at first. That is to say, when we first begin to reflect,

we find ourselves already believing in them, not because of any argument,

but  because  the  belief  is  natural  to  us.  It  is,  however,  a  psychologically

derivative belief, since it results from observation of people's bodies; and

along with other such beliefs, it does not belong to the hardest of hard data,

but becomes, under the influence of philosophic reflection, just sufficiently

questionable to make us desire some argument connecting it with the facts of

sense.

  The obvious argument is, of course, derived from analogy. Other people's

bodies behave as ours do when we have certain thoughts and feelings; hence,

by analogy, it is natural to suppose that such behaviour is connected with

thoughts and feelings like our own. Someone says,  “Look out!” and we find

we are on the point of being killed by a motor-car; we therefore attribute the

words we heard to the person in question having seen the motor-car first, in

which case there are existing things of which we are not directly conscious.

But this whole scene, with our inference, may occur in a dream, in which

case the inference is generally considered to be mistaken. Is there anything to

make the argument from analogy more cogent when we are (as we think)

awake?

  The analogy in waking life is only to be preferred to that in dreams on the

ground of its greater extent and consistency. If a man were to dream every

night about a set of people whom he never met by day, who had consistent

characters and grew older with the lapse of years, he might, like the man in

Calderon's play, find it difficult to decide which was the dream-world and

which was the so-called “real” world. It is only the failure of our dreams to

form a consistent whole either with each other or with waking life that makesus condemn them. Certain uniformities are observed in waking life, while

dreams seem quite erratic. The natural hypothesis would be that demons and

the spirits of the dead visit us while we sleep; but the modern mind, as a rule,

refuses to entertain this view, though it is hard to see what could be said

against it. On the other hand, the mystic, in moments of illumination, seems

to awaken from a sleep which has filled all his mundane life: the whole world

of  sense  becomes  phantasmal,  and  he  sees,  with  the  clarity  and

convincingness that belongs to our morning realisation after dreams, a world

utterly different from that of our daily cares and troubles. Who shall condemn

him? Who shall justify him? Or who shall justify the seeming solidity of the

common objects among which we suppose ourselves to live?

  The hypothesis that other people have minds must, I think, be allowed to

be not susceptible of any very strong support from the analogical argument.

At the same time, it is a hypothesis which systematises a vast body of facts

and never leads to any consequences which there is reason to think false.

There is therefore nothing to be said against its truth, and good reason to use

it as a working hypothesis. When once it is admitted, it enables us to extend

our  knowledge  of  the  sensible  world  by  testimony,  and  thus  leads  to  the

system of private worlds which we assumed in our hypothetical construction.

In actual fact, whatever we may try to think as philosophers, we cannot help

believing in the minds of other people, so that the question whether our belief

is justified has a merely speculative interest. And if it is justified, then there is

no further difficulty of principle in that vast extension of our knowledge,

beyond our own private data, which we find in science and common sense.

  This  somewhat  meagre  conclusion  must  not  be  regarded  as  the  whole

outcome of our long discussion. The problem of the connection of sense with

objective reality has commonly been dealt with from a standpoint which did

not carry initial doubt so far as we have carried it; most writers, consciously

or  unconsciously,  have  assumed  that  the  testimony  of  others  is  to  be

admitted, and therefore (at least by implication) that others have minds. Their

difficulties  have  arisen  after  this  admission,  from  the  differences  in  the

appearance which one physical object presents to two people at the same

time, or to one person at two times between which it cannot be supposed to

have changed. Such difficulties have made people doubtful how far objective

reality could be known by sense at all, and have made them suppose that

there were positive arguments against the view that it can be so  known. Our

hypothetical construction meets these arguments, and shows that the accountof the world given by common sense and physical science can be interpreted

in a way which is logically unobjectionable, and finds a place for all the data,

both hard and soft. It is this hypothetical construction, with its reconciliation

of psychology and physics, which is the chief outcome of our discussion.

Probably the construction is only in part necessary as an initial assumption,

and can be obtained from more slender materials by the logical methods of

which we shall have an example in the definitions of points, instants, and

particles; but I do not yet know to what lengths this diminution in our initial

assumptions can be carried.

                                 LECTURE IV

THE WORLD OF PHYSICS AND THE WORLD

                                  OF SENSE

AMONG the objections to the reality of objects of sense, there is one which is

derived from the apparent difference between matter as it appears in physics

and things as they appear in sensation. Men of science, for the most part, are

willing  to  condemn  immediate  data  as  “merely  subjective,”  while  yet

maintaining the truth of the physics inferred from those data. But such an

attitude, though it may be capable of justification, obviously stands in need

of it; and the only justification possible must be one which exhibits matter as

a  logical  construction  from  sense-data—unless,  indeed,  there  were  some

wholly a priori principle by which unknown entities could be inferred from

such as are known. It is therefore necessary to find some way of bridging the

gulf  between  the  world  of  physics  and  the  world  of  sense,  and  it  is  this

problem which will occupy us in the present lecture. Physicists appear to be

unconscious of the gulf, while psychologists, who are conscious of it, have

not the mathematical knowledge required for spanning it. The problem is

difficult, and I do not know its solution in detail. All that I can hope to do is

to make the problem felt, and to indicate the kind of methods by which a

solution is to be sought.

  Let us begin by a brief description of the two contrasted worlds. We will

take first the world of physics,  for, though the other world is given while the

physical  world  is  inferred,  to  us  now  the  world  of  physics  is  the  more

familiar,  the  world  of  pure  sense  having  become  strange  and  difficult  to

rediscover. Physics started from the common-sense belief in fairly permanent

and fairly rigid bodies—tables and chairs, stones, mountains, the earth and

moon and sun. This common-sense belief, it should be noticed, is a piece of

audacious  metaphysical  theorising;  objects  are  not  continually  present  to

sensation, and it may be doubted whether they are there when they are not

seen or felt. This problem, which has been acute since the time of Berkeley,

is  ignored  by  common  sense,  and  has  therefore  hitherto  been  ignored  by

physicists. We have thus here a first departure from the immediate data of

sensation,  though  it  is  a  departure  merely  by  way  of  extension,  and  was

probably  made  by  our  savage  ancestors  in  some  very  remote  prehistoric

epoch.  But tables and chairs, stones and mountains, are not quite permanent or

quite rigid. Tables and chairs lose their legs, stones are split by frost, and

mountains are cleft by earthquakes and eruptions. Then there are other things,

which  seem  material,  and  yet  present  almost  no  permanence  or  rigidity.

Breath, smoke, clouds, are examples of such things—so, in a lesser degree,

are ice and snow; and rivers and seas, though fairly permanent, are not in any

degree rigid. Breath, smoke, clouds, and generally things that can be seen but

not touched, were thought to be hardly real; to this day the usual mark of a

ghost is that it can be seen but not touched. Such objects were peculiar in the

fact that they seemed to disappear completely, not merely to be transformed

into  something  else.  Ice  and  snow,  when  they  disappear,  are  replaced  by

water; and it required no great theoretical  effort to invent the hypothesis that

the water was the same thing as the ice and snow, but in a new form. Solid

bodies, when they break, break into parts which are practically the same in

shape and size as they were before. A stone can be hammered into a powder,

but the powder consists of grains which retain the character they had before

the pounding. Thus the ideal of absolutely rigid and absolutely permanent

bodies, which early physicists pursued throughout the changing appearances,

seemed attainable by supposing ordinary bodies to be composed of a vast

number  of  tiny  atoms.  This  billiard-ball  view  of  matter  dominated  the

imagination  of  physicists  until  quite  modern  times,  until,  in  fact,  it  was

replaced by the electromagnetic theory, which in its turn is developing into a

new atomism. Apart from the special form of the atomic theory which was

invented for the needs of chemistry, some kind of atomism dominated the

whole of traditional dynamics, and was implied in every statement of its laws

and axioms.

  The pictorial accounts which physicists give of the material world as they

conceive it undergo violent changes under the influence of modifications in

theory  which  are  much  slighter  than  the  layman  might  suppose  from  the

alterations of the description. Certain features, however, have remained fairly

stable. It is always assumed that there is something indestructible which is

capable of motion in space; what is indestructible is always very small, but

does not always occupy a mere point in space. There is supposed to be one

all-embracing  space  in  which  the  motion  takes  place,  and  until  lately  we

might  have  assumed  one  all-embracing  time  also.  But  the  principle  of

relativity has given prominence to the conception of “local time,” and has

somewhat diminished men's confidence in the one even-flowing stream oftime. Without dogmatising  as  to  the  ultimate  outcome  of  the  principle  of

relativity, however, we may safely say, I think, that it does not destroy the

possibility of correlating different local times, and does not therefore have

such far-reaching philosophical consequences as is sometimes supposed. In

fact, in spite of difficulties as to measurement, the one all-embracing time

still, I think, underlies all that physics has to say about motion. We thus have

still in physics, as we had in Newton's time, a set of indestructible entities

which may be called particles, moving relatively to each other in a single

space and a single time.

  The  world  of  immediate  data  is  quite  different  from  this.  Nothing  is

permanent;  even  the  things  that  we  think  are  fairly  permanent,  such  as

mountains, only become data when we see them, and are not immediately

given as existing at other moments. So far from one all-embracing space

being  given,  there  are  several  spaces  for  each  person,  according  to  the

different senses which give relations that may be called spatial. Experience

teaches us to obtain one space from these by correlation, and experience,

together with instinctive theorising, teaches us to correlate our spaces with

those which we believe to exist in the sensible worlds of other people. The

construction  of  a  single  time  offers  less  difficulty  so  long  as  we  confine

ourselves to one person's private world, but the correlation of one private

time with another is a matter of great difficulty. Thus, apart from any of the

fluctuating hypotheses of physics, three main problems arise in connecting

the world of physics with the world of sense, namely (1) the construction of

permanent  “things,”  (2)  the  construction  of  a  single  space,  and  (3)  the

construction  of  a  single  time.  We  will  consider  these  three  problems  in

succession.

  (1)  The  belief  in  indestructible  “things”  very early  took  the  form  of

atomism. The underlying motive in atomism was not, I think, any empirical

success  in  interpreting  phenomena,  but  rather  an  instinctive  belief  that

beneath  all  the  changes  of  the  sensible  world  there  must  be  something

permanent and unchanging. This belief was, no doubt, fostered and nourished

by its practical successes, culminating in the conservation of mass; but it was

not produced by these successes. On the contrary, they were produced by it.

Philosophical writers on physics sometimes speak as though the conservation

of something or other were essential to the possibility of science, but this, I

believe, is an entirely erroneous opinion. If the a priori belief in permanence

had not existed, the same laws which are now formulated in terms of thisbelief might just as well have been formulated without it. Why should we

suppose that, when ice melts, the water which replaces it is the same thing in

a  new  form?  Merely  because  this  supposition  enables  us  to  state  the

phenomena in a way which is consonant with our prejudices. What we really

know is that, under certain conditions of temperature, the appearance we call

ice is replaced by the appearance we call water. We can give laws according

to which the one appearance will be succeeded by the other, but there is no

reason  except  prejudice  for  regarding  both  as  appearances  of  the  same

substance.

  One task, if what has just been said is correct, which confronts us in trying

to  connect  the  world  of  sense  with  the  world  of  physics,  is  the  task  of

reconstructing the conception of matter without the a priori beliefs which

historically gave rise to it. In spite of the revolutionary results of modern 

physics, the empirical successes of the conception of matter show that there 

must be some legitimate conception which fulfils roughly the same functions.  

The time has hardly come when we can state precisely what this legitimate 

conception is, but we can see in a general way what it must be like. For this 

purpose, it is only necessary to take our ordinary common-sense statements 

and reword them without the assumption of permanent substance. We say, for 

example, that things change gradually—sometimes very quickly, but not 

without passing through a continuous series of intermediate states. What this 

means is that, given any sensible appearance, there will usually be, if we

watch,  a  continuous  series  of  appearances  connected  with  the  given  one,

leading  on  by  imperceptible  gradations  to  the  new  appearances  which

common-sense  regards  as  those  of  the  same  thing.  Thus  a  thing  may  be

defined  as  a  certain  series  of  appearances,  connected  with  each  other  by

continuity and by certain causal laws. In the case of slowly changing things,

this is easily seen. Consider, say, a wall-paper which fades in the course of

years. It is an effort not to conceive of it as one “thing” whose colour is

slightly different at one time from what it is at another. But what do we really

know about it? We know that under suitable circumstances—i.e. when we

are,  as  is  said,  “in  the  room”—we  perceive  certain  colours  in  a  certain

pattern: not always precisely the same colours, but sufficiently similar to feel

familiar. If we can state the laws according to which the colour varies, we can

state all that is empirically verifiable; the assumption that there is a constant

entity, the wall-paper, which “has” these various colours at various times, is a

piece of gratuitous metaphysics. We may, if we like, define the wall-paper asthe series of its aspects. These are collected together by the same motives

which led us to regard the wall-paper as one thing, namely a combination of

sensible continuity and causal connection. More  generally, a “thing” will be

defined as a certain series of aspects, namely those which would commonly

be said to be of the thing. To say that a certain aspect is an aspect of a certain

thing will merely mean that it is one of those which, taken serially, are the

thing.  Everything  will  then  proceed  as  before:  whatever  was  verifiable  is

unchanged, but our language is so interpreted as to avoid an unnecessary

metaphysical assumption of permanence.

  The above extrusion of permanent things affords an example of the maxim

which inspires all scientific philosophising, namely “Occam's razor”: Entities

are not to be multiplied without necessity. In other words, in dealing with any

subject-matter,  find  out  what  entities  are  undeniably  involved,  and  state

everything in terms of these entities. Very often the resulting statement is

more complicated and difficult than one which, like common sense and most

philosophy, assumes hypothetical entities whose existence there is no good

reason to believe in. We find it easier to imagine a wall-paper with changing

colours than to think merely of the series of colours; but it is a mistake to

suppose that what is easy and natural in thought is what is most free from

unwarrantable assumptions, as the case of “things” very aptly illustrates.

  The above summary account of the genesis of “things,” though it may be

correct in outline, has omitted some serious difficulties which it is necessary

briefly  to  consider.  Starting  from  a  world  of  helter-skelter  sense-data,  we

wish to collect them into series, each of which can be regarded as consisting

of the successive appearances of one “thing.” There is, to begin with, some

conflict between what common sense regards as one thing, and what physics

regards an unchanging collection of particles. To common sense, a human

body is one thing, but to  science  the  matter  composing  it  is  continually

changing. This conflict, however, is not very serious, and may, for our rough

preliminary purpose, be largely ignored. The problem is: by what principles

shall we select certain data from the chaos, and call them all appearances of

the same thing?

  A rough and approximate answer to this question is not very difficult.

There are certain fairly stable collections of appearances, such as landscapes,

the furniture of rooms, the faces of acquaintances. In these cases, we have

little hesitation in regarding them on successive occasions as appearances of

one thing or collection of things. But, as the Comedy of Errors illustrates, wemay  be  led  astray  if  we  judge  by  mere  resemblance.  This  shows  that

something more is involved, for two different things may have any degree of

likeness up to exact similarity.

  Another  insufficient  criterion  of  one  thing  is continuity.  As  we  have

already seen, if we watch what we regard as one changing thing, we usually

find its changes to be continuous so far as our senses can perceive. We are

thus led to assume that, if we see two finitely different appearances at two

different times, and if we have reason to regard them as belonging to the

same thing, then there was a continuous series of intermediate states of that

thing during the time when we were not observing it. And so it comes to be

thought that continuity of change is necessary and sufficient to constitute one

thing. But in fact it is neither. It is not necessary, because the unobserved

states, in the case where our attention has not been concentrated on the thing

throughout, are purely hypothetical, and cannot possibly be our ground for

supposing the earlier and later appearances to belong to the same thing; on

the  contrary,  it  is  because  we suppose  this  that  we  assume  intermediate

unobserved  states.  Continuity  is  also  not  sufficient,  since  we  can,  for

example, pass by sensibly continuous gradations from any one drop of the sea

to  any  other  drop.  The  utmost  we  can  say  is  that  discontinuity  during

uninterrupted observation is as a rule a mark of difference between things,

though even this cannot be said in such cases as sudden explosions.

  The assumption of continuity is, however, successfully made in physics.

This proves something, though not anything of very obvious utility to our

present problem: it proves that nothing in the known world is inconsistent

with the hypothesis that all changes are really continuous, though from too

great rapidity or from our lack of observation they may not always appear

continuous. In this hypothetical sense, continuity may be allowed to be a

necessary condition if two appearances are to be classed as appearances of

the  same  thing.  But  it  is  not  a sufficient  condition,  as  appears  from  the

instance of the drops in the sea. Thus something more must be sought before

we can give even the roughest definition of a “thing.”

  What is wanted further seems to be something in the nature of fulfilment

of  causal  laws.  This  statement,  as  it  stands,  is  very  vague,  but  we  will

endeavour to give it precision. When I speak of “causal laws,” I mean any

laws which connect events at different times, or even, as a limiting case,

events  at  the  same  time  provided  the  connection  is  not  logically

demonstrable. In this very general sense, the laws of dynamics are causallaws, and so are the laws correlating the simultaneous appearances of one

“thing” to different senses. The question is: How do such laws help in the

definition of a “thing”?

  To answer this question, we must consider what it is that is proved by the

empirical success of physics. What is proved is that its hypotheses, though 

unverifiable  where  they  go  beyond  sense-data,  are  at  no  point  in

contradiction  with  sense-data,  but,  on  the  contrary,  are  ideally  such  as  to

render  all  sense-data  calculable  from  a  sufficient  collection  of  data  all

belonging to a given period of time. Now physics has found it empirically

possible  to  collect  sense-data  into  series,  each  series  being  regarded  as

belonging to one “thing,” and behaving, with regard to the laws of physics, in

a  way  in  which  series  not  belonging  to  one  thing  would  in  general  not

behave. If it is to be unambiguous whether two appearances belong to the

same thing or not, there must be only one way of grouping appearances so

that the resulting things obey the laws of physics. It would be very difficult to

prove that this is the case, but for our present purposes we may let this point

pass,  and  assume  that  there  is  only  one  way.  We  must  include  in  our

definition of a “thing” those of its aspects, if any, which are not observed.

Thus we may lay down the following definition: Things are those series of

aspects which obey the laws of physics. That such series exist is an empirical

fact, which constitutes the verifiability of physics.

  It may still be objected that the “matter” of physics is something other

than series of sense-data. Sense-data, it may be said, belong to psychology

and  are,  at  any  rate  in  some  sense,  subjective,  whereas  physics  is  quite

independent of psychological considerations, and does not assume that its

matter only exists when it is perceived.

  To this objection there are two answers, both of some importance.

  (a) We have been considering, in the above account, the question of the

verifiability of physics. Now verifiability is by no means the same thing as

truth; it is, in fact, something far more subjective and psychological. For a

proposition to be verifiable, it is not enough that  it should be true, but it must

also be such as we can discover to be true. Thus verifiability depends upon

our capacity for acquiring knowledge, and not only upon the objective truth.

In physics, as ordinarily set forth, there is much that is unverifiable: there are

hypotheses as to (α) how things would appear to a spectator in a place where,

as it happens, there is no spectator; (β) how things would appear at times

when, in fact, they are not appearing to anyone; (γ) things which never appearat all. All these are introduced to simplify the statement of the causal laws,

but none of them form an integral part of what is known to be true in physics.

This brings us to our second answer.

  (b) If physics is to consist wholly of propositions known to be true, or at

least capable of being proved or disproved, the three kinds of hypothetical

entities we have just enumerated must all be capable of being exhibited as

logical functions of sense-data. In order to show how this might possibly be

done, let us recall the hypothetical Leibnizian universe of Lecture III. In that

universe, we had a number of perspectives, two of which never had any entity

in  common,  but  often  contained  entities  which  could  be  sufficiently

correlated to be regarded as belonging to the same thing. We will call one of

these an “actual” private world when there is an actual spectator to which it

appears, and “ideal” when it is merely constructed on principles of continuity.

A physical thing consists, at each instant, of the whole set of its aspects at

that instant, in all the different worlds; thus a momentary state of a thing is a

whole  set  of  aspects.  An  “ideal”  appearance  will  be  an  aspect  merely

calculated, but not actually perceived by any spectator. An “ideal” state of a

thing will be a state at a moment when all its appearances are ideal. An ideal  

thing will be one whose states at all times are ideal. Ideal appearances, states,

and things, since they are calculated, must be functions of actual appearances,

states,  and  things;  in  fact,  ultimately,  they  must  be  functions  of  actual

appearances.  Thus  it  is  unnecessary,  for  the  enunciation  of  the  laws  of

physics, to assign any reality to ideal elements: it is enough to accept them as

logical constructions, provided we have means of knowing how to determine

when  they  become  actual.  This,  in  fact,  we  have  with  some  degree  of

approximation; the starry heaven, for instance, becomes actual whenever we

choose to look at it. It is open to us to believe that the ideal elements exist,

and there can be no reason for disbelieving this; but unless in virtue of some

a priori law we cannot know it, for empirical knowledge is confined to what

we actually observe.

  (2) The three main conceptions of physics are space, time, and matter.

Some of the problems raised by the conception of matter have been indicated

in the above discussion of “things.” But space and time also raise difficult

problems  of  much  the  same  kind,  namely,  difficulties  in  reducing  the

haphazard untidy world of immediate sensation to the smooth orderly world

of geometry and kinematics. Let us begin with the consideration of space.

  People who have never read any psychology seldom realise how muchmental labour has gone into the construction of the one all-embracing space

into which all sensible objects are supposed to fit. Kant, who was unusually

ignorant  of  psychology,  described  space  as  “an  infinite  given  whole,”

whereas a moment's psychological reflection shows that a space which is

infinite is not given, while a space which can be called given is not infinite.

What the nature of “given” space really is, is a difficult  question, upon which

psychologists are by no means agreed. But some general remarks may be

made, which will suffice to show the problems, without taking sides on any

psychological issue still in debate.

  The first thing to notice is that different senses have different spaces. The

space  of  sight  is  quite  different  from  the  space  of  touch:  it  is  only  by

experience in infancy that we learn to correlate them. In later life, when we

see an object within reach, we know how to touch it, and more or less what it

will feel like; if we touch an object with our eyes shut, we know where we

should have to look for it, and more or less what it would look like. But this

knowledge is derived from early experience of the correlation of certain kinds

of touch-sensations with certain kinds of sight-sensations. The one space into

which both kinds of sensations fit is an intellectual construction, not a datum.

And besides touch and sight, there are other kinds of sensation which give

other, though less important spaces: these also have to be fitted into the one

space by means of experienced correlations. And as in the case of things, so

here: the one all-embracing space, though convenient as a way of speaking,

need not be supposed really to exist. All that experience makes certain is the

several  spaces  of  the  several  senses,  correlated  by  empirically  discovered

laws.  The  one  space  may  turn  out  to  be  valid  as  a  logical  construction,

compounded of the several spaces, but there is no good reason to assume its

independent metaphysical reality.

  Another respect in which the spaces of immediate experience differ from

the  space  of  geometry  and  physics  is  in  regard  to points.  The  space  of

geometry and physics consists of an infinite number of points, but no one has

ever seen or touched a point. If there are points in a  sensible space, they must

be  an  inference.  It  is  not  easy  to  see  any  way  in  which,  as  independent

entities, they could be validly inferred from the data; thus here again, we shall

have,  if  possible,  to  find  some  logical  construction,  some  complex

assemblage of immediately given objects, which will have the geometrical

properties required of points. It is customary to think of points as simple and

infinitely small, but geometry in no way demands that we should think ofthem in this way. All that is necessary for geometry is that they should have

mutual relations possessing certain enumerated abstract properties, and it may

be that an assemblage of data of sensation will serve this purpose. Exactly

how this is to be done, I do not yet know, but it seems fairly certain that it can

be done.

  The  following  illustrative  method,  simplified  so  as  to  be  easily

manipulated, has been invented by Dr Whitehead for the purpose of showing

how points might be manufactured from sense-data. We have first of all to

observe that there are no infinitesimal sense-data: any surface we can see, for

example, must be of some finite extent. But what at first appears as one

undivided whole is often found, under the influence of attention, to split up

into  parts  contained  within  the  whole.  Thus  one  spatial  object  may  be

contained within another, and entirely enclosed by the other. This relation of

enclosure, by the help of some very natural hypotheses, will enable us to

define a “point” as a certain class of spatial objects, namely all those (as it

will turn out in the end) which would naturally be said to contain the point. In

order to obtain a definition of a “point” in this way, we proceed as follows:

  Given any set of volumes or surfaces, they will not in general converge

into one point. But if they get smaller  and smaller, while of any two of the

set there is always one that encloses the other, then we begin to have the kind

of conditions which would enable us to treat them as having a point for their

limit. The hypotheses required for the relation of enclosure are that (1) it must

be transitive; (2) of two different spatial objects, it is impossible for each to

enclose the other, but a single spatial object always encloses itself; (3) any set

of spatial objects such that there is at least one spatial object enclosed by

them all has a lower limit or minimum, i.e. an object enclosed by all of them

and enclosing all objects which are enclosed by all of them; (4) to prevent

trivial exceptions, we must add that there are to be instances of enclosure, i.e.

there  are  really  to  be  objects  of  which  one  encloses  the  other.  When  an

enclosure-relation  has  these  properties,  we  will  call  it  a  “point-producer.”

Given any relation of enclosure, we will call a set of objects an “enclosure-

series” if, of any two of them, one is contained in the other. We require a

condition which shall secure that an enclosure-series converges to a point,

and this is obtained as follows: Let our enclosure-series be such that, given

any  other  enclosure-series  of  which  there  are  members  enclosed  in  any

arbitrarily chosen member of our first series, then there are members of our

first series enclosed in any arbitrarily chosen member of our second series. Inthis  case,  our  first  enclosure-series  may  be  called  a  “punctual  enclosure-

series.” Then a “point” is all the objects which enclose members of a given

punctual enclosure-series. In order to ensure infinite divisibility, we require

one further property to be added to those defining point-producers, namely

that any object which encloses itself also encloses an object other than itself.

The “points” generated by point-producers with this property will be found to

be such as geometry requires.

  (3) The question of time, so long as we confine ourselves to one private

world, is rather less complicated than that of space, and we can see pretty

clearly  how  it  might  be  dealt  with  by  such  methods  as  we  have  been

considering.  Events  of  which  we  are  conscious  do  not  last  merely  for  a

mathematical instant, but always for some finite time, however short. Even if

there  be  a  physical  world  such  as  the  mathematical  theory  of  motion

supposes, impressions on our sense-organs produce sensations which are not

merely and strictly instantaneous, and therefore the objects of sense of which

we  are  immediately  conscious  are  not  strictly  instantaneous.  Instants,

therefore, are not among the data of experience, and, if legitimate, must be

either inferred or constructed. It is difficult to see how they can be validly

inferred; thus we are left with the alternative that they must be constructed.

How is this to be done?

  Immediate experience provides us with two time-relations among events:

they may be simultaneous, or one may be earlier and the other later. These

two are both part of the crude data; it is not the case that only the events are

given, and their time-order is added by our subjective activity. The time-

order, within certain limits, is as much given as the events. In any story of

adventure you will find such passages as the following: “With a cynical smile

he pointed the revolver at the breast of the dauntless youth. ‘At the word

three I shall fire,’ he said. The words one and two had already been spoken

with a cool and deliberate distinctness. The word three was forming on his 

lips. At this moment a blinding flash of lightning rent the air.” Here we have 

simultaneity—not due, as Kant would have us believe, to the subjective 

mental apparatus of the dauntless youth, but given as objectively as the 

revolver and the lightning.  And it is equally given in immediate experience 

that the words one and two come earlier than the flash. These time-relations

hold between events which are not strictly instantaneous. Thus one event may

begin sooner than another, and therefore be before it, but may continue after

the other has begun, and therefore be also simultaneous with it. If it persistsafter  the  other  is  over,  it  will  also  be  later  than  the  other.  Earlier,

simultaneous, and later, are not inconsistent with each other when we are

concerned with events which last for a finite time, however short; they only

become inconsistent when we are dealing with something instantaneous.

  It is to be observed that we cannot give what may be called absolute dates,

but only dates determined by events. We cannot point to a time itself, but

only to some event occurring at that time. There is therefore no reason in

experience to suppose that there are times as opposed to events: the events,

ordered  by  the  relations  of  simultaneity  and  succession,  are  all  that

experience  provides.  Hence,  unless  we  are  to  introduce  superfluous

metaphysical entities, we must, in defining what mathematical physics can

regard as an instant, proceed by means of some construction which assumes

nothing beyond events and their temporal relations.

  If we wish to assign a date exactly by means of events, how shall we

proceed?  If  we  take  any  one  event,  we  cannot  assign  our  date  exactly,

because the event is not instantaneous, that is to say, it may be simultaneous

with  two  events  which  are  not  simultaneous  with  each  other.  In  order  to

assign a date exactly, we must be able, theoretically, to determine whether

any given event is before, at, or after this date, and we must know that any

other date is either before or after this date, but not simultaneous with it.

Suppose, now, instead of taking  one event A, we take two events A and B,

and suppose A and B partly overlap, but B ends before A ends. Then an event

which is simultaneous with both A and B must exist during the time when A

and B overlap; thus we have come rather nearer to a precise date than when

we considered A and B alone. Let C be an event which is simultaneous with

both A and B, but which ends before either A or B has ended. Then an event

which is simultaneous with A and B and C must exist during the time when

all three overlap, which is a still shorter time. Proceeding in this way, by

taking more and more events, a new event which is dated as simultaneous

with all of them becomes gradually more and more accurately dated. This

suggests a way by which a completely accurate date can be defined.  Let us take a group of events of which any two overlap, so that there is

some time, however short, when they all exist. If there is any other event

which is simultaneous with all of these, let us add it to the group; let us go on

until we have constructed a group such that no event outside the group is

simultaneous  with  all  of  them,  but  all  the  events  inside  the  group  are

simultaneous with each other. Let us define this whole group as an instant of

time. It remains to show that it has the properties we expect of an instant.

  What are the properties we expect of instants? First, they must form a

series: of any two, one must be before the other, and the other must be not

before the one; if one is before another, and the other before a third, the  first

must be before the third. Secondly, every event must be at a certain number

of instants; two events are simultaneous if they are at the same instant, and

one is before the other if there is an instant, at which the one is, which is

earlier than some instant at which the other is. Thirdly, if we assume that

there is always some change going on somewhere during the time when any

given event persists, the series of instants ought to be compact, i.e. given any

two instants, there ought to be other instants between them. Do instants, as

we have defined them, have these properties?

  We shall say that an event is “at” an instant when it is a member of the

group by which the instant is constituted; and we shall say that one instant is

before another if the group which is the one instant contains an event which

is earlier than, but not simultaneous with, some event in the group which is

the other instant. When one event is earlier than, but not simultaneous with

another, we shall say that it “wholly precedes” the other. Now we know that

of two events which are not simultaneous, there must be one which wholly

precedes the other, and in that case the other cannot also wholly precede the

one; we also know that, if one event wholly precedes another, and the other

wholly precedes a third, then the first wholly precedes the third. From these

facts it is easy to deduce that the instants as we have defined them form a

series.

  We have next to show that every event is “at” at least one instant, i.e. that,

given  any  event,  there  is  at  least  one  class,  such  as  we  used  in  defining

instants, of which it is a member. For this purpose, consider all the events

which are simultaneous with a given event, and do not begin later, i.e. are not

wholly after anything simultaneous with it. We will call these the “initial 

contemporaries”  of the given event. It will be found that this class of events

is  the  first  instant  at  which  the  given  event  exists,  provided  every  eventwholly  after  some  contemporary  of  the  given  event  is  wholly  after  some

initial contemporary of it.

  Finally, the series of instants will be compact if, given any two events of

which one wholly precedes the other, there are events wholly after the one

and simultaneous with something wholly before the other. Whether this is the

case or not, is an empirical question; but if it is not, there is no reason to

expect the time-series to be compact.[17]

  Thus  our  definition  of  instants  secures  all  that  mathematics  requires,

without  having  to  assume  the  existence  of  any  disputable  metaphysical

entities.

  Instants may also be defined by means of the enclosure-relation, exactly as

was done in the case of points. One object will be temporally enclosed by

another when it is simultaneous with the other, but not before or after it.

Whatever  encloses  temporally  or  is  enclosed  temporally  we  shall  call  an

“event.” In order that the relation of temporal enclosure may be a “point-

producer,” we require (1) that it should be transitive, i.e. that if one event

encloses another, and the other a third, then the first encloses the third; (2)

that every event encloses itself, but if one event encloses another different

event, then the other does not enclose the one; (3) that given any set of events

such that there is at least one event enclosed by all of them, then there is an

event enclosing all that they all enclose, and itself enclosed by all of them; (4)

that there is at least one event. To ensure infinite divisibility, we require also

that  every  event  should  enclose  events  other  than  itself.  Assuming  these

characteristics, temporal enclosure is an infinitely divisible point-producer.

We can now form an “enclosure-series” of events, by choosing a group of

events such that of any two there is one which encloses the other; this will be

a “punctual enclosure-series” if, given any other enclosure-series such that

every member of our first series encloses some member of our second, then

every member of our second series encloses some member of our first. Then

an “instant” is the class of all events which enclose members of a given

punctual enclosure-series.

  The correlation of the times of different private worlds so as to produce

the one all-embracing time of physics is a more difficult matter. We saw, in

Lecture  III.,  that  different  private  worlds  often  contain  correlated

appearances, such as common sense would regard as appearances of the same

“thing.” When two appearances in different  worlds are so correlated as to

belong to one momentary “state” of a thing, it would be natural to regardthem as simultaneous, and as thus affording a simple means of correlating

different private times. But this can only be regarded as a first approximation.

What we call one sound will be heard sooner by people near the source of the

sound than by people further from it, and the same applies, though in a less

degree, to light. Thus two correlated appearances in different worlds are not

necessarily to be regarded as occurring at the same date in physical time,

though they will be parts of one momentary state of a thing. The correlation

of different private times is regulated by the desire to secure the simplest

possible statement of the laws of physics, and thus raises rather complicated

technical problems; but from the point of view of philosophical theory, there

is no very serious difficulty of principle involved.

  The above brief outline must not be regarded as more than tentative and

suggestive. It is intended merely to show the kind of way in which, given a

world  with  the  kind  of  properties  that  psychologists  find  in  the  world  of

sense, it may be possible, by means of purely logical constructions, to make it

amenable to mathematical treatment by defining series or classes of sense-

data which can be called respectively particles, points, and instants. If such

constructions are possible, then mathematical physics is applicable to the real

world, in spite of the fact that its particles, points, and instants are not to be

found among actually existing entities.

  The problem which the above considerations are intended to elucidate is

one  whose  importance  and  even  existence  has  been  concealed  by  the

unfortunate  separation  of  different  studies  which  prevails  throughout  the

civilised world. Physicists, ignorant and contemptuous  of philosophy, have

been content to assume their particles, points, and instants in practice, while

conceding,  with  ironical  politeness,  that  their  concepts  laid  no  claim  to

metaphysical validity. Metaphysicians, obsessed by the idealistic opinion that

only mind is real, and the Parmenidean belief that the real is unchanging,

repeated  one  after  another  the  supposed  contradictions  in  the  notions  of

matter, space, and time, and therefore naturally made no endeavour to invent

a tenable theory of particles, points, and instants. Psychologists, who have

done invaluable work in bringing to light the chaotic nature of the crude

materials  supplied  by  unmanipulated  sensation,  have  been  ignorant  of

mathematics and modern logic, and have therefore been content to say that

matter, space, and time are “intellectual constructions,” without making any

attempt to show in detail either how the intellect can construct them, or what

secures  the  practical  validity  which  physics  shows  them  to  possess.Philosophers,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  will  come  to  recognise  that  they  cannot

achieve any solid success in such problems without some slight knowledge of

logic, mathematics, and physics; meanwhile, for want of students with the

necessary equipment, this vital problem remains unattempted and unknown.

  There  are,  it  is  true,  two  authors,  both  physicists,  who  have  done

something, though not much, to bring about a recognition of the problem as

one demanding study. These two authors are Poincaré and Mach, Poincaré

especially in his Science and Hypothesis, Mach especially in his Analysis of

Sensations. Both of them, however, admirable as their work is, seem to me to

suffer from a general philosophical bias. Poincaré is Kantian, while Mach is

ultra-empiricist; with Poincaré almost all the mathematical part of physics is

merely conventional, while with Mach the sensation as a mental event is 

identified  with its object as a part of the physical world. Nevertheless, both

these authors, and especially Mach, deserve mention as having made serious

contributions to the consideration of our problem.

  When a point or an instant is defined as a class of sensible qualities, the

first  impression  produced  is  likely  to  be  one  of  wild  and  wilful  paradox.

Certain  considerations  apply  here,  however,  which  will  again  be  relevant

when  we  come  to  the  definition  of  numbers.  There  is  a  whole  type  of

problems which can be solved by such definitions, and almost always there

will be at first an effect of paradox. Given a set of objects any two of which

have a relation of the sort called “symmetrical and transitive,” it is almost

certain  that  we  shall  come  to  regard  them  as  all  having  some  common

quality, or as all having the same relation to some one object outside the set.

This kind of case is important, and I shall therefore try to make it clear even

at the cost of some repetition of previous definitions.

  A relation is said to be “symmetrical” when, if one term has this relation

to another, then the other also has it to the one. Thus “brother or sister” is a

“symmetrical” relation: if one person is a brother or a sister of another, then

the  other  is  a  brother  or  sister  of  the  one.  Simultaneity,  again,  is  a

symmetrical  relation;  so  is  equality  in  size.  A  relation  is  said  to  be

“transitive” when, if one term has this relation to another, and the other to a

third, then the one has it to the third. The symmetrical relations mentioned

just now are also transitive—provided, in the case of “brother or sister,” we

allow a person to be counted as his or her own brother or sister, and provided,

in the case of simultaneity, we mean complete simultaneity, i.e. beginning

and ending together.  But many relations are transitive without being symmetrical—for instance,

such relations as “greater,” “earlier,” “to the right of,” “ancestor of,” in fact

all  such  relations  as  give  rise  to  series.  Other  relations  are  symmetrical

without being transitive—for example, difference in any respect. If A is of a

different age from B, and B of a different age from C, it does not follow that

A is of a different age from C. Simultaneity, again, in the case of events

which last for a finite time, will not necessarily be transitive if it only means

that the times of the two events overlap. If A ends just after B has begun, and

B ends just after C has begun, A and B will be simultaneous in this sense, and

so will B and C, but A and C may well not be simultaneous.

  All the relations which can naturally be represented as equality in any

respect,  or  as  possession  of  a  common  property,  are  transitive  and

symmetrical—this  applies,  for  example,  to  such  relations  as  being  of  the

same  height  or  weight  or  colour.  Owing  to  the  fact  that  possession  of  a

common property gives rise to a transitive symmetrical relation, we come to

imagine that wherever such a relation occurs it must be due to a common

property. “Being equally numerous” is a transitive symmetrical relation of

two collections; hence we imagine that both have a common property, called

their number. “Existing at a given instant” (in the sense in which we defined

an instant) is a transitive symmetrical relation; hence we come to think that

there really is an instant which confers a common property on all the things

existing  at  that  instant.  “Being  states  of  a  given  thing”  is  a  transitive

symmetrical relation; hence we come to imagine that there really is a thing,

other than the series of states, which accounts for the transitive symmetrical

relation. In all such cases, the class of terms that have the given  transitive

symmetrical relation to a given term will fulfil all the formal requisites of a

common property of all the members of the class. Since there certainly is the

class, while any other common property may be illusory, it is prudent, in

order to avoid needless assumptions, to substitute the class for the common

property  which  would  be  ordinarily  assumed.  This  is  the  reason  for  the

definitions we have adopted, and this is the source of the apparent paradoxes.

No harm is done if there are such common properties as language assumes,

since we do not deny them, but merely abstain from asserting them. But if

there are not such common properties in any given case, then our method has

secured us against error. In the absence of special knowledge, therefore, the

method we have adopted is the only one which is safe, and which avoids the

risk of introducing fictitious metaphysical entities.                                   LECTURE V

            THE THEORY OF CONTINUITY

THE theory of continuity, with which we shall be occupied in the present

lecture,  is,  in  most  of  its  refinements  and  developments,  a  purely

mathematical subject—very beautiful, very important, and very delightful,

but not, strictly speaking, a part of philosophy. The logical basis of the theory

alone belongs to philosophy, and alone will occupy us to-night. The way the

problem  of  continuity  enters  into  philosophy  is,  broadly  speaking,  the

following: Space and time are treated by mathematicians as consisting of

points and instants, but they also have a property, easier to feel than to define,

which  is  called  continuity,  and  is  thought  by  many  philosophers  to  be

destroyed when they are resolved into points and instants. Zeno, as we shall

see,  proved  that  analysis  into  points  and  instants  was  impossible  if  we

adhered to the view that the number of points or instants in a finite space or

time must be finite. Later philosophers, believing infinite number to be self-

contradictory,  have  found  here  an  antinomy:  Spaces  and  times  could  not

consist of a finite number of points and instants, for such reasons as Zeno's;

they could not consist of an infinite number of points and instants, because

infinite numbers were supposed to be self-contradictory. Therefore spaces

and times, if real at all, must not be regarded as composed of points and

instants.

  But even when points and instants, as independent entities, are discarded,

as they were by the theory advocated in our last lecture, the problems of

continuity, as I shall try to show presently, remain, in a practically unchanged

form. Let us therefore, to begin with, admit points and instants, and consider

the  problems  in  connection  with  this  simpler  or  at  least  more  familiar

hypothesis.

  The argument against continuity, in so far as it rests upon the supposed

difficulties of infinite numbers, has been disposed of by the positive theory of

the infinite, which will be considered in Lecture VII. But there remains a

feeling—of the kind that led Zeno to the contention that the arrow in its flight

is at rest—which suggests that points and instants, even if they are infinitely

numerous,  can  only  give  a  jerky  motion,  a  succession  of  different

immobilities, not the smooth transitions with which the senses have made us

familiar. This feeling is due, I believe, to a failure to realise imaginatively, aswell  as  abstractly,  the  nature  of  continuous  series  as  they  appear  in

mathematics. When a theory has been apprehended logically, there is often a

long and serious labour still required in order to feel it: it is necessary to

dwell  upon  it,  to  thrust  out  from  the  mind,  one  by  one,  the  misleading

suggestions  of  false  but  more  familiar  theories,  to  acquire  the  kind  of

intimacy which, in the case of a foreign language, would enable us to think

and dream in it, not merely to construct laborious sentences by the help of

grammar and dictionary. It is, I believe, the absence of this kind of intimacy

which  makes  many  philosophers  regard  the  mathematical  doctrine  of

continuity  as  an  inadequate  explanation  of  the  continuity  which  we

experience in the world of sense.

  In  the  present  lecture,  I  shall  first  try  to  explain in  outline  what  the

mathematical  theory  of  continuity  is  in  its  philosophically  important

essentials. The application to actual space and time will not be in question to

begin with. I do not see any reason to suppose that the points and instants

which mathematicians introduce in dealing with space and time are actual

physically existing entities, but I do see reason to suppose that the continuity

of actual space and time may be more or less analogous to mathematical

continuity.  The  theory  of  mathematical  continuity  is  an  abstract  logical

theory, not dependent for its validity upon any properties of actual space and

time.  What  is  claimed  for  it  is  that,  when  it  is  understood,  certain

characteristics of space and time, previously very hard to analyse, are found

not to present any logical difficulty. What we know empirically about space

and  time  is  insufficient  to  enable  us  to  decide  between  various

mathematically  possible  alternatives,  but  these  alternatives  are  all  fully

intelligible and fully adequate to the observed facts. For the present, however,

it will be well to forget space and time and the continuity of sensible change,

in order to return to these topics equipped with the weapons provided by the

abstract theory of continuity.

  Continuity,  in  mathematics,  is  a  property  only  possible  to  a series  of

terms, i.e. to terms arranged in an order, so that we can say of any two that

one comes before the other. Numbers in order of magnitude, the points on a

line from left to right, the moments of time from earlier to later, are instances

of series. The notion of order, which is here introduced, is one which is not

required in the theory of cardinal number. It is possible to know that two

classes have the same number of terms without knowing any order in which

they are to be taken. We have an instance of this in such a case as Englishhusbands and English wives: we can see that there must be the  same number

of husbands as of wives, without having to arrange them in a series. But

continuity, which we are now to consider, is essentially a property of an

order: it does not belong to a set of terms in themselves, but only to a set in a

certain order. A set of terms which can be arranged in one order can always

also be arranged in other orders, and a set of terms which can be arranged in a

continuous  order  can  always  also  be  arranged  in  orders  which  are  not

continuous. Thus the essence of continuity must not be sought in the nature

of the set of terms, but in the nature of their arrangement in a series.

    Mathematicians  have  distinguished  different  degrees  of  continuity,  and

have confined the word “continuous,” for technical purposes, to series having

a certain high degree of continuity. But for philosophical purposes, all that is

important  in  continuity  is  introduced  by  the  lowest  degree  of  continuity,

which is called “compactness.” A series is called “compact” when no two

terms  are  consecutive,  but  between  any  two  there  are  others.  One  of  the

simplest examples of a compact series is the series of fractions in order of

magnitude. Given any two fractions, however near together, there are other

fractions greater than the one and smaller than the other, and therefore no two

fractions are consecutive. There is no fraction, for example, which is next
    11
after ⁄: if we choose some fraction which is very little greater than ⁄, say
      22
511011
⁄ we can find others, such as ⁄, which are nearer to ⁄. Thus between
1002002

any two fractions, however little they differ, there are an infinite number of

other  fractions.  Mathematical  space  and  time  also  have  this  property  of

compactness,  though  whether  actual  space  and  time  have  it  is  a  further

question,  dependent  upon  empirical  evidence,  and  probably  incapable  of

being answered with certainty.

  In the case of abstract objects such as fractions, it is perhaps not very

difficult to realise the logical possibility of their forming a compact series.

The difficulties that might be felt are those of infinity, for in a compact series

the number of terms between any two given terms must be infinite. But when

these difficulties have been solved, the mere compactness in itself offers no

great obstacle to the imagination. In more concrete cases, however, such as

motion, compactness becomes much more repugnant to our habits of thought.

It will therefore be desirable to consider explicitly the mathematical account

of motion, with a view to making its logical possibility felt. The mathematical

account  of  motion  is  perhaps  artificially  simplified  when  regarded  as

describing  what  actually  occurs  in  the  physical  world;  but  what  actuallyoccurs must be capable, by a certain amount of logical manipulation, of being

brought  within  the  scope  of  the  mathematical  account,  and  must,  in  its

analysis, raise just such problems as are raised in their simplest form by this

account. Neglecting, therefore, for the present, the question of its physical

adequacy, let us devote ourselves merely to considering its possibility as a

formal statement of the nature of motion.

  In order to simplify our problem as much as possible, let us imagine a tiny

speck of light moving along a scale. What do we mean by saying that the

motion is continuous? It is not necessary for our purposes to consider the

whole of what the mathematician means by this statement: only part of what

he means is philosophically important. One part of what he means is that, if

we consider any two positions of the speck occupied at any two instants,

there will be other intermediate positions occupied at intermediate instants.

However near together we take the two positions, the speck will not jump

suddenly from  the one to the other, but will pass through an infinite number

of other positions on the way. Every distance, however small, is traversed by

passing through all the infinite series of positions between the two ends of the

distance.

  But at this point imagination suggests that we may describe the continuity

of motion by saying that the speck always passes from one position at one

instant to the next position at the next instant. As soon as we say this or

imagine it, we fall into error, because there is no next point or next instant. If

there were, we should find Zeno's paradoxes, in some form, unavoidable, as

will  appear  in  our next  lecture.  One  simple  paradox  may  serve  as  an

illustration. If our speck is in motion along the scale throughout the whole of

a certain time, it cannot be at the same point at two consecutive instants. But

it cannot, from one instant to the next, travel further than from one point to

the  next,  for  if  it  did,  there  would  be  no  instant  at  which  it  was  in  the

positions intermediate between that at the first instant and that at the next, and

we  agreed  that  the  continuity  of  motion  excludes  the  possibility  of  such

sudden jumps. It follows that our speck must, so long as it moves, pass from

one point at one instant to the next point at the next instant. Thus there will be

just one perfectly definite velocity with which all motions must take place: no

motion  can  be  faster  than  this,  and  no  motion  can  be  slower.  Since  this

conclusion is false, we must reject the hypothesis upon which it is based,

namely that there are consecutive points and instants.[18] Hence the continuity

of motion must not be supposed to consist in a body's occupying consecutivepositions at consecutive times.

  The  difficulty  to  imagination  lies  chiefly,  I  think,  in  keeping  out  the

suggestion of infinitesimal distances and times. Suppose we halve a given

distance, and then halve the half, and so on, we can continue the process as

long as we please, and the longer we continue it, the smaller the resulting

distance becomes. This infinite divisibility seems, at first sight, to imply that

there are infinitesimal distances, i.e. distances so small that any finite fraction

of  an  inch  would  be  greater.  This,  however,  is  an  error.  The  continued

bisection of our distance, though it gives us continually smaller distances,

gives us always finite distances. If our original distance was an inch, we reach

successively half an inch, a quarter of an inch, an eighth, a sixteenth, and so

on; but every one of this infinite series of diminishing distances is finite.

“But,” it may be said, “in the end the distance will grow infinitesimal.” No,

because  there  is  no  end.  The  process  of  bisection  is  one  which  can,

theoretically, be carried on for ever, without any last term being attained.

Thus  infinite  divisibility  of  distances,  which  must  be  admitted,  does  not

imply  that  there  are  distances  so  small  that  any  finite  distance  would  be

larger.

  It  is  easy,  in  this  kind  of  question,  to  fall  into  an  elementary  logical

blunder. Given any finite distance, we can find a smaller distance; this may

be expressed in the ambiguous form “there is a distance smaller than any

finite distance.” But if this is then interpreted as meaning “there is a distance

such that, whatever finite distance may be chosen, the distance in question is

smaller,”  then  the  statement  is  false.  Common  language  is  ill  adapted  to

expressing matters of this kind, and philosophers who have been dependent

on it have frequently been misled by it.

  In a continuous motion, then, we shall say that at any  given instant the 

moving body occupies a certain position, and at other instants it occupies 

other positions; the interval between any two instants and between any two 

positions is always finite, but the continuity of the motion is shown in the fact 

that, however near together we take the two positions and the two instants, 

there are an infinite number of positions still nearer together, which are 

occupied at instants that are also still nearer together. The moving body never 

jumps from one position to another, but always passes by a gradual transition 

through an infinite number of intermediaries. At a given instant, it is where it 

is, like Zeno's arrow;[19] but we cannot say that it is at rest at the instant, since

the instant does not last for a finite time, and there is not a beginning and endof the instant with an interval between them. Rest consists in being in the

same position at all the instants throughout a certain finite period, however

short; it does not consist simply in a body's being where it is at a given

instant. This whole theory, as is obvious, depends upon the nature of compact

series, and demands, for its full comprehension, that compact series should

have become familiar and easy to the imagination as well as to deliberate

thought.

  What is required may be expressed in mathematical language by saying

that the position of a moving body must be a continuous function of the time.

To define accurately what this means, we proceed as follows. Consider a

particle which, at the moment t, is at the point P. Choose now any small

portion PP of the path of the particle, this portion being one which contains
        12

P. We say then that, if the motion of the particle is continuous at the  time t, it

must be possible to find two instants t, t, one earlier than t and one later,
                                              12

such that throughout the whole time from t to t (both included), the particle
                                                  12

lies between P and P. And we say that this must still hold however small we
                12

make  the  portion  PP.  When  this  is  the  case,  we  say  that  the  motion  is
                      12

continuous at the time t; and when the motion is continuous at all times, we

say that the motion as a whole is continuous. It is obvious that if the particle

were to jump suddenly from P to some other point Q, our definition would

fail  for  all  intervals  PP  which  were  too  small  to  include  Q.  Thus  our
                          12

definition affords an analysis of the continuity of motion, while admitting

points and instants and denying infinitesimal distances in space or periods in

time.

  Philosophers, mostly in ignorance of the mathematician's analysis, have

adopted  other  and  more  heroic  methods  of  dealing  with  the primâ  facie

difficulties  of  continuous  motion.  A  typical  and  recent  example  of

philosophic theories of motion is afforded by Bergson, whose views on this

subject I have examined elsewhere.[20]

  Apart  from  definite  arguments,  there  are  certain  feelings,  rather  than

reasons, which stand in the way of an acceptance of the mathematical account

of motion. To begin with, if a body is moving at all fast, we see its motion

just as we see its colour. A slow motion, like that of the hour-hand of a watch,

is  only  known  in  the  way  which  mathematics  would  lead  us  to  expect,

namely by observing a change of position after a lapse of time; but, when we

observe  the  motion  of  the  second-hand,  we  do  not  merely  see  first  one

position and then another—we see something as directly sensible as colour. What is this something that we see, and that we call visible motion?  

Whatever it is, it is not  the  successive  occupation  of  successive  positions:

something beyond the mathematical theory of motion is required to account

for  it.  Opponents  of  the  mathematical  theory  emphasise  this  fact.  “Your

theory,” they say, “may be very logical, and might apply admirably to some

other world; but in this actual world, actual motions are quite different from

what  your  theory  would  declare  them  to  be,  and  require,  therefore,  some

different philosophy from yours for their adequate explanation.”

  The objection thus raised is one which I have no wish to underrate, but I

believe it can be fully answered without departing from the methods and the

outlook  which  have  led  to  the  mathematical  theory  of  motion.  Let  us,

however, first try to state the objection more fully.

  If  the  mathematical  theory  is  adequate,  nothing  happens  when  a  body

moves except that it is in different places at different times. But in this sense

the hour-hand and the second-hand are equally in motion, yet in the second-

hand there is something perceptible to our senses which is absent in the hour-

hand. We can see, at each moment, that the second-hand is moving, which is

different from seeing it first in one place and then in another. This seems to

involve our seeing it simultaneously in a number of places, although it must

also involve our seeing that it is in some of these places earlier than in others.

If, for example, I move my hand quickly from left to right, you seem to see

the whole movement at once, in spite of the fact that you know it begins at

the left and ends at the right. It is this kind of consideration, I think, which

leads  Bergson  and  many  others  to  regard  a  movement  as  really  one

indivisible  whole,  not  the  series  of  separate  states  imagined  by  the

mathematician.

  To this objection there are three supplementary answers, physiological,

psychological, and logical. We will consider them successively.

  (1) The physiological answer merely shows that, if the physical world is

what the mathematician supposes, its sensible appearance may nevertheless

be expected to be what it is. The aim of this answer is thus the modest one of

showing that the mathematical account is not impossible as applied to the

physical  world;  it  does  not  even  attempt  to  show  that  this  account  is

necessary, or that an analogous account applies in psychology.

  When any nerve is stimulated, so as to cause a sensation, the sensation

does not cease instantaneously with the cessation of the stimulus, but dies

away in a short finite time. A flash of lightning, brief as it is to our sight, isbriefer  still  as  a  physical  phenomenon:  we  continue  to  see  it  for  a  few

moments after the light-waves have ceased to strike the eye. Thus in the case

of a physical motion, if it is sufficiently swift, we shall actually at one instant

see the moving body throughout a finite portion of its course, and not only at

the exact spot where it is at that instant. Sensations, however, as they die

away, grow gradually fainter; thus the sensation due to a stimulus which is

recently past is not exactly like the sensation due to a present stimulus. It

follows from this that, when we see a rapid motion, we shall not only see a

number of positions of the moving body simultaneously, but we shall see

them with different degrees of intensity—the present position most vividly,

and the others with diminishing vividness, until sensation fades away into

immediate memory. This state of things accounts fully for the perception of

motion. A motion is perceived, not merely inferred, when it is sufficiently

swift for many positions to be sensible at one time; and  the earlier and later

parts  of  one  perceived  motion  are  distinguished  by  the  less  and  greater

vividness of the sensations.

  This  answer  shows  that  physiology  can  account  for  our  perception  of

motion.  But  physiology,  in  speaking  of  stimulus  and  sense-organs  and  a

physical motion distinct from the immediate object of sense, is assuming the

truth of physics, and is thus only capable of showing the physical account to

be possible, not of showing it to be necessary. This consideration brings us to

the psychological answer.

  (2) The psychological answer to our difficulty about motion is part of a

vast  theory,  not  yet  worked  out,  and  only  capable,  at  present,  of  being

vaguely outlined. We considered this theory in the third and fourth lectures;

for the present, a mere sketch of its application to our present problem must

suffice.  The  world  of  physics,  which  was  assumed  in  the  physiological

answer, is obviously inferred from what is given in sensation; yet as soon as

we  seriously  consider  what  is  actually  given  in  sensation,  we  find  it

apparently very different from the world of physics. The question is thus

forced upon us: Is the inference from sense to physics a valid one? I believe

the answer to be affirmative, for reasons which I suggested in the third and

fourth lectures; but the answer cannot be either short or easy. It consists,

broadly speaking, in showing that, although the particles, points, and instants

with which physics operates are not themselves given in experience, and are

very likely not actually existing things, yet, out of the materials provided in

sensation,  it  is  possible  to  make  logical  constructions  having  themathematical  properties  which  physics  assigns  to  particles,  points,  and

instants.  If  this  can  be  done,  then  all  the  propositions  of  physics  can  be

translated,  by  a  sort of  dictionary,  into  propositions  about  the  kinds  of

objects which are given in sensation.

  Applying these general considerations to the case of motion, we find that,

even within the sphere of immediate sense-data, it is necessary, or at any rate

more  consonant  with  the  facts  than  any  other  equally  simple  view,  to

distinguish  instantaneous  states  of  objects,  and  to  regard  such  states  as

forming a compact series. Let us consider a body which is moving swiftly

enough for its motion to be perceptible, and long enough for its motion to be

not wholly comprised in one sensation. Then, in spite of the fact that we see a

finite extent of the motion at one instant, the extent which we see at one

instant is different from that which we see at another. Thus we are brought

back, after all, to a series of momentary views of the moving body, and this

series  will  be  compact,  like  the  former  physical  series  of  points.  In  fact,

though the terms of the series seem different, the mathematical character of

the series is unchanged, and the whole mathematical theory of motion will

apply to it verbatim.

  When we are considering the actual data of sensation in this connection, it

is important to realise that two sense-data may be, and must sometimes be,

really different when we cannot perceive any difference between them. An

old but conclusive reason for believing this was emphasised by Poincaré.[21]

In all cases of sense-data capable of gradual change, we may find one sense-

datum indistinguishable from another, and that other indistinguishable from a

third, while yet the first and third are quite easily distinguishable. Suppose,

for example, a person with his eyes shut is holding a weight in his hand, and

someone noiselessly adds a small extra weight. If  the extra weight is small

enough, no difference will be perceived in the sensation. After a time, another

small extra weight may be added, and still no change will be perceived; but if

both extra weights had been added at once, it may be that the change would

be quite easily perceptible. Or, again, take shades of colour. It would be easy

to find three stuffs of such closely similar shades that no difference could be

perceived between the first and second, nor yet between the second and third,

while yet the first and third would be distinguishable. In such a case, the

second shade cannot be the same as the first, or it would be distinguishable

from the third; nor the same as the third, or it would be distinguishable from

the  first.  It  must,  therefore,  though  indistinguishable  from  both,  be  reallyintermediate between them.

  Such  considerations  as  the  above  show  that,  although  we  cannot

distinguish sense-data unless they differ by more than a certain amount, it is

perfectly  reasonable  to  suppose  that  sense-data  of  a  given  kind,  such  as

weights or colours, really form a compact series. The objections which may

be  brought  from  a  psychological  point  of  view  against  the  mathematical

theory  of  motion  are  not,  therefore,  objections  to  this  theory  properly

understood, but only to a quite unnecessary assumption of simplicity in the

momentary object of sense. Of the immediate object of sense, in the case of a

visible motion, we may say that at each instant it is in all the positions which

remain sensible at that instant; but this set of positions changes continuously

from moment to moment, and is amenable to exactly the same mathematical

treatment as if it were a mere point. When we assert that some mathematical

account of phenomena is correct, all that we primarily assert is that something

definable in terms of the crude phenomena satisfies our formulæ; and in this

sense the  mathematical  theory  of  motion  is  applicable  to  the  data  of

sensation as well as to the supposed particles of abstract physics.

  There are a number of distinct questions which are apt to be confused

when the mathematical continuum is said to be inadequate to the facts of

sense. We may state these, in order of diminishing generality, as follows:—

  (a) Are series possessing mathematical continuity logically possible?

  (b) Assuming that they are possible logically, are they not impossible as

applied to actual sense-data, because, among actual sense-data, there are no

such fixed mutually external terms as are to be found, e.g., in the series of

fractions?

  (c)  Does  not  the  assumption  of  points  and  instants  make  the  whole

mathematical account fictitious?

  (d)  Finally,  assuming  that  all  these  objections  have  been  answered,  is

there, in actual empirical fact, any sufficient reason to believe the world of

sense continuous?

  Let us consider these questions in succession.

  (a) The question of the logical possibility of the mathematical continuum

turns  partly  on  the  elementary  misunderstandings  we  considered  at  the

beginning of the present lecture, partly on the possibility of the mathematical

infinite, which will occupy our next two lectures, and partly on the logical

form  of  the  answer  to  the  Bergsonian  objection  which  we  stated  a  few

minutes ago. I shall say no more on this topic at present, since it is desirablefirst to complete the psychological answer.

  (b) The question whether sense-data are composed of mutually external

units is not one which can be decided by empirical evidence. It is often urged

that, as a  matter  of  immediate  experience,  the  sensible  flux  is  devoid  of

divisions, and is falsified by the dissections of the intellect. Now I have no

wish to argue that this view is contrary to immediate experience: I wish only

to  maintain  that  it  is  essentially  incapable  of  being proved  by  immediate

experience. As we saw, there must be among sense-data differences so slight

as to be imperceptible: the fact that sense-data are immediately given does

not mean that their differences also must be immediately given (though they

may  be).  Suppose,  for  example,  a  coloured  surface  on  which  the  colour

changes gradually—so gradually that the difference of colour in two very

neighbouring portions is imperceptible, while the difference between more

widely separated portions is quite noticeable. The effect produced, in such a

case, will be precisely that of “interpenetration,” of transition which is not a

matter of discrete units. And since it tends to be supposed that the colours,

being immediate data, must appear different if they are different, it seems

easily to follow that “interpenetration” must be the ultimately right account.

But this does not follow. It is unconsciously assumed, as a premiss for a

reductio ad absurdum of the analytic view, that, if A and B are immediate

data, and A differs from B, then the fact that they differ must also be an

immediate datum. It is difficult to say how this assumption arose, but I think

it  is  to  be  connected  with  the  confusion  between  “acquaintance”  and

“knowledge about.” Acquaintance, which is what we derive from sense, does

not, theoretically at least, imply even the smallest “knowledge about,” i.e. it

does  not  imply  knowledge  of  any  proposition  concerning  the  object  with

which we are acquainted. It is a mistake to speak as if acquaintance had

degrees: there is merely acquaintance and non-acquaintance. When we  speak

of becoming “better acquainted,” as for instance with a person, what we must

mean is, becoming acquainted with more parts of a certain whole; but the

acquaintance with each part is either complete or nonexistent. Thus it is a

mistake to say that if we were perfectly acquainted with an object we should

know all about it. “Knowledge about” is knowledge of propositions, which is

not  involved  necessarily  in  acquaintance  with  the  constituents  of  the

propositions. To know that two shades of colour are different is knowledge

about them; hence acquaintance with the two shades does not in any way

necessitate the knowledge that they are different.  From  what  has  just  been  said  it  follows  that  the  nature  of  sense-data

cannot  be  validly  used  to  prove  that  they  are  not  composed  of  mutually

external units. It may be admitted, on the other hand, that nothing in their

empirical character specially necessitates the view that they are composed of

mutually external units. This view, if it is held, must be held on logical, not

on empirical, grounds. I believe that the logical grounds are adequate to the

conclusion.  They  rest,  at  bottom,  upon  the  impossibility  of  explaining

complexity without assuming constituents. It is undeniable that the visual

field, for example, is complex; and so far as I can see, there is always self-

contradiction in the theories which, while admitting this complexity, attempt

to deny that it results from a combination of mutually external units. But to

pursue this topic would lead us too far from our theme, and I shall therefore

say no more about it at present.

  (c)  It  is  sometimes  urged  that  the  mathematical  account  of  motion  is

rendered fictitious by its assumption of points and instants. Now there are

here two different  questions  to  be  distinguished.  There  is  the  question  of

absolute or relative space and time, and there is the question whether what

occupies  space  and  time  must  be  composed  of  elements  which  have  no

extension  or  duration.  And  each  of  these  questions  in  turn  may  take  two

forms, namely: (α) is the hypothesis consistent with the facts and with logic?

(β) is it necessitated by the facts or by logic? I wish to answer, in each case,

yes to the first form of the question, and no to the second. But in any case the

mathematical  account  of  motion  will  not  be  fictitious,  provided  a  right

interpretation is given to the words “point” and “instant.” A few words on

each alternative will serve to make this clear.

  Formally, mathematics adopts an absolute theory of space and time, i.e. it

assumes that, besides the things which are in space and time, there are also

entities, called “points” and “instants,” which are occupied by things. This

view,  however,  though  advocated  by  Newton,  has  long  been  regarded  by

mathematicians as merely a convenient fiction. There is, so far as I can see,

no conceivable evidence either for or against it. It is logically possible, and it

is consistent with the facts. But the facts are also consistent with the denial of

spatial and temporal entities over and above things with spatial and temporal

relations.  Hence,  in  accordance  with  Occam's  razor,  we  shall  do  well  to

abstain from either assuming or denying points and instants. This means, so

far as practical working out is concerned, that we adopt the relational theory;

for in practice the refusal to assume points and instants has the same effect asthe denial of them. But in strict theory the two are quite different, since the

denial introduces an element of unverifiable dogma which is wholly absent

when we merely refrain from the assertion. Thus, although we shall derive  

points and instants from things, we shall leave the bare possibility open that

they may also have an independent existence as simple entities.

  We come now to the question whether the things in space and time are to

be conceived as composed of elements without extension or duration, i.e. of

elements  which  only  occupy  a  point  and  an  instant.  Physics,  formally,

assumes in its differential equations that things consist of elements which

occupy only a point at each instant, but persist throughout time. For reasons

explained  in Lecture IV.,  the  persistence  of  things  through  time  is  to  be

regarded  as  the  formal  result  of  a  logical  construction,  not  as  necessarily

implying any actual persistence. The same motives, in fact, which lead to the

division  of  things  into  point-particles,  ought  presumably  to  lead  to  their

division into instant-particles, so that the ultimate formal constituent of the

matter in physics will be a point-instant-particle. But such objects, as well as

the particles of physics, are not data. The same economy of hypothesis, which

dictates the practical adoption of a relative rather than an absolute space and

time, also dictates the practical adoption of material elements which have a

finite extension and duration. Since, as we saw in Lecture IV., points and

instants  can  be  constructed  as  logical  functions  of  such  elements,  the

mathematical  account  of  motion,  in  which  a  particle  passes  continuously

through a continuous series of points, can be interpreted in a form which

assumes only elements which agree with our actual data in having a finite

extension  and  duration.  Thus,  so  far  as  the  use  of  points  and  instants  is

concerned, the mathematical account of motion can be freed from the charge

of employing fictions.

  (d) But we must now face the question: Is there, in actual empirical fact,

any sufficient reason to believe the  world of sense continuous? The answer

here must, I think, be in the negative. We may say that the hypothesis of

continuity is perfectly consistent with the facts and with logic, and that it is

technically simpler than any other tenable hypothesis. But since our powers

of  discrimination  among  very  similar  sensible  objects  are  not  infinitely

precise, it is quite impossible to decide between different theories which only

differ  in  regard  to  what  is  below  the  margin  of  discrimination.  If,  for

example, a coloured surface which we see consists of a finite number of very

small surfaces, and if a motion which we see consists, like a cinematograph,of  a  large  finite  number  of  successive  positions,  there  will  be  nothing

empirically discoverable to show that objects of sense are not continuous. In

what is called experienced continuity, such as is said to be given in sense,

there is a large negative element: absence of perception of difference occurs

in cases which are thought to give perception of absence of difference. When,

for example, we cannot distinguish a colour A from a colour B, nor a colour

B from a colour C, but can distinguish A from C, the indistinguishability is a

purely negative fact, namely, that we do not perceive a difference. Even in

regard  to  immediate  data,  this  is  no  reason  for  denying  that  there  is  a

difference.  Thus,  if  we  see  a  coloured  surface  whose  colour  changes

gradually,  its  sensible  appearance  if  the  change  is  continuous  will  be

indistinguishable from what it would be if the change were by small finite

jumps. If this is true, as it seems to be, it follows that there can never be any

empirical evidence to demonstrate that the sensible world is continuous, and

not a collection of a very large finite number of elements of which each

differs from its neighbour in a finite though very small degree. The continuity

of space and time, the infinite number of  different shades in the spectrum,

and so on, are all in the nature of unverifiable hypotheses—perfectly possible

logically, perfectly consistent with the known facts, and simpler technically

than any other tenable hypotheses, but not the sole hypotheses which are

logically and empirically adequate.

  If a relational theory of instants is constructed, in which an “instant” is

defined  as  a  group  of  events  simultaneous  with  each  other  and  not  all

simultaneous with any event outside the group, then if our resulting series of

instants is to be compact, it must be possible, if x wholly precedes y, to find

an event z, simultaneous with part of x, which wholly precedes some event

which  wholly  precedes y.  Now  this  requires  that  the  number  of  events

concerned should be infinite in any finite period of time. If this is to be the

case in the world of one man's sense-data, and if each sense-datum is to have

not  less  than  a  certain  finite  temporal  extension,  it  will  be  necessary  to

assume that we always have an infinite number of sense-data simultaneous

with any given sense-datum. Applying similar considerations to space, and

assuming that sense-data are to have not less than a certain spatial extension,

it will be necessary to suppose that an infinite number of sense-data overlap

spatially  with  any  given  sense-datum.  This  hypothesis  is  possible,  if  we

suppose a single sense-datum, e.g. in sight, to be a finite surface, enclosing

other surfaces which are also single sense-data. But there are difficulties insuch a hypothesis, and I do not know whether these difficulties could be

successfully met. If they cannot, we must do one of two things: either declare

that the world of one man's sense-data is not continuous, or else refuse to

admit that there is any lower limit to the duration and extension of a single

sense-datum. I do not know what  is the right course to adopt as regards these

alternatives.  The  logical  analysis  we  have  been  considering  provides  the

apparatus for dealing with the various hypotheses, and the empirical decision

between them is a problem for the psychologist.

  (3) We have now to consider the logical answer to the alleged difficulties

of the mathematical theory of motion, or rather to the positive theory which is

urged on the other side. The view urged explicitly by Bergson, and implied in

the doctrines of many philosophers, is, that a motion is something indivisible,

not validly analysable into a series of states. This is part of a much more

general doctrine, which holds that analysis always falsifies, because the parts

of a complex whole are different, as combined in that whole, from what they

would otherwise be. It is very difficult to state this doctrine in any form

which  has  a  precise  meaning.  Often  arguments  are  used  which  have  no

bearing whatever upon the question. It is urged, for example, that when a

man becomes a father, his nature is altered by the new relation in which he

finds  himself,  so  that  he  is  not  strictly  identical  with  the  man  who  was

previously not a father. This may be true, but it is a causal psychological fact,

not a logical fact. The doctrine would require that a man who is a father

cannot be strictly identical with a man who is a son, because he is modified in

one way by the relation of fatherhood and in another by that of sonship. In

fact, we may give a precise statement of the doctrine we are combating in the

form: There  can  never  be  two  facts  concerning  the  same  thing.  A  fact

concerning a thing always is or involves a relation to one or more entities;

thus two facts concerning the same thing would involve two relations of the

same thing. But the doctrine in question holds that a thing is so modified by

its relations that it cannot be the same  in one relation as in another. Hence, if

this doctrine is true, there can never be more than one fact concerning any

one thing. I do not think the philosophers in question have realised that this is

the precise statement of the view they advocate, because in this form the view

is so contrary to plain truth that its falsehood is evident as soon as it is stated.

The discussion of this question, however, involves so many logical subtleties,

and is so beset with difficulties, that I shall not pursue it further at present.

  When once the above general doctrine is rejected, it is obvious that, wherethere is change, there must be a succession of states. There cannot be change

—and motion is only a particular case of change—unless there is something

different  at  one  time  from  what  there  is  at  some  other  time.  Change,

therefore, must involve relations and complexity, and must demand analysis.

So long as our analysis has only gone as far as other smaller changes, it is not

complete; if it is to be complete, it must end with terms that are not changes,

but are related by a relation of earlier and later. In the case of changes which

appear  continuous,  such  as  motions,  it  seems  to  be  impossible  to  find

anything other than change so long as we deal with finite periods of time,

however short. We are thus driven back, by the logical necessities of the case,

to the conception of instants without duration, or at any rate without any

duration  which  even  the  most  delicate  instruments  can  reveal.  This

conception, though it can be made to seem difficult, is really easier than any

other that the facts allow. It is a kind of logical framework into which any

tenable theory must fit—not necessarily itself the statement of the crude facts,

but a form in which statements which are true of the crude facts can be made

by a suitable interpretation. The direct consideration  of the crude facts of the

physical world has been undertaken in earlier lectures; in the present lecture,

we  have  only  been  concerned  to  show  that  nothing  in  the  crude  facts  is

inconsistent  with  the  mathematical  doctrine  of  continuity,  or  demands  a

continuity of a radically different kind from that of mathematical motion.

                                 LECTURE VI

  THE PROBLEM OF INFINITY CONSIDERED

                              HISTORICALLY

IT will be remembered that, when we enumerated the grounds upon which the

reality of the sensible world has been questioned, one of those mentioned was

the supposed impossibility of infinity and continuity. In view of our earlier

discussion of physics, it would seem that no conclusive empirical evidence

exists in favour of infinity or continuity in objects of sense or in matter.

Nevertheless, the explanation which assumes infinity and continuity remains

incomparably easier and more natural, from a scientific point of view, than

any  other,  and  since  Georg  Cantor  has  shown  that  the  supposed

contradictions are illusory, there is no longer any reason to struggle after a

finitist explanation of the world.

  The supposed difficulties of continuity all have their source in the fact that

a continuous series must have an infinite number of terms, and are in fact

difficulties  concerning  infinity.  Hence,  in  freeing  the  infinite  from

contradiction,  we  are  at  the  same  time  showing  the  logical  possibility  of

continuity as assumed in science.

  The kind of way in which infinity has been used to discredit the world of

sense may be illustrated by Kant's first two antinomies. In the first, the thesis

states: “The world has a beginning in time, and as regards space is enclosed

within limits”; the antithesis states:  “The  world  has  no  beginning  and  no

limits  in  space,  but  is  infinite  in  respect  of  both  time  and  space.”  Kant

professes to prove both these propositions, whereas, if what we have said on

modern logic has any truth, it must be impossible to prove either. In order,

however, to rescue the world of sense, it is enough to destroy the proof of one

of the two. For our present purpose, it is the proof that the world is finite that

interests us. Kant's argument as regards space here rests upon his argument as

regards time. We need therefore only examine the argument as regards time.

What he says is as follows:

  “For let us assume that the world has no beginning as regards time, so that

up to every given instant an eternity has elapsed, and therefore an infinite

series of successive states of the things in the world has passed by. But the

infinity of a series consists just in this, that it can never be completed by

successive synthesis. Therefore an infinite past world-series is impossible,and  accordingly  a  beginning  of  the  world  is  a  necessary  condition  of  its

existence; which was the first thing to be proved.”

  Many different criticisms might be passed on this argument, but we will

content ourselves with a bare minimum. To begin with, it is a mistake to

define the infinity of a series as “impossibility of completion by successive

synthesis.”  The  notion  of  infinity,  as  we  shall  see  in  the next lecture,  is

primarily a property of classes, and only derivatively applicable to series;

classes which are infinite are given all at once by the defining property of

their members, so that there is no question of “completion” or of “successive

synthesis.” And the word “synthesis,” by suggesting the mental activity of

synthesising, introduces, more or less surreptitiously, that reference to mind

by which all Kant's philosophy was infected. In the second place, when Kant

says that  an infinite series can “never” be completed by successive synthesis,

all that he has even conceivably a right to say is that it cannot be completed

in a finite time. Thus what he really proves is, at most, that if the world had

no beginning, it must have already existed for an infinite time. This, however,

is a very poor conclusion, by no means suitable for his purposes. And with

this result we might, if we chose, take leave of the first antinomy.

  It is worth while, however, to consider how Kant came to make such an

elementary  blunder.  What  happened  in  his  imagination  was  obviously

something like this: Starting from the present and going backwards in time,

we have, if the world had no beginning, an infinite series of events. As we

see from the word “synthesis,” he imagined a mind trying to grasp these

successively, in the reverse order to that in which they had occurred, i.e.

going from the present backwards. This series is obviously one which has no

end. But the series of events up to the present has an end, since it ends with

the present. Owing to the inveterate subjectivism of his mental habits, he

failed to notice that he had reversed the sense of the series by substituting

backward synthesis for forward happening, and thus he supposed that it was

necessary to identify the mental series, which had no end, with the physical

series, which had an end but no beginning. It was this mistake, I think, which,

operating unconsciously, led him to attribute validity to a singularly flimsy

piece of fallacious reasoning.

  The  second  antinomy  illustrates  the  dependence  of  the  problem  of

continuity upon that of infinity. The thesis states: “Every complex substance

in the world consists of simple parts, and there exists everywhere nothing but

the simple or what is composed of it.” The antithesis states: “No complexthing in the world consists of  simple parts, and everywhere in it there exists

nothing simple.” Here, as before, the proofs of both thesis and antithesis are

open to criticism, but for the purpose of vindicating physics and the world of

sense it is enough to find a fallacy in one of the proofs. We will choose for

this purpose the proof of the antithesis, which begins as follows:

  “Assume  that  a  complex  thing  (as  substance)  consists  of  simple  parts.

Since all external relation, and therefore all composition out of substances, is

only possible in space, the space occupied by a complex thing must consist of

as many parts as the thing consists of. Now space does not consist of simple

parts, but of spaces.”

  The rest of his argument need not concern us, for the nerve of the proof

lies in the one statement: “Space does not consist of simple parts, but of

spaces.”  This  is  like  Bergson's  objection  to  “the  absurd  proposition  that

motion is made up of immobilities.” Kant does not tell us why he holds that a

space must consist of spaces rather than of simple parts. Geometry regards

space as made up of points, which are simple; and although, as we have seen,

this view is not scientifically or logically necessary, it remains primâ facie

possible, and its mere possibility is enough to vitiate Kant's argument. For, if

his proof of the thesis of the antinomy were valid, and if the antithesis could

only be avoided by assuming points, then the antinomy itself would afford a

conclusive reason in favour of points. Why, then, did Kant think it impossible

that space should be composed of points?

  I think two considerations probably influenced him. In the first place, the

essential thing about space is spatial order, and mere points, by themselves,

will not account for spatial order. It is obvious that his argument  assumes

absolute space; but it is spatial relations that are alone important, and they

cannot be reduced to points. This ground for his view depends, therefore,

upon his ignorance of the logical theory of order and his oscillations between

absolute and relative space. But there is also another ground for his opinion,

which is more relevant to our present topic. This is the ground derived from

infinite divisibility. A space may be halved, and then halved again, and so on

ad infinitum, and at every stage of the process the parts are still spaces, not

points. In order to reach points by such a method, it would be necessary to

come to the end of an unending process, which is impossible. But just as an

infinite class can be given all at once by its defining concept, though it cannot

be reached by successive enumeration, so an infinite set of points can be

given all at once as making up a line or area or volume, though they cannever  be  reached  by  the  process  of  successive  division.  Thus  the  infinite

divisibility of space gives no ground for denying that space is composed of

points. Kant does not give his grounds for this denial, and we can therefore

only conjecture what they were. But the above two grounds, which we have

seen to be fallacious, seem sufficient to account for his opinion, and we may

therefore conclude that the antithesis of the second antinomy is unproved.

  The above illustration of Kant's antinomies has only been introduced in

order to show the relevance of the problem of infinity to the problem of the

reality of objects of sense. In the remainder of the present lecture, I wish to

state and explain the problem of infinity, to show how it arose, and to show

the irrelevance of all the solutions proposed by philosophers. In the following

lecture, I shall try to explain the true solution, which has been discovered by

the mathematicians, but nevertheless belongs essentially  to philosophy. The

solution is definitive, in the sense that it entirely satisfies and convinces all

who study it carefully. For over two thousand years the human intellect was

baffled by the problem; its many failures and its ultimate success make this

problem peculiarly apt for the illustration of method.

  The  problem  appears  to  have  first  arisen  in  some  such  way  as  the

following.[22]  Pythagoras  and  his  followers,  who  were  interested,  like

Descartes, in the application of number to geometry, adopted in that science

more  arithmetical  methods  than  those  with  which  Euclid  has  made  us

familiar. They, or their contemporaries the atomists, believed, apparently, that

space  is  composed  of  indivisible  points,  while  time  is  composed  of

indivisible  instants.[23]  This  belief  would  not,  by  itself,  have  raised  the

difficulties which they encountered, but it was presumably accompanied by

another belief, that the number of points in any finite area or of instants in

any finite period must be finite. I do not suppose that this latter belief was a

conscious one, because probably no other possibility had occurred to them.

But the belief nevertheless operated, and very soon brought them into conflict

with  facts  which  they  themselves  discovered.  Before  explaining  how  this

occurred,  however,  it  is  necessary  to  say  one  word  in  explanation  of  the

phrase “finite number.” The exact explanation is a matter for our next lecture;

for the present, it must suffice to say that I mean 0 and 1 and 2 and 3 and so

on,  for  ever—in  other  words,  any  number  that  can  be  obtained by  

successively adding ones. This includes all the numbers that can be expressed

by means of our ordinary numerals, and since such numbers can be made

greater and greater, without ever reaching an unsurpassable maximum, it iseasy to suppose that there are no other numbers. But this supposition, natural

as it is, is mistaken.

  Whether  the  Pythagoreans  themselves  believed  space  and  time  to  be

composed  of  indivisible  points  and  instants  is  a  debatable  question.[24]  It

would seem that the distinction between space and matter had not yet been

clearly made, and that therefore, when an atomistic view is expressed, it is

difficult to decide whether particles of matter or points of space are intended.

There is an interesting passage[25] in Aristotle's Physics,[26] where he says:

  “The Pythagoreans all maintained the existence of the void, and said that it

enters  into  the  heaven  itself  from  the  boundless  breath,  inasmuch  as  the

heaven breathes in the void also; and the void differentiates natures, as  if it

were  a  sort  of  separation  of  consecutives,  and  as  if  it  were  their

differentiation; and that this also is what is first in numbers, for it is the void

which differentiates them.”

  This seems to imply that they regarded matter as consisting of atoms with

empty space in between. But if so, they must have thought space could be

studied by only paying attention to the atoms, for otherwise it would be hard

to account for their arithmetical methods in geometry, or for their statement

that “things are numbers.”

  The  difficulty  which  beset  the  Pythagoreans  in  their  attempts  to  apply

numbers  arose  through  their  discovery  of  incommensurables,  and  this,  in

turn, arose as follows. Pythagoras, as we all learnt in youth, discovered the

proposition that the sum of the squares on the sides of a right-angled triangle

is equal to the square on the hypotenuse. It is said that he sacrificed an ox

when he discovered this theorem; if so, the ox was the first martyr to science.

But the theorem, though it has remained his chief claim to immortality, was

soon found to have a consequence fatal to his whole philosophy. Consider the

case of a right-angled triangle whose two sides are equal, such a triangle as is

formed  by  two  sides  of  a  square  and  a  diagonal.  Here,  in  virtue  of  the

theorem, the square on the diagonal is double of the square on either of the

sides. But Pythagoras or his early followers easily proved that the square of

one whole number cannot be double of the square of another.[27]  Thus the 

length of the side and the length of the diagonal are incommensurable; that is 

to say, however small a unit of length you take, if it is contained an exact 

number of times in the side, it is not contained any exact number of times in 

the diagonal, and vice versa.

  Now this fact might have been assimilated by some philosophies withoutany great difficulty, but to the philosophy of Pythagoras it was absolutely

fatal. Pythagoras held that number is the constitutive essence of all things, yet

no  two  numbers  could  express  the  ratio  of  the  side  of  a  square  to  the

diagonal. It would seem probable that we may expand his difficulty, without

departing from his thought, by assuming that he regarded the length of a line

as determined by the number of atoms contained in it—a line two inches long

would contain twice as many atoms as a line one inch long, and so on. But if

this were the truth, then there must be a definite numerical ratio between any

two finite lengths, because it was supposed that the number of atoms in each,

however large, must be finite. Here there was an insoluble contradiction. The

Pythagoreans, it is said, resolved to keep the existence of incommensurables

a profound secret, revealed only to a few of the supreme heads of the sect;

and one of their number, Hippasos of Metapontion, is even said to have been

shipwrecked at sea for impiously disclosing the terrible discovery to their

enemies. It must be remembered that Pythagoras was the founder of a new

religion as well as the teacher of a new science: if the science came to be

doubted, the disciples might fall into sin, and perhaps even eat beans, which

according to Pythagoras is as bad as eating parents' bones.

  The problem first raised by the discovery of incommensurables proved, as

time went on, to be one of the most severe and at the same time most far-

reaching problems that have confronted the human intellect in its endeavour

to understand the world. It showed at once that numerical measurement of

lengths,  if  it  was  to  be  made  accurate,  must  require  an  arithmetic  more

advanced  and  more  difficult  than  any  that  the  ancients  possessed.  They

therefore set to work to reconstruct geometry on a basis which did not assume

the universal possibility of numerical measurement—a reconstruction which,

as may be seen in Euclid, they effected with extraordinary skill and with great

logical acumen. The moderns, under the influence of Cartesian geometry,

have  reasserted  the  universal  possibility  of  numerical  measurement,

extending arithmetic, partly for that purpose, so as to include what are called

“irrational” numbers, which give the ratios of incommensurable lengths. But

although irrational numbers have long been used without a qualm, it is only

in quite recent years that logically satisfactory definitions of them have been

given. With these definitions, the first and most obvious form of the difficulty

which confronted the Pythagoreans has been solved; but other forms of the

difficulty remain to be considered, and it is these that introduce us to the

problem of infinity in its pure form.  We saw that, accepting the view that a length is composed of points, the

existence of incommensurables proves that every finite length must contain

an infinite number of points. In other words, if we were to take away points

one by one, we should never have taken away all the points, however long we

continued the process. The number of points, therefore, cannot be counted,

for counting is a process which enumerates things one by one. The  property

of being unable to be counted is characteristic of infinite collections, and is a

source  of  many  of  their  paradoxical  qualities.  So  paradoxical  are  these

qualities  that  until  our  own  day  they  were  thought  to  constitute  logical

contradictions. A long line of philosophers, from Zeno[28]  to M. Bergson,

have based much of their metaphysics upon the supposed impossibility of

infinite collections. Broadly speaking, the difficulties were stated by Zeno,

and nothing material was added until we reach Bolzano's Paradoxien des

Unendlichen, a little work written in 1847–8, and published posthumously in

1851. Intervening attempts to deal with the problem are futile and negligible.

The definitive solution of the difficulties is due, not to Bolzano, but to Georg

Cantor, whose work on this subject first appeared in 1882.

  In order to understand Zeno, and to realise how little modern orthodox

metaphysics has added to the achievements of the Greeks, we must consider

for a moment his master Parmenides, in whose interest the paradoxes were

invented.[29] Parmenides expounded his views in a poem divided into two

parts, called “the way of truth” and “the way of opinion”—like Mr Bradley's

“Appearance”  and  “Reality,”  except  that  Parmenides  tells  us  first  about

reality and then about appearance. “The way of opinion,” in his philosophy,

is, broadly speaking, Pythagoreanism; it begins with a warning: “Here I shall

close my trustworthy speech and thought about the truth. Henceforward learn

the opinions of mortals, giving ear to the deceptive ordering of my words.”

What has gone before has been revealed by a goddess, who tells him what

really is.  Reality,  she  says,  is  uncreated,  indestructible,  unchanging,

indivisible;  it  is  “immovable  in  the  bonds  of  mighty  chains,  without

beginning and without end; since coming into being and passing away have

been  driven  afar,  and  true  belief  has  cast  them  away.”  The  fundamental

principle of his inquiry is stated in a sentence which would not be out of

place in Hegel:[30] “Thou canst not know what is not—that is impossible—

nor utter it; for it is the same thing that can be thought and that can be.” And

again: “It needs must be that what can be thought and spoken of is; for it is

possible for it to be, and it is not possible for what is nothing to be.” Theimpossibility of change follows from this principle; for what is past can be

spoken of, and therefore, by the principle, still is.

  The great conception of a reality behind the passing illusions of sense, a

reality one, indivisible, and unchanging, was thus introduced into Western

philosophy  by  Parmenides,  not,  it  would  seem,  for  mystical  or  religious

reasons, but on the basis of a logical argument as to the impossibility of not-

being. All the great metaphysical systems—notably those of Plato, Spinoza,

and  Hegel—are  the  outcome  of  this  fundamental  idea.  It  is  difficult  to

disentangle the truth and the error in this view. The contention that time is

unreal and that the world of sense is illusory must, I think, be regarded as

based upon fallacious reasoning. Nevertheless, there is some sense—easier to

feel  than  to  state—in  which  time  is  an  unimportant  and  superficial

characteristic of reality. Past and future must be acknowledged to be as real

as the present, and a certain emancipation from slavery to time is essential to

philosophic  thought.  The  importance of  time  is  rather  practical  than

theoretical, rather in relation to our desires than in relation to truth. A truer

image of the world, I think, is obtained by picturing things as entering into

the stream of time from an eternal world outside, than from a view which

regards time as the devouring tyrant of all that is. Both in thought and in

feeling,  to  realise  the  unimportance  of  time  is  the  gate  of  wisdom.  But

unimportance is not unreality; and therefore what we shall have to say about

Zeno's arguments in support of Parmenides must be mainly critical.

  The  relation  of  Zeno  to  Parmenides  is  explained  by  Plato[31]  in  the

dialogue  in  which  Socrates,  as  a  young  man,  learns  logical  acumen  and

philosophic  disinterestedness  from  their  dialectic.  I  quote  from  Jowett's

translation:

  “I see, Parmenides, said Socrates, that Zeno is your second self in his

writings too; he puts what you say in another way, and would fain deceive us

into believing that he is telling us what is new. For you, in your poems, say

All is one, and of this you adduce excellent proofs; and he on the other hand

says  There  is  no  Many;  and  on  behalf  of  this  he  offers  overwhelming

evidence. To deceive the world, as you have done, by saying the same thing

in different ways, one of you affirming the one, and the other denying the

many, is a strain of art beyond the reach of most of us.

  “Yes,  Socrates,  said  Zeno.  But  although  you  are  as  keen  as  a  Spartan

hound in pursuing the track, you do not quite apprehend the true motive of

the composition, which is not really such an ambitious work as you imagine;for  what  you  speak  of  was  an  accident;  I  had  no  serious  intention  of

deceiving the world. The truth  is, that these writings of mine were meant to

protect the arguments of Parmenides against those who scoff at him and show

the many ridiculous and contradictory results which they suppose to follow

from the affirmation of the one. My answer is an address to the partisans of

the many, whose attack I return with interest by retorting upon them that their

hypothesis of the being of the many if carried out appears in a still more

ridiculous light than the hypothesis of the being of the one.”

  Zeno's  four  arguments  against  motion  were  intended  to  exhibit  the

contradictions that result from supposing that there is such a thing as change,

and thus to support the Parmenidean doctrine that reality is unchanging.[32]

Unfortunately, we only know his arguments through Aristotle,[33] who stated

them in order to refute them. Those philosophers in the present day who have

had their doctrines stated by opponents will realise that a just or adequate

presentation of Zeno's position is hardly to be expected from Aristotle; but by

some  care  in  interpretation  it  seems  possible  to  reconstruct  the  so-called

“sophisms” which have been “refuted” by every tyro from that day to this.

  Zeno's arguments would seem to be “ad hominem”; that is to say, they

seem  to  assume  premisses  granted  by  his  opponents,  and  to  show  that,

granting these premisses, it is possible to deduce consequences which his

opponents must deny. In order to decide whether they are valid arguments or

“sophisms,” it is necessary to guess at the tacit premisses, and to decide who 

was the “homo” at whom they were aimed. Some maintain that they were  

aimed at the Pythagoreans,[34] while others have held that they were intended

to  refute  the  atomists.[35]  M.  Evellin,  on  the  contrary,  holds  that  they

constitute a refutation of infinite divisibility,[36] while M. G. Noël, in the

interests  of  Hegel,  maintains  that  the  first  two  arguments  refute  infinite

divisibility,  while  the  next  two  refute  indivisibles.[37]  Amid  such  a

bewildering variety of interpretations, we can at least not complain of any

restrictions on our liberty of choice.

  The historical questions raised by the above-mentioned discussions are no

doubt largely insoluble, owing to the very scanty material from which our

evidence is derived. The points which seem fairly clear are the following: (1)

That, in spite of MM. Milhaud and Paul Tannery, Zeno is anxious to prove

that motion is really impossible, and that he desires to prove this because he

follows  Parmenides  in  denying  plurality;[38]  (2)  that  the  third  and  fourth

arguments  proceed  on  the  hypothesis  of  indivisibles,  a  hypothesis  which,whether adopted by the Pythagoreans or not, was certainly much advocated,

as may be seen from the treatise On Indivisible Lines attributed to Aristotle.

As  regards  the  first  two  arguments,  they  would  seem  to  be  valid  on  the

hypothesis of indivisibles, and also, without this hypothesis, to be such as  

would  be  valid  if  the  traditional  contradictions  in  infinite  numbers  were

insoluble, which they are not.

  We may conclude, therefore, that Zeno's polemic is directed against the

view that space and time consist of points and instants; and that as against the

view that a finite stretch of space or time consists of a finite number of points

and instants, his arguments are not sophisms, but perfectly valid.

  The  conclusion  which  Zeno  wishes  us  to  draw  is  that  plurality  is  a

delusion, and spaces and times are really indivisible. The other conclusion

which is possible, namely, that the number of points and instants is infinite,

was not tenable so long as the infinite was infected with contradictions. In a

fragment  which  is  not  one  of  the  four  famous  arguments  against  motion,

Zeno says:

  “If things are a many, they must be just as many as they are, and neither

more nor less. Now, if they are as many as they are, they will be finite in

number.

  “If things are a many, they will be infinite in number; for there will always

be other things between them, and others again between these. And so things

are infinite in number.”[39]

  This argument attempts to prove that, if there are many things, the number

of them must be both finite and infinite, which is impossible; hence we are to

conclude that there is only one thing. But the weak point in the argument is

the  phrase:  “If  they  are  just  as  many  as  they  are,  they  will  be  finite  in

number.” This phrase is not very clear, but it is plain that it assumes the

impossibility of definite infinite numbers. Without this assumption, which is

now  known  to  be  false,  the  arguments  of  Zeno,  though  they  suffice  (on

certain  very  reasonable  assumptions)  to  dispel  the  hypothesis  of finite  

indivisibles, do not suffice to prove that motion and change and plurality are

impossible. They are not, however, on any view, mere foolish quibbles: they

are serious arguments, raising difficulties which it has taken two thousand

years  to  answer,  and  which  even  now  are  fatal  to  the  teachings  of  most

philosophers.

  The first of Zeno's arguments is the argument of the race-course, which is

paraphrased by Burnet as follows:[40]  “You  cannot  get  to  the  end  of  a  race-course.  You  cannot  traverse  an

infinite number of points in a finite time. You must traverse the half of any

given distance before you traverse the whole, and the half of that again before

you can traverse it. This goes on ad infinitum, so that there are an infinite

number  of  points  in  any  given  space,  and  you  cannot  touch  an  infinite

number one by one in a finite time.”[41]

  Zeno appeals here, in the first place, to the fact that  any distance, however

small, can be halved. From this it follows, of course, that there must be an

infinite number of points in a line. But, Aristotle represents him as arguing,

you cannot touch an infinite number of points one by one in a finite time. The

words “one by one” are important. (1) If all the points touched are concerned,

then, though you pass through them continuously, you do not touch them

“one by one.” That is to say, after touching one, there is not another which

you touch next: no two points are next each other, but between any two there

are always an infinite number of others, which cannot be enumerated one by

one.  (2)  If,  on  the  other  hand,  only  the  successive  middle  points  are

concerned, obtained by always halving what remains of the course, then the

points are reached one by one, and, though they are infinite in number, they

are in fact all reached in a finite time. His argument to the contrary may be

supposed to appeal to the view that a finite time must consist of a finite

number of instants, in which case what he says would be perfectly true on the

assumption that the possibility of continued dichotomy is undeniable. If, on

the other hand, we suppose the argument directed against the partisans of

infinite divisibility, we must suppose it to proceed as follows:[42] “The points

given by successive halving of the distances still to be traversed are infinite in

number, and are reached in succession, each being reached a finite time later

than its predecessor; but the sum of an infinite number of finite times must be

infinite,  and  therefore  the  process  will  never  be  completed.”  It  is  very

possible that this is historically the right interpretation, but in this form the

argument  is  invalid.  If  half  the  course  takes  half  a  minute,  and  the  next 

quarter  takes a quarter of a minute, and so on, the whole course will take a

minute. The apparent force of the argument, on this interpretation, lies solely

in the mistaken supposition that there cannot be anything beyond the whole

of an infinite series, which can be seen to be false by observing that 1 is
                                              13715
beyond the whole of the infinite series ⁄, ⁄, ⁄, ⁄, …
                                              24816

  The second of Zeno's arguments is the one concerning Achilles and the

tortoise, which has achieved more notoriety than the others. It is paraphrasedby Burnet as follows:[43]

  “Achilles will never overtake the tortoise. He must first reach the place

from which the tortoise started. By that time the tortoise will have got some

way ahead. Achilles must then make up that, and again the tortoise will be

ahead. He is always coming nearer, but he never makes up to it.”[44]

  This argument is essentially the same as the previous one. It shows that, if

Achilles ever overtakes the tortoise, it must be after an infinite number of

instants have elapsed since he started. This is in fact true; but the view that an

infinite number of instants make up an infinitely long time is not true, and

therefore the conclusion that Achilles will never overtake the tortoise does

not follow.

  The third argument,[45] that of the arrow, is very interesting. The text has

been questioned. Burnet accepts the alterations of Zeller, and paraphrases

thus:

  “The arrow in flight is at rest. For, if everything is  at rest when it occupies

a space equal to itself, and what is in flight at any given moment always

occupies a space equal to itself, it cannot move.”

  But according to Prantl, the literal translation of the unemended text of

Aristotle's statement of the argument is as follows: “If everything, when it is

behaving in a uniform manner, is continually either moving or at rest, but

what is moving is always in the now, then the moving arrow is motionless.”

This form of the argument brings out its force more clearly than Burnet's

paraphrase.

  Here, if not in the first two arguments, the view that a finite part of time

consists of a finite series of successive instants seems to be assumed; at any

rate the plausibility of the argument seems to depend upon supposing that

there are consecutive instants. Throughout an instant, it is said, a moving

body is where it is: it cannot move during the instant, for that would require

that  the  instant  should  have  parts.  Thus,  suppose  we  consider  a  period

consisting  of  a  thousand  instants,  and  suppose  the  arrow  is  in  flight

throughout this period. At each of the thousand instants, the arrow is where it

is, though at the next instant it is somewhere else. It is never moving, but in

some  miraculous  way  the  change  of  position  has  to  occur between  the

instants, that is to say, not at any time whatever. This is what M. Bergson

calls the cinematographic representation of reality. The more the difficulty is

meditated,  the  more  real  it  becomes.  The  solution  lies  in  the  theory  of

continuous series: we find it hard to avoid supposing that, when the arrow isin flight, there is a next position occupied at the next moment; but in fact

there  is  no  next  position  and  no  next  moment,  and  when  once  this  is

imaginatively realised, the difficulty is seen to disappear.

  The fourth and last of Zeno's arguments is[46] the argument of the stadium.

  The argument as stated by Burnet is as follows:

          First Position. Second Position.

          A.... A .... 

          B.... B.... 

          C.... C ....

  “Half the time may be equal to double the time. Let us suppose three rows

of bodies, one of which (A) is at rest while the other two (B, C) are moving

with equal velocity in opposite directions. By the time they are all in the same

part of the course, B will have passed twice as many of the bodies in C as in

A. Therefore the time which it takes to pass C is twice as long as the time it

takes to pass A. But the time which B and C take to reach the position of A is

the same. Therefore double the time is equal to the half.”

  Gaye[47]  devoted  an  interesting  article  to  the  interpretation  of  this

argument. His translation of Aristotle's statement is as follows:

  “The fourth argument is that concerning the two rows of bodies, each row

being composed of an equal number of bodies of equal size, passing each

other  on  a  race-course  as  they  proceed  with  equal  velocity  in  opposite

directions, the one row originally occupying the space between the goal and

the middle point of the course, and the other that between the middle point

and  the  starting-post.  This,  he  thinks,  involves  the  conclusion  that  half  a

given time is equal to double the time. The fallacy of the reasoning lies in the

assumption that a body occupies an equal time in passing with equal velocity

a  body  that  is  in  motion  and  a  body  of  equal  size  that  is  at  rest, an  

assumption which is false. For instance (so runs the argument), let A A … be

the stationary bodies of equal size, B B … the bodies, equal in number and in

size to A A …, originally occupying the half of the course from the starting-

post to the middle of the A's, and C C … those originally occupying the other

half  from  the  goal  to  the  middle  of  the  A's,  equal  in  number,  size,  and

velocity, to B B … Then three consequences follow. First, as the B's and C's

pass one another, the first B reaches the last C at the same moment at which

the first C reaches the last B. Secondly, at this moment the first C has passed

all  the  A's,  whereas  the  first  B  has  passed  only  half  the  A's  and  hasconsequently occupied only half the time occupied by the first C, since each

of the two occupies an equal time in passing each A. Thirdly, at the same

moment all the B's have passed all the C's: for the first C and the first B will

simultaneously reach the opposite ends of the course, since (so says Zeno) the

time  occupied  by  the  first  C  in  passing  each  of  the  B's  is  equal  to  that

occupied by it in passing each of the A's, because an equal time is occupied

by both the first B and the first C in passing all the A's. This is the argument:

but it presupposes the aforesaid fallacious assumption.”

First Position. Second Position.

2. 3. 4. 6. 7. 8. 
      BB′B″BB′B″

    ···5.  ···

9. 10. 11. 13. 14. 15. 
      AA′A″AA′A″

    ···12.  ···16.  

17. 18. 19. 21. 22. 23. 
      CC′C″CC′C″

    ···20.  ···24.  

  This argument is not quite easy to follow, and it is only valid as against the

assumption that a finite time consists of a finite number of instants. We may

re-state it in different language. Let us suppose three drill-sergeants, A, A′,

and A″, standing in a row, while the two files of soldiers march past them in

opposite directions. At the first moment which we consider,  the three men B,

B′,  B″  in  one  row,  and  the  three  men  C,  C′,  C″  in  the  other  row,  are

respectively opposite to A, A′, and A″. At the very next moment, each row

has  moved  on,  and  now  B  and  C″  are  opposite  A′.  Thus  B  and  C″  are

opposite  each  other.  When,  then,  did  B  pass  C′?  It  must  have  been

somewhere between the two moments which we supposed consecutive, and

therefore the two moments cannot really have been consecutive. It follows

that  there  must  be  other  moments  between  any  two  given  moments,  and

therefore that there must be an infinite number of moments in any given

interval of time.

  The above difficulty, that B must have passed C′ at some time between

two consecutive moments, is a genuine one, but is not precisely the difficulty

raised by Zeno. What Zeno professes to prove is that “half of a given time is

equal to double that time.” The most intelligible explanation of the argument

known to me is that of Gaye.[48] Since, however, his explanation is not easy

to set forth shortly, I will re-state what seems to me to be the logical essenceof  Zeno's  contention.  If  we  suppose  that  time  consists  of  a  series  of

consecutive instants, and that motion consists in passing through a series of

consecutive points, then the fastest possible motion is one which, at each

instant, is at a point consecutive to that at which it was at the previous instant.

Any slower motion must be one which has intervals of rest interspersed, and

any faster motion must wholly omit some points. All this is evident from the

fact that we cannot have more than one event for each instant. But now, in the

case of our A's and B's and C's, B is opposite a fresh A every instant, and

therefore the number of A's passed gives the number of instants since the

beginning of the motion. But during the motion B has passed twice as  many

C's,  and  yet  cannot  have  passed  more  than  one  each  instant.  Hence  the

number of instants since the motion began is twice the number of A's passed,

though we previously found it was equal to this number. From this result,

Zeno's conclusion follows.

  Zeno's arguments, in some form, have afforded grounds for almost all the

theories of space and time and infinity which have been constructed from his

day to our own. We have seen that all his arguments are valid (with certain

reasonable hypotheses) on the assumption that finite spaces and times consist

of a finite number of points and instants, and that the third and fourth almost

certainly in fact proceeded on this assumption, while the first and second,

which were perhaps intended to refute the opposite assumption, were in that

case  fallacious.  We  may  therefore  escape  from  his  paradoxes  either  by

maintaining that, though space and time do consist of points and instants, the

number of them in any finite interval is infinite; or by denying that space and

time consist of points and instants at all; or lastly, by denying the reality of

space and time altogether. It would seem that Zeno himself, as a supporter of 

Parmenides, drew the last of these three possible deductions, at any rate in 

regard to time. In this a very large number of philosophers have followed 

him. Many others, like M. Bergson, have preferred to deny that space and 

time consist of points and instants. Either of these solutions will meet the 

difficulties in the form in which Zeno raised them. But, as we saw, the 

difficulties can also be met if infinite numbers are admissible. And on 

grounds which are independent of space and time, infinite numbers, and 

series in which no two terms are consecutive, must in any case be admitted. 

Consider, for example, all the fractions less than 1, arranged in order of 

magnitude.  Between any two of them, there are others, for example, the 

arithmetical mean of the two. Thus no two fractions are consecutive, and thetotal number of them is infinite. It will be found that much of what Zeno says

as regards the series of points on a line can be equally well applied to the

series of fractions. And we cannot deny that there are fractions, so that two of

the above ways of escape are closed to us. It follows that, if we are to solve

the whole class of difficulties derivable from Zeno's by analogy, we must

discover  some  tenable  theory  of  infinite  numbers.  What,  then,  are  the

difficulties which, until the last thirty years, led philosophers to the belief that

infinite numbers are impossible?

  The difficulties of infinity are of two kinds, of which the first may be

called sham, while the others involve, for their solution, a certain amount of

new  and  not  altogether  easy  thinking.  The  sham  difficulties  are  those

suggested  by  the  etymology,  and  those  suggested  by  confusion  of  the

mathematical infinite with what philosophers impertinently call the “true”

infinite. Etymologically, “infinite” should mean “having no end.” But in fact

some infinite series have ends, some have not; while some collections are

infinite without being serial, and can therefore not properly be regarded as

either endless or having ends. The series of instants from any earlier one to

any  later  one  (both  included)  is  infinite,  but  has  two  ends;  the  series  of

instants from the beginning of time to the present moment has one end, but is

infinite. Kant, in his first antinomy, seems to hold that it is harder for the past

to be infinite than for the future to be so, on the ground that the past is now

completed, and that nothing infinite can be completed. It is very difficult to

see how he can have imagined that there was any sense in this remark; but it

seems most probable that he was  thinking of the infinite as the “unended.” It

is odd that he did not see that the future too has one end at the present, and is

precisely on a level with the past. His regarding the two as different in this

respect illustrates just that kind of slavery to time which, as we agreed in

speaking of Parmenides, the true philosopher must learn to leave behind him.

  The  confusions  introduced  into  the  notions  of  philosophers  by  the  so-

called “true” infinite are curious. They see that this notion is not the same as

the  mathematical  infinite,  but  they  choose  to  believe  that  it  is  the  notion

which the mathematicians are vainly trying to reach. They therefore inform

the mathematicians, kindly but firmly, that they are mistaken in adhering to

the  “false”  infinite,  since  plainly  the  “true”  infinite  is  something  quite

different. The reply to this is that what they call the “true” infinite is a notion

totally irrelevant to the problem of the mathematical infinite, to which it has

only a fanciful and verbal analogy. So remote is it that I do not propose toconfuse the issue by even mentioning what the “true” infinite is. It is the

“false” infinite that concerns us, and we have to show that the epithet “false”

is undeserved.

  There  are,  however,  certain  genuine  difficulties  in  understanding  the

infinite,  certain  habits  of  mind  derived  from  the  consideration  of  finite

numbers, and easily extended to infinite numbers under the mistaken notion

that they represent logical necessities. For example, every number that we are

accustomed to, except 0, has another number immediately before it, from

which it results by adding 1; but the first infinite number does not have this

property. The numbers before it form an infinite series, containing all the

ordinary finite numbers, having no maximum, no last finite number, after 

which  one little step would plunge us into the infinite. If it is assumed that

the first infinite number is reached by a succession of small steps, it is easy to

show that it is self-contradictory. The first infinite number is, in fact, beyond

the whole unending series of finite numbers. “But,” it will be said, “there

cannot be anything beyond the whole of an unending series.” This, we may

point out, is the very principle upon which Zeno relies in the arguments of the

race-course and the Achilles. Take the race-course: there is the moment when

the runner still has half his distance to run, then the moment when he still has

a quarter, then when he still has an eighth, and so on in a strictly unending

series. Beyond the whole of this series is the moment when he reaches the

goal. Thus there certainly can be something beyond the whole of an unending

series. But it remains to show that this fact is only what might have been

expected.

  The  difficulty,  like  most  of  the  vaguer  difficulties  besetting  the

mathematical infinite, is derived, I think, from the more or less unconscious

operation of the idea of counting. If you set to work to count the terms in an

infinite collection, you will never have completed your task. Thus, in the case

of the runner, if half, three-quarters, seven-eighths, and so on of the course

were marked, and the runner was not allowed to pass any of the marks until

the umpire said “Now,” then Zeno's conclusion would be true in practice, and

he would never reach the goal.

  But it is not essential to the existence of a collection, or even to knowledge

and reasoning concerning it, that we should be able to pass its terms in review

one by one. This may be seen in the case of finite collections; we can speak

of “mankind” or “the human race,” though many of the individuals in this

collection are not personally  known to us. We can do this because we knowof various characteristics which every individual has if he belongs to the

collection, and not if he does not. And exactly the same happens in the case

of infinite collections: they may be known by their characteristics although

their  terms  cannot  be  enumerated.  In  this  sense,  an  unending  series  may

nevertheless form a whole, and there may be new terms beyond the whole of

it.

  Some  purely  arithmetical  peculiarities  of  infinite  numbers  have  also

caused perplexity. For instance, an infinite number is not increased by adding

one  to  it,  or  by  doubling  it.  Such  peculiarities  have  seemed  to  many  to

contradict logic, but in fact they only contradict confirmed mental habits. The

whole  difficulty  of  the  subject  lies  in  the  necessity  of  thinking  in  an

unfamiliar way, and in realising that many properties which we have thought

inherent  in  number  are  in  fact  peculiar  to  finite  numbers.  If  this  is

remembered,  the  positive  theory  of  infinity,  which  will  occupy  the next

lecture, will not be found so difficult as it is to those who cling obstinately to

the prejudices instilled by the arithmetic which is learnt in childhood.

                                 LECTURE VII

      THE POSITIVE THEORY OF INFINITY

THE positive theory of infinity, and the general theory of number to which it

has given rise, are among the triumphs of scientific method in philosophy,

and  are  therefore  specially  suitable  for  illustrating  the  logical-analytic

character  of  that  method.  The  work  in  this  subject  has  been  done  by

mathematicians, and its results can be expressed in mathematical symbolism.

Why,  then,  it  may  be  said,  should  the  subject  be  regarded  as  philosophy

rather than as mathematics? This raises a difficult question, partly concerned

with the use of words, but partly also of real importance in understanding the

function of philosophy. Every subject-matter, it would seem, can give rise to

philosophical  investigations  as  well  as  to  the  appropriate  science,  the

difference between the two treatments being in the direction of movement

and  in  the  kind  of  truths  which  it  is  sought  to  establish.  In  the  special

sciences, when they have become fully developed, the movement is forward

and synthetic, from the simpler to the more complex. But in philosophy we

follow the inverse direction: from the complex and relatively concrete we

proceed towards the simple and abstract by means of analysis, seeking, in the

process, to eliminate the particularity of the original subject-matter, and to

confine our attention entirely to the logical form of the facts concerned.

  Between philosophy and pure mathematics there is a certain affinity, in the

fact that both are general and a priori. Neither of them asserts propositions

which, like those of history and geography, depend upon the actual concrete

facts being just what they are. We may illustrate this characteristic by means

of Leibniz's conception of many possible worlds, of which one only is actual.

In  all  the  many  possible  worlds,  philosophy  and  mathematics  will  be  the

same; the differences will only be in respect of those particular facts which

are chronicled by the descriptive sciences. Any quality, therefore, by which

our actual world is distinguished from other abstractly possible worlds, must

be  ignored  by  mathematics  and  philosophy  alike.  Mathematics  and

philosophy differ, however, in their manner of treating the general properties

in  which  all  possible  worlds  agree;  for  while  mathematics,  starting  from

comparatively simple propositions, seeks to build up more and more complex

results  by  deductive  synthesis,  philosophy,  starting  from  data  which  are

common knowledge, seeks to purify and generalise them into the simpleststatements  of  abstract  form  that  can  be  obtained  from  them  by  logical

analysis.

  The difference between philosophy and mathematics may be illustrated by

our present problem, namely, the nature of number. Both start from certain

facts about numbers which are evident to inspection. But mathematics uses

these facts to deduce more and more complicated theorems, while philosophy

seeks,  by  analysis,  to  go  behind  these  facts  to  others,  simpler,  more

fundamental, and inherently more fitted to form the premisses of the science

of  arithmetic.  The  question,  “What  is  a  number?”  is  the  pre-eminent

philosophic question in this subject, but it is one which the mathematician as

such need not ask, provided he knows enough of the properties  of numbers

to enable him to deduce his theorems. We, since our object is philosophical,

must grapple with the philosopher's question. The answer to the question,

“What is a number?” which we shall reach in this lecture, will be found to

give also, by implication, the answer to the difficulties of infinity which we

considered in the previous lecture.

  The question “What is a number?” is one which, until quite recent times,

was never considered in the kind of way that is capable of yielding a precise

answer.  Philosophers  were  content  with  some  vague  dictum  such  as,

“Number is unity in plurality.” A typical definition of the kind that contented

philosophers is the following from Sigwart's Logic (§ 66, section 3): “Every

number is not merely a plurality, but a plurality thought as held together and

closed, and to that extent as a unity.” Now there is in such definitions a very

elementary blunder, of the same kind that would be committed if we said

“yellow is a flower” because some flowers are yellow. Take, for example, the

number 3. A single collection of three things might conceivably be described

as “a plurality thought as held together and closed, and to that extent as a

unity”; but a collection of three things is not the number 3. The number 3 is

something which all collections of three things have in common, but is not

itself a collection of three things. The definition, therefore, apart from any

other  defects,  has  failed  to  reach  the  necessary  degree  of  abstraction:  the

number 3 is something more abstract than any collection of three things.

  Such  vague  philosophic  definitions,  however,  remained  inoperative

because of their very vagueness. What most men who thought about numbers

really  had  in  mind  was  that  numbers  are  the  result  of counting.  “On  the

consciousness of the law of counting,” says Sigwart  at the beginning of his

discussion of number, “rests the possibility of spontaneously prolonging theseries of numbers ad infinitum.” It is this view of number as generated by

counting  which  has  been  the  chief  psychological  obstacle  to  the

understanding  of  infinite  numbers.  Counting,  because  it  is  familiar,  is

erroneously supposed to be simple, whereas it is in fact a highly complex

process, which has no meaning unless the numbers reached in counting have

some significance independent of the process by which they are reached. And

infinite numbers cannot be reached at all in this way. The mistake is of the

same kind as if cows were defined as what can be bought from a cattle-

merchant. To a person who knew several cattle-merchants, but had never

seen a cow, this might seem an admirable definition. But if in his travels he

came across a herd of wild cows, he would have to declare that they were not

cows at all, because no cattle-merchant could sell them. So infinite numbers

were declared not to be numbers at all, because they could not be reached by

counting.

  It will be worth while to consider for a moment what counting actually is.

We count a set of objects when we let our attention pass from one to another,

until we have attended once to each, saying the names of the numbers in

order with each successive act of attention. The last number named in this

process is the number of the objects, and therefore counting is a method of

finding out what the number of the objects is. But this operation is really a

very complicated one, and those who imagine that it is the logical source of

number show themselves remarkably incapable of analysis. In the first place,

when we say “one, two, three …” as we count, we cannot be said to be

discovering  the  number  of  the  objects  counted  unless  we  attach  some 

meaning  to the words one, two, three, … A child may learn to know these

words in order, and to repeat them correctly like the letters of the alphabet,

without attaching any meaning to them. Such a child may count correctly

from the point of view of a grown-up listener, without having any idea of

numbers at all. The operation of counting, in fact, can only be intelligently

performed by a person who already has some idea what the numbers are; and

from this it follows that counting does not give the logical basis of number.

  Again, how do we know that the last number reached in the process of

counting is the number of the objects counted? This is just one of those facts

that are too familiar for their significance to be realised; but those who wish

to be logicians must acquire the habit of dwelling upon such facts. There are

two propositions involved in this fact: first, that the number of numbers from

1 up to any given number is that given number—for instance, the number ofnumbers from 1 to 100 is a hundred; secondly, that if a set of numbers can be

used as names of a set of objects, each number occurring only once, then the

number of numbers used as names is the same as the number of objects. The

first of these propositions is capable of an easy arithmetical proof so long as

finite numbers are concerned; but with infinite numbers, after the first, it

ceases to be true. The second proposition remains true, and is in fact, as we

shall see, an immediate consequence of the definition of number. But owing

to  the  falsehood  of  the  first  proposition  where  infinite  numbers  are

concerned, counting, even if it were practically possible, would not be a valid

method  of  discovering  the  number  of  terms  in  an  infinite  collection,  and

would in fact give different results according to the manner in which it was

carried out.

  There are two respects in which the infinite numbers that are known differ

from finite numbers: first, infinite numbers have, while finite numbers have

not, a property which I shall call reflexiveness; secondly, finite numbers have,

while infinite numbers have not, a property which I shall call inductiveness.

Let us consider these two properties successively.

  (1) Reflexiveness.—A  number  is  said  to  be reflexive  when  it  is  not

increased by adding 1 to it. It follows at once that any finite number can be

added to a reflexive number without increasing it. This property of infinite

numbers  was  always  thought,  until  recently,  to  be  self-contradictory;  but

through the work of Georg Cantor it has come to be recognised that, though

at first astonishing, it is no more self-contradictory than the fact that people at

the antipodes do not tumble off. In virtue of this property, given any infinite

collection of objects, any finite number of objects can be added or taken

away without increasing or diminishing the number of the collection. Even an

infinite number of objects may, under certain conditions, be added or taken

away without altering the number. This may be made clearer by the help of

some examples.

  Imagine all the natural numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, … to be written down in a row,

and immediately beneath them write down the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, …, so that

1 is under 0, 2 is under 1, and so on. Then every number in the top row has a

number directly under it in the bottom row, and no number occurs twice in

either row. It follows that the number of numbers in the two rows must be the

same. But all the numbers that occur in the bottom row also occur in the top  

row, and one more, namely 0; thus the number of terms in the top row is

obtained by adding one to the number of the bottom row. So long, therefore,