that suggestion 

Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair 

And make my seated heart knock at my ribs 

Against the use of nature.

  The whistle of a steam-engine could hardly have a stronger effect than

this. A very intense emotion will often bring with it—especially where some

future  action  or  some  undecided  issue  is  involved—powerful  compelling

images which may determine the whole course of life, sweeping aside all

contrary solicitations to the will by their capacity for exclusively possessing

the  mind.  And  in  all  cases  where  images,  originally  recognized  as  such,

gradually pass into hallucinations, there must be just that "force or liveliness"

which is supposed to be always absent from images. The cases of dreams and

fever-delirium are as hard to adjust to Professor Stout's modified criterion as

to Hume's. I conclude therefore that the test of liveliness, however applicable

in  ordinary  instances,  cannot  be  used  to  define  the  differences  between

sensations and images.

  (2)  We  might  attempt  to  distinguish  images  from  sensations  by  our

absence of belief in the "physical reality" of images. When we are aware that

what we are experiencing is an image, we do not give it the kind of belief that

we should give to a sensation: we do not think that it has the same power of

producing knowledge of the "external world." Images are "imaginary"; in

SOME sense they are "unreal." But this difference is hard to analyse or state

correctly. What we call the "unreality" of images requires interpretation it

cannot mean what would be expressed by saying "there's no such thing."

Images are just as truly part of the actual world as sensations are. All that we

really  mean  by  calling  an  image  "unreal"  is  that  it  does  not  have  the

concomitants which it would have if it were a sensation. When we call up a

visual image of a chair, we do not attempt to sit in it, because we know that,

like Macbeth's dagger, it is not "sensible to feeling as to sight"—i.e. it does

not have the correlations with tactile sensations which it would have if it were

a visual sensation and not merely a visual image. But this means that the so-

called "unreality" of images consists merely in their not obeying the laws of

physics, and thus brings us back to the causal distinction between images and

sensations.

  This view is confirmed by the fact that we only feel images to be "unreal"

when we already know them to be images. Images cannot be defined by theFEELING of unreality, because when we falsely believe an image to be a

sensation, as in the case of dreams, it FEELS just as real as if it were a

sensation. Our feeling of unreality results from our having already realized

that we are dealing with an image, and cannot therefore be the definition of

what we mean by an image. As soon as an image begins to deceive us as to

its status, it also deceives us as to its correlations, which are what we mean by

its "reality."

  (3)  This  brings  us  to  the  third  mode  of  distinguishing  images  from

sensations, namely, by their causes and effects. I believe this to be the only

valid ground of distinction. James, in the passage about the mental fire which

won't burn real sticks, distinguishes images by their effects, but I think the

more reliable distinction is by their causes. Professor Stout (loc. cit., p. 127)

says: "One characteristic mark of what we agree in calling sensation is its

mode of production. It is caused by what we call a STIMULUS. A stimulus is

always some condition external to the nervous system itself and operating

upon it." I think that this is the correct view, and that the distinction between

images and sensations can only be made by taking account of their causation.

Sensations come through sense-organs, while images do not. We cannot have

visual sensations in the dark, or with our eyes shut, but we can very well have

visual  images  under  these  circumstances.  Accordingly  images  have  been

defined  as  "centrally  excited  sensations,"  i.e.  sensations  which  have  their

physiological cause in the brain only, not also in the sense-organs and the

nerves  that  run  from  the  sense-organs  to  the  brain.  I  think  the  phrase

"centrally excited sensations" assumes more than is necessary, since it takes it

for granted that an image must have a proximate physiological cause. This is

probably true, but it is an hypothesis, and for our purposes an unnecessary

one. It would seem to fit better with what we can immediately observe if we

were to say that an image is occasioned, through association, by a sensation

or another image, in other words that it has a mnemic cause—which does not

prevent it from also having a physical cause. And I think it will be found that

the causation of an image always proceeds according to mnemic laws, i.e.

that it is governed by habit and past experience. If you listen to a man playing

the pianola without looking at him, you will have images of his hands on the

keys as if he were playing the piano; if you suddenly look at him while you

are absorbed in the music, you will experience a shock of surprise when you

notice that his hands are not touching the notes. Your image of his hands isdue to the many times that you have heard similar sounds and at the same

time seen the player's hands on the piano. When habit and past experience

play this part, we are in the region of mnemic as opposed to ordinary physical

causation.  And  I  think  that,  if  we  could  regard  as  ultimately  valid  the

difference  between  physical  and  mnemic  causation,  we  could  distinguish

images from sensations as having mnemic causes, though they may also have

physical  causes.  Sensations,  on  the  other  hand,  will  only  have  physical

causes.

  However  this  may  be,  the  practically  effective  distinction  between

sensations  and  images  is  that  in  the  causation  of  sensations,  but  not  of

images, the stimulation of nerves carrying an effect into the brain, usually

from the surface of the body, plays an essential part. And this accounts for

the fact that images and sensations cannot always be distinguished by their

intrinsic nature.

  Images also differ from sensations as regards their effects. Sensations, as a

rule, have both physical and mental effects. As you watch the train you meant

to catch leaving the station, there are both the successive positions of the train

(physical  effects)  and  the  successive  waves  of  fury  and  disappointment

(mental effects). Images, on the contrary, though they MAY produce bodily

movements, do so according to mnemic laws, not according to the laws of

physics. All their effects, of whatever nature, follow mnemic laws. But this

difference is less suitable for definition than the difference as to causes.

  Professor  Watson,  as  a  logical  carrying-out  of  his  behaviourist  theory,

denies altogether that there are any observable phenomena such as images are

supposed to be. He replaces them all by faint sensations, and especially by

pronunciation  of  words  sotto  voce.  When  we  "think"  of  a  table  (say),  as

opposed to seeing it, what happens, according to him, is usually that we are

making small movements of the throat and tongue such as would lead to our

uttering the word "table" if they were more pronounced. I shall consider his

view again in connection with words; for the present I am only concerned to

combat his denial of images. This denial is set forth both in his book on

"Behavior" and in an article called "Image and Affection in Behavior" in the

"Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods," vol. x (July,

1913). It seems to me that in this matter he has been betrayed into denying

plain facts in the interests of a theory, namely, the supposed impossibility of

introspection. I dealt with the theory in Lecture VI; for the present I wish toreinforce the view that the facts are undeniable.

  Images  are  of  various  sorts,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  sensations

which they copy. Images of bodily movements, such as we have when we

imagine moving an arm or, on a smaller scale, pronouncing a word, might

possibly be explained away on Professor Watson's lines, as really consisting

in small incipient movements such as, if magnified and prolonged, would be

the movements we are said to be imagining. Whether this is the case or not

might even be decided experimentally. If there were a delicate instrument for

recording small movements in the mouth and throat, we might place such an

instrument in a person's mouth and then tell him to recite a poem to himself,

as far as possible only in imagination. I should not be at all surprised if it

were found that actual small movements take place while he is "mentally"

saying  over  the  verses.  The  point  is  important,  because  what  is  called

"thought" consists mainly (though I think not wholly) of inner speech. If

Professor  Watson  is  right  as  regards  inner  speech,  this  whole  region  is

transferred from imagination to sensation. But since the question is capable

of experimental decision, it would be gratuitous rashness to offer an opinion

while that decision is lacking.

  But visual and auditory images are much more difficult to deal with in this

way, because they lack the connection with physical events in the outer world

which belongs to visual and auditory sensations. Suppose, for example, that I

am sitting in my room, in which there is an empty arm-chair. I shut my eyes,

and call up a visual image of a friend sitting in the arm-chair. If I thrust my

image into the world of physics, it contradicts all the usual physical laws. My

friend reached the chair without coming in at the door in the usual way;

subsequent inquiry will show that he was somewhere else at the moment. If

regarded as a sensation, my image has all the marks of the supernatural. My

image, therefore, is regarded as an event in me, not as having that position in

the orderly happenings of the public world that belongs to sensations. By

saying  that  it  is  an  event  in  me,  we  leave  it  possible  that  it  may  be

PHYSIOLOGICALLY caused: its privacy may be only due to its connection

with my body. But in any case it is not a public event, like an actual person

walking in at the door and sitting down in my chair. And it cannot, like inner

speech, be regarded as a SMALL sensation, since it occupies just as large an

area in my visual field as the actual sensation would do.

  Professor  Watson  says:  "I  should  throw  out  imagery  altogether  andattempt to show that all natural thought goes on in terms of sensori-motor

processes  in  the  larynx."  This  view  seems  to  me  flatly  to  contradict

experience. If you try to persuade any uneducated person that she cannot call

up a visual picture of a friend sitting in a chair, but can only use words

describing what such an occurrence would be like, she will conclude that you

are mad. (This statement is based upon experiment.) Galton, as every one

knows, investigated visual imagery, and found that education tends to kill it:

the Fellows of the Royal Society turned out to have much less of it than their

wives.  I  see  no  reason  to  doubt  his  conclusion  that  the  habit  of  abstract

pursuits  makes  learned  men  much  inferior  to  the  average  in  power  of

visualizing,  and  much  more  exclusively  occupied  with  words  in  their

"thinking." And Professor Watson is a very learned man.

  I shall henceforth assume that the existence of images is admitted, and that

they are to be distinguished from sensations by their causes, as well as, in a

lesser  degree,  by  their  effects.  In  their  intrinsic  nature,  though  they  often

differ from sensations by being more dim or vague or faint, yet they do not

always or universally differ from sensations in any way that can be used for

defining them. Their privacy need form no bar to the scientific study of them,

any more than the privacy of bodily sensations does. Bodily sensations are

admitted  by  even  the  most  severe  critics  of  introspection,  although,  like

images, they can only be observed by one observer. It must be admitted,

however, that the laws of the appearance and disappearance of images are

little known and difficult to discover, because we are not assisted, as in the

case of sensations, by our knowledge of the physical world.

  There remains one very important point concerning images, which will

occupy  us  much  hereafter,  and  that  is,  their  resemblance  to  previous

sensations. They are said to be "copies" of sensations, always as regards the

simple qualities that enter into them, though not always as regards the manner

in  which  these  are  put  together.  It  is  generally  believed  that  we  cannot

imagine a shade of colour that we have never seen, or a sound that we have

never heard. On this subject Hume is the classic. He says, in the definitions

already quoted:

  "Those perceptions, which enter with most force and violence, we may

name IMPRESSIONS; and under this name I comprehend all our sensations,

passions and emotions, as they make their first appearance in the soul. By

IDEAS I mean the faint images of these in thinking and reasoning."  He next explains the difference between simple and complex ideas, and

explains  that  a  complex  idea  may  occur  without  any  similar  complex

impression. But as regards simple ideas, he states that "every simple idea has

a  simple  impression,  which  resembles  it,  and  every  simple  impression  a

correspondent idea." He goes on to enunciate the general principle "that all

our  simple  ideas  in  their  first  appearance  are  derived  from  simple

impressions,  which  are  correspondent  to  them,  and  which  they  exactly

represent" ("Treatise of Human Nature," Part I, Section I).

  It is this fact, that images resemble antecedent sensations, which enables

us to call them images "of" this or that. For the understanding of memory,

and  of  knowledge  generally,  the  recognizable  resemblance  of  images  and

sensations is of fundamental importance.

  There are difficulties in establishing Hume's principles, and doubts as to

whether  it  is  exactly  true.  Indeed,  he  himself  signalized  an  exception

immediately after stating his maxim. Nevertheless, it is impossible to doubt

that in the main simple images are copies of similar simple sensations which

have occurred earlier, and that the same is true of complex images in all cases

of  memory  as  opposed  to  mere  imagination.  Our  power  of  acting  with

reference to what is sensibly absent is largely due to this characteristic of

images, although, as education advances, images tend to be more and more

replaced by words. We shall have much to say in the next two lectures on the

subject of images as copies of sensations. What has been said now is merely

by way of reminder that this is their most notable characteristic.

  I  am  by  no  means  confident  that  the  distinction  between  images  and

sensations  is  ultimately  valid,  and  I  should  be  glad  to  be  convinced  that

images can be reduced to sensations of a peculiar kind. I think it is clear,

however, that, at any rate in the case of auditory and visual images, they do

differ  from  ordinary  auditory  and  visual  sensations,  and  therefore  form  a

recognizable class of occurrences, even if it should prove that they can be

regarded as a sub-class of sensations. This is all that is necessary to validate

the use of images to be made in the sequel.

                              LECTURE IX. MEMORY

  Memory, which we are to consider to-day, introduces us to knowledge in

one of its forms. The analysis of knowledge will occupy us until the end of

the thirteenth lecture, and is the most difficult part of our whole enterprise.

  I do not myself believe that the analysis of knowledge can be effected

entirely  by  means  of  purely  external  observation,  such  as  behaviourists

employ. I shall discuss this question in later lectures. In the present lecture I

shall attempt the analysis of memory-knowledge, both as an introduction to

the problem of knowledge in general, and because memory, in some form, is

presupposed in almost all other knowledge. Sensation, we decided, is not a

form of knowledge. It might, however, have been expected that we should

begin our discussion of knowledge with PERCEPTION, i.e. with that integral

experience of things in the environment, out of which sensation is extracted

by psychological analysis. What is called perception differs from sensation

by  the  fact  that  the  sensational  ingredients  bring  up  habitual  associates—

images  and  expectations  of  their  usual  correlates—all  of  which  are

subjectively  indistinguishable  from  the  sensation.  The  FACT  of  past

experience is essential in producing this filling-out of sensation, but not the

RECOLLECTION  of  past  experience.  The  non-sensational  elements  in

perception  can  be  wholly  explained  as  the  result  of  habit,  produced  by

frequent correlations. Perception, according to our definition in Lecture VII,

is no more a form of knowledge than sensation is, except in so far as it

involves expectations. The purely psychological problems which it raises are

not  very  difficult,  though  they  have  sometimes  been  rendered  artificially

obscure  by  unwillingness  to  admit  the  fallibility  of  the  non-sensational

elements of perception. On the other hand, memory raises many difficult and

very important problems, which it is necessary to consider at the first possible

moment.

  One reason for treating memory at this early stage is that it seems to be

involved in the fact that images are recognized as "copies" of past sensible

experience. In the preceding lecture I alluded to Hume's principle "that all our

simple ideas in their first appearance are derived from simple impressions,

which are correspondent to them, and which they exactly represent." Whether

or not this principle is liable to exceptions, everyone would agree that is has a

broad  measure  of  truth,  though  the  word  "exactly"  might  seem  anoverstatement,  and  it  might  seem  more  correct  to  say  that  ideas

APPROXIMATELY represent impressions. Such modifications of Hume's

principle, however, do not affect the problem which I wish to present for your

consideration, namely: Why do we believe that images are, sometimes or

always,  approximately  or  exactly,  copies  of  sensations?  What  sort  of

evidence  is  there?  And  what  sort  of  evidence  is  logically  possible?  The

difficulty of this question arises through the fact that the sensation which an

image is supposed to copy is in the past when the image exists, and can

therefore only be known by memory, while, on the other hand, memory of

past sensations seems only possible by means of present images. How, then,

are  we  to  find  any  way  of  comparing  the  present  image  and  the  past

sensation? The problem is just as acute if we say that images differ from their

prototypes as if we say that they resemble them; it is the very possibility of

comparison that is hard to understand.* We think we can know that they are

alike or different, but we cannot bring them together in one experience and

compare them. To deal with this problem, we must have a theory of memory.

In this way the whole status of images as "copies" is bound up with the

analysis of memory.

* How, for example, can we obtain such knowledge as the 

following: "If we look at, say, a red nose and perceive it, 

and after a little while ekphore, its memory-image, we note 

immediately how unlike, in its likeness, this memory-image 

is to the original perception" (A. Wohlgemuth, "On the 

Feelings and their Neural Correlate with an Examination of 

the Nature of Pain," "Journal of Psychology," vol. viii, 

part iv, June, 1917).

  In investigating memory-beliefs, there are certain points which must be

borne in mind. In the first place, everything constituting a memory-belief is

happening now, not in that past time to which the belief is said to refer. It is

not logically necessary to the existence of a memory-belief that the event

remembered should have occurred, or even that the past should have existed

at all. There is no logical impossibility in the hypothesis that the world sprang

into being five minutes ago, exactly as it then was, with a population that

"remembered"  a  wholly  unreal  past.  There  is  no  logically  necessary

connection  between  events  at  different  times;  therefore  nothing  that  is

happening now or will happen in the future can disprove the hypothesis thatthe  world  began  five  minutes  ago.  Hence  the  occurrences  which  are

CALLED knowledge of the past are logically independent of the past; they

are wholly analysable into present contents, which might, theoretically, be

just what they are even if no past had existed.

  I  am  not  suggesting  that  the  non-existence  of  the  past  should  be

entertained  as  a  serious  hypothesis.  Like  all  sceptical  hypotheses,  it  is

logically tenable, but uninteresting. All that I am doing is to use its logical

tenability as a help in the analysis of what occurs when we remember.

  In the second place, images without beliefs are insufficient to constitute

memory;  and  habits  are  still  more  insufficient.  The  behaviourist,  who

attempts to make psychology a record of behaviour, has to trust his memory

in making the record. "Habit" is a concept involving the occurrence of similar

events at different times; if the behaviourist feels confident that there is such

a phenomenon as habit, that can only be because he trusts his memory, when

it assures him that there have been other times. And the same applies to

images. If we are to know as it is supposed we do—that images are "copies,"

accurate  or  inaccurate,  of  past  events,  something  more  than  the  mere

occurrence of images must go to constitute this knowledge. For their mere

occurrence, by itself, would not suggest any connection with anything that

had happened before.

  Can we constitute memory out of images together with suitable beliefs?

We may take it that memory-images, when they occur in true memory, are (a)

known  to  be  copies,  (b)  sometimes  known  to  be  imperfect  copies  (cf.

footnote on previous page). How is it possible to know that a memory-image

is  an  imperfect  copy,  without  having  a  more  accurate  copy  by  which  to

replace it? This would SEEM to suggest that we have a way of knowing the

past which is independent of images, by means of which we can criticize

image-memories. But I do not think such an inference is warranted.

  What results, formally, from our knowledge of the past through images of

which  we  recognize  the  inaccuracy,  is  that  such  images  must  have  two

characteristics by which we can arrange them in two series, of which one

corresponds to the more or less remote period in the past to which they refer,

and the other to our greater or less confidence in their accuracy. We will take

the second of these points first.

  Our confidence or lack of confidence in the accuracy of a memory-image

must, in fundamental cases, be based upon a characteristic of the image itself,since we cannot evoke the past bodily and compare it with the present image.

It might be suggested that vagueness is the required characteristic, but I do

not think this is the case. We sometimes have images that are by no means

peculiarly  vague,  which  yet  we  do  not  trust—for  example,  under  the

influence  of  fatigue  we  may  see  a  friend's  face  vividly  and  clearly,  but

horribly distorted. In such a case we distrust our image in spite of its being

unusually clear. I think the characteristic by which we distinguish the images

we  trust  is  the  feeling  of  FAMILIARITY  that  accompanies  them.  Some

images, like some sensations, feel very familiar, while others feel strange.

Familiarity is a feeling capable of degrees. In an image of a well-known face,

for  example,  some  parts  may  feel  more  familiar  than  others;  when  this

happens, we have more belief in the accuracy of the familiar parts than in that

of the unfamiliar parts. I think it is by this means that we become critical of

images, not by some imageless memory with which we compare them. I shall

return to the consideration of familiarity shortly.

  I come now to the other characteristic which memory-images must have in

order  to  account  for  our  knowledge  of  the  past.  They  must  have  some

characteristic which makes us regard them as referring to more or less remote

portions  of  the  past.  That  is  to  say  if  we  suppose  that  A  is  the  event

remembered, B the remembering, and t the interval of time between A and B,

there  must  be  some  characteristic  of  B  which  is  capable  of  degrees,  and

which, in accurately dated memories, varies as t varies. It may increase as t

increases, or diminish as t increases. The question which of these occurs is

not of any importance for the theoretic serviceability of the characteristic in

question.

  In actual fact, there are doubtless various factors that concur in giving us

the feeling of greater or less remoteness in some remembered event. There

may be a specific feeling which could be called the feeling of "pastness,"

especially where immediate memory is concerned. But apart from this, there

are other marks. One of these is context. A recent memory has, usually, more

context  than  a  more  distant  one.  When  a  remembered  event  has  a

remembered context, this may occur in two ways, either (a) by successive

images in the same order as their prototypes, or (b) by remembering a whole

process simultaneously, in the same way in which a present process may be

apprehended,  through  akoluthic  sensations  which,  by  fading,  acquire  the

mark  of  just-pastness  in  an  increasing  degree  as  they  fade,  and  are  thusplaced in a series while all sensibly present. It will be context in this second

sense, more specially, that will give us a sense of the nearness or remoteness

of a remembered event.

  There is, of course, a difference between knowing the temporal relation of

a  remembered  event  to  the  present,  and  knowing  the  time-order  of  two

remembered events. Very often our knowledge of the temporal relation of a

remembered event to the present is inferred from its temporal relations to

other remembered events. It would seem that only rather recent events can be

placed at all accurately by means of feelings giving their temporal relation to

the present, but it is clear that such feelings must play an essential part in the

process of dating remembered events.

  We may say, then, that images are regarded by us as more or less accurate

copies of past occurrences because they come to us with two sorts of feelings:

(1) Those that may be called feelings of familiarity; (2) those that may be

collected together as feelings giving a sense of pastness. The first lead us to

trust our memories, the second to assign places to them in the time-order.

  We  have  now  to  analyse  the  memory-belief,  as  opposed  to  the

characteristics of images which lead us to base memory-beliefs upon them.

  If we had retained the "subject" or "act" in knowledge, the whole problem

of memory would have been comparatively simple. We could then have said

that remembering is a direct relation between the present act or subject and

the past occurrence remembered: the act of remembering is present, though

its  object  is  past.  But  the  rejection  of  the  subject  renders  some  more

complicated theory necessary. Remembering has to be a present occurrence

in some way resembling, or related to, what is remembered. And it is difficult

to find any ground, except a pragmatic one, for supposing that memory is not

sheer delusion, if, as seems to be the case, there is not, apart from memory,

any way of ascertaining that there really was a past occurrence having the

required  relation  to  our  present  remembering.  What,  if  we  followed

Meinong's terminology, we should call the "object" in memory, i.e. the past

event which we are said to be remembering, is unpleasantly remote from the

"content," i.e. the present mental occurrence in remembering. There is an

awkward gulf between the two, which raises difficulties for the theory of

knowledge.  But  we  must  not  falsify  observation  to  avoid  theoretical

difficulties. For the present, therefore, let us forget these problems, and try to

discover what actually occurs in memory.  Some points may be taken as fixed, and such as any theory of memory

must arrive at. In this case, as in most others, what may be taken as certain in

advance  is  rather  vague.  The  study  of  any  topic  is  like  the  continued

observation of an object which is approaching us along a road: what is certain

to begin with is the quite vague knowledge that there is SOME object on the

road.  If  you  attempt  to  be  less  vague,  and  to  assert  that  the  object  is  an

elephant, or a man, or a mad dog, you run a risk of error; but the purpose of

continued  observation  is  to  enable  you  to  arrive  at  such  more  precise

knowledge.  In  like  manner,  in  the  study  of  memory,  the  certainties  with

which you begin are very vague, and the more precise propositions at which

you try to arrive are less certain than the hazy data from which you set out.

Nevertheless, in spite of the risk of error, precision is the goal at which we

must aim.

  The first of our vague but indubitable data is that there is knowledge of the

past. We do not yet know with any precision what we mean by "knowledge,"

and we must admit that in any given instance our memory may be at fault.

Nevertheless, whatever a sceptic might urge in theory, we cannot practically

doubt that we got up this morning, that we did various things yesterday, that a

great war has been taking place, and so on. How far our knowledge of the

past is due to memory, and how far to other sources, is of course a matter to

be  investigated,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  memory  forms  an

indispensable part of our knowledge of the past.

  The second datum is that we certainly have more capacity for knowing the

past than for knowing the future. We know some things about the future, for

example  what  eclipses  there  will  be;  but  this  knowledge  is  a  matter  of

elaborate calculation and inference, whereas some of our knowledge of the

past comes to us without effort, in the same sort of immediate way in which

we acquire knowledge of occurrences in our present environment. We might

provisionally, though perhaps not quite correctly, define "memory" as that

way of knowing about the past which has no analogue in our knowledge of

the future; such a definition would at least serve to mark the problem with

which we are concerned, though some expectations may deserve to rank with

memory as regards immediacy.

  A third point, perhaps not quite so certain as our previous two, is that the

truth of memory cannot be wholly practical, as pragmatists wish all truth to

be. It seems clear that some of the things I remember are trivial and withoutany visible importance for the future, but that my memory is true (or false) in

virtue of a past event, not in virtue of any future consequences of my belief.

The definition of truth as the correspondence between beliefs and facts seems

peculiarly evident in the case of memory, as against not only the pragmatist

definition  but  also  the  idealist  definition  by  means  of  coherence.  These

considerations, however, are taking us away from psychology, to which we

must now return.

  It is important not to confuse the two forms of memory which Bergson

distinguishes in the second chapter of his "Matter and Memory," namely the

sort  that  consists  of  habit,  and  the  sort  that  consists  of  independent

recollection. He gives the instance of learning a lesson by heart: when I know

it by heart I am said to "remember" it, but this merely means that I have

acquired certain habits; on the other hand, my recollection of (say) the second

time I read the lesson while I was learning it is the recollection of a unique

event, which occurred only once. The recollection of a unique event cannot,

so Bergson contends, be wholly constituted by habit, and is in fact something

radically different from the memory which is habit. The recollection alone is

true memory. This distinction is vital to the understanding of memory. But it

is not so easy to carry out in practice as it is to draw in theory. Habit is a very

intrusive feature of our mental life, and is often present where at first sight it

seems not to be. There is, for example, a habit of remembering a unique

event. When we have once described the event, the words we have used

easily  become  habitual.  We  may  even  have  used  words  to  describe  it  to

ourselves while it was happening; in that case, the habit of these words may

fulfil the function of Bergson's true memory, while in reality it is nothing but

habit-memory. A gramophone, by the help of suitable records, might relate to

us the incidents of its past; and people are not so different from gramophones

as they like to believe.

  In  spite,  however,  of  a  difficulty  in  distinguishing  the  two  forms  of

memory in practice, there can be no doubt that both forms exist. I can set to

work now to remember things I never remembered before, such as what I had

to  eat  for  breakfast  this  morning,  and  it  can  hardly  be  wholly  habit  that

enables me to do this. It is this sort of occurrence that constitutes the essence

of memory Until we have analysed what happens in such a case as this, we

have not succeeded in understanding memory.

  The sort of memory with which we are here concerned is the sort which isa form of knowledge. Whether knowledge itself is reducible to habit is a

question to which I shall return in a later lecture; for the present I am only

anxious to point out that, whatever the true analysis of knowledge may be,

knowledge of past occurrences is not proved by behaviour which is due to

past experience. The fact that a man can recite a poem does not show that he

remembers  any  previous  occasion  on  which  he  has  recited  or  read  it.

Similarly, the performances of animals in getting out of cages or mazes to

which they are accustomed do not prove that they remember having been in

the same situation before. Arguments in favour of (for example) memory in

plants  are  only  arguments  in  favour  of  habit-memory,  not  of  knowledge-

memory. Samuel Butler's arguments in favour of the view that an animal

remembers something of the lives of its ancestors* are, when examined, only

arguments in favour of habit-memory. Semon's two books, mentioned in an

earlier  lecture,  do  not  touch  knowledge-memory  at  all  closely.  They  give

laws according to which images of past occurrences come into our minds, but

do not discuss our belief that these images refer to past occurrences, which is

what constitutes knowledge-memory. It is this that is of interest to theory of

knowledge. I shall speak of it as "true" memory, to distinguish it from mere

habit acquired through past experience. Before considering true memory, it

will be well to consider two things which are on the way towards memory,

namely the feeling of familiarity and recognition.

* See his "Life and Habit and Unconscious Memory."

  We  often  feel  that  something  in  our  sensible  environment  is  familiar,

without having any definite recollection of previous occasions on which we

have seen it. We have this feeling normally in places where we have often

been before—at home, or in well-known streets. Most people and animals

find  it  essential  to  their  happiness  to  spend  a  good  deal  of  their  time  in

familiar  surroundings,  which  are  especially  comforting  when  any  danger

threatens. The feeling of familiarity has all sorts of degrees, down to the stage

where we dimly feel that we have seen a person before. It is by no means

always reliable; almost everybody has at some time experienced the well-

known illusion that all that is happening now happened before at some time.

There are occasions when familiarity does not attach itself to any definite

object, when there is merely a vague feeling that SOMETHING is familiar.

This is illustrated by Turgenev's "Smoke," where the hero is long puzzled by

a haunting sense that something in his present is recalling something in hispast, and at last traces it to the smell of heliotrope. Whenever the sense of

familiarity  occurs  without  a  definite  object,  it  leads  us  to  search  the

environment until we are satisfied that we have found the appropriate object,

which leads us to the judgment: "THIS is familiar." I think we may regard

familiarity as a definite feeling, capable of existing without an object, but

normally standing in a specific relation to some feature of the environment,

the relation being that which we express in words by saying that the feature

in  question  is  familiar.  The  judgment  that  what  is  familiar  has  been

experienced before is a product of reflection, and is no part of the feeling of

familiarity, such as a horse may be supposed to have when he returns to his

stable. Thus no knowledge as to the past is to be derived from the feeling of

familiarity alone.

  A further stage is RECOGNITION. This may be taken in two senses, the

first when a thing not merely feels familiar, but we know it is such-and-such.

We recognize our friend Jones, we know cats and dogs when we see them,

and so on. Here we have a definite influence of past experience, but not

necessarily any actual knowledge of the past. When we see a cat, we know it

is a cat because of previous cats we have seen, but we do not, as a rule,

recollect at the moment any particular occasion when we have seen a cat.

Recognition in this sense does not necessarily involve more than a habit of

association: the kind of object we are seeing at the moment is associated with

the  word  "cat,"  or  with  an  auditory  image  of  purring,  or  whatever  other

characteristic we may happen to recognize in the cat of the moment. We are,

of course, in fact able to judge, when we recognize an object, that we have

seen it before, but this judgment is something over and above recognition in

this  first  sense,  and  may  very  probably  be  impossible  to  animals  that

nevertheless have the experience of recognition in this first sense of the word.

  There  is,  however,  another  sense  of  the  word,  in  which  we  mean  by

recognition, not knowing the name of a thing or some other property of it, but

knowing that we have seen it before In this sense recognition does involve

knowledge about the Fast. This knowledge is memory in one sense, though in

another it is not. It does not involve a definite memory of a definite past

event, but only the knowledge that something happening now is similar to

something that happened before. It differs from the sense of familiarity by

being cognitive; it is a belief or judgment, which the sense of familiarity is

not. I do not wish to undertake the analysis of belief at present, since it willbe  the  subject  of  the  twelfth  lecture;  for  the  present  I  merely  wish  to

emphasize the fact that recognition, in our second sense, consists in a belief,

which we may express approximately in the words: "This has existed before."

  There  are,  however,  several  points  in  which  such  an  account  of

recognition is inadequate. To begin with, it might seem at first sight more

correct to define recognition as "I have seen this before" than as "this has

existed before." We recognize a thing (it may be urged) as having been in our

experience before, whatever that may mean; we do not recognize it as merely

having  been  in  the  world  before.  I  am  not  sure  that  there  is  anything

substantial  in  this  point.  The  definition  of  "my  experience"  is  difficult;

broadly  speaking,  it  is  everything  that  is  connected  with  what  I  am

experiencing now by certain links, of which the various forms of memory are

among the most important. Thus, if I recognize a thing, the occasion of its

previous  existence  in  virtue  of  which  I  recognize  it  forms  part  of  "my

experience" by DEFINITION: recognition will be one of the marks by which

my experience is singled out from the rest of the world. Of course, the words

"this has existed before" are a very inadequate translation of what actually

happens when we form a judgment of recognition, but that is unavoidable:

words  are  framed  to  express  a  level  of  thought  which  is  by  no  means

primitive,  and  are  quite  incapable  of  expressing  such  an  elementary

occurrence as recognition. I shall return to what is virtually the same question

in connection with true memory, which raises exactly similar problems.

  A second point is that, when we recognize something, it was not in fact the

very same thing, but only something similar, that we experienced on a former

occasion. Suppose the object in question is a friend's face. A person's face is

always changing, and is not exactly the same on any two occasions. Common

sense  treats  it  as  one  face  with  varying  expressions;  but  the  varying

expressions  actually  exist,  each  at  its  proper  time,  while  the  one  face  is

merely  a  logical  construction.  We  regard  two  objects  as  the  same,  for

common-sense purposes, when the reaction they call for is practically the

same.  Two  visual  appearances,  to  both  of  which  it  is  appropriate  to  say:

"Hullo, Jones!" are treated as appearances of one identical object, namely

Jones. The name "Jones" is applicable to both, and it is only reflection that

shows us that many diverse particulars are collected together to form the

meaning of the name "Jones." What we see on any one occasion is not the

whole series of particulars that make up Jones, but only one of them (or a fewin quick succession). On another occasion we see another member of the

series, but it is sufficiently similar to count as the same from the standpoint of

common sense. Accordingly, when we judge "I have seen THIS before," we

judge falsely if "this" is taken as applying to the actual constituent of the

world that we are seeing at the moment. The word "this" must be interpreted

vaguely so as to include anything sufficiently like what we are seeing at the

moment. Here, again, we shall find a similar point as regards true memory;

and in connection with true memory we will consider the point again. It is

sometimes  suggested,  by  those  who  favour  behaviourist  views,  that

recognition consists in behaving in the same way when a stimulus is repeated

as we behaved on the first occasion when it occurred. This seems to be the

exact  opposite  of  the  truth.  The  essence  of  recognition  is  in  the

DIFFERENCE  between  a  repeated  stimulus  and  a  new  one.  On  the  first

occasion there is no recognition; on the second occasion there is. In fact,

recognition  is  another  instance  of  the  peculiarity  of  causal  laws  in

psychology, namely, that the causal unit is not a single event, but two or more

events  Habit  is  the  great  instance  of  this,  but  recognition  is  another.  A

stimulus  occurring  once  has  a  certain  effect;  occurring  twice,  it  has  the

further effect of recognition. Thus the phenomenon of recognition has as its

cause  the  two  occasions  when  the  stimulus  has  occurred;  either  alone  is

insufficient. This complexity of causes in psychology might be connected

with Bergson's arguments against repetition in the mental world. It does not

prove that there are no causal laws in psychology, as Bergson suggests; but it

does prove that the causal laws of psychology are Prima facie very different

from those of physics. On the possibility of explaining away the difference as

due  to  the  peculiarities  of  nervous  tissue  I  have  spoken  before,  but  this

possibility  must  not  be  forgotten  if  we  are  tempted  to  draw  unwarranted

metaphysical deductions.

  True memory, which we must now endeavour to understand, consists of

knowledge of past events, but not of all such knowledge. Some knowledge of

past events, for example what we learn through reading history, is on a par

with the knowledge we can acquire concerning the future: it is obtained by

inference, not (so to speak) spontaneously. There is a similar distinction in

our knowledge of the present: some of it is obtained through the senses, some

in more indirect ways. I know that there are at this moment a number of

people in the streets of New York, but I do not know this in the immediateway in which I know of the people whom I see by looking out of my window.

It is not easy to state precisely wherein the difference between these two sorts

of knowledge consists, but it is easy to feel the difference. For the moment, I

shall not stop to analyse it, but shall content myself with saying that, in this

respect,  memory  resembles  the  knowledge  derived  from  the  senses.  It  is

immediate, not inferred, not abstract; it differs from perception mainly by

being referred to the past.

  In regard to memory, as throughout the analysis of knowledge, there are

two  very  distinct  problems,  namely  (1)  as  to  the  nature  of  the  present

occurrence in knowing; (2) as to the relation of this occurrence to what is

known. When we remember, the knowing is now, while what is known is in

the past. Our two questions are, in the case of memory:

  (1) What is the present occurrence when we remember?

  (2) What is the relation of this present occurrence to the past event which

is remembered?

  Of  these  two  questions,  only  the  first  concerns  the  psychologist;  the

second belongs to theory of knowledge. At the same time, if we accept the

vague datum with which we began, to the effect that, in some sense, there is

knowledge of the past, we shall have to find, if we can, such an account of

the present occurrence in remembering as will make it not impossible for

remembering to give us knowledge of the past. For the present, however, we

shall do well to forget the problems concerning theory of knowledge, and

concentrate upon the purely psychological problem of memory.

  Between memory-image and sensation there is an intermediate experience

concerning the immediate past. For example, a sound that we have just heard

is present to us in a way which differs both from the sensation while we are

hearing the sound and from the memory-image of something heard days or

weeks ago. James states that it is this way of apprehending the immediate

past that is "the ORIGINAL of our experience of pastness, from whence we

get the meaning of the term"("Psychology," i, p. 604). Everyone knows the

experience of noticing (say) that the clock HAS BEEN striking, when we did

not notice it while it was striking. And when we hear a remark spoken, we are

conscious of the earlier words while the later ones are being uttered, and this

retention  feels  different  from  recollection  of  something  definitely  past.  A

sensation fades gradually, passing by continuous gradations to the status of

an image. This retention of the immediate past in a condition intermediatebetween  sensation  and  image  may  be  called  "immediate  memory."

Everything belonging to it is included with sensation in what is called the

"specious present." The specious present includes elements at all stages on

the  journey  from  sensation  to  image.  It  is  this  fact  that  enables  us  to

apprehend such things as movements, or the order of the words in a spoken

sentence. Succession can occur within the specious present, of which we can

distinguish some parts as earlier and others as later. It is to be supposed that

the earliest parts are those that have faded most from their original force,

while the latest parts are those that retain their full sensational character. At

the beginning of a stimulus we have a sensation; then a gradual transition;

and  at  the  end  an  image.  Sensations  while  they  are  fading  are  called

"akoluthic"  sensations.*  When  the  process  of  fading  is  completed  (which

happens very quickly), we arrive at the image, which is capable of being

revived on subsequent occasions with very little change. True memory, as

opposed to "immediate memory," applies only to events sufficiently distant to

have  come  to  an  end  of  the  period  of  fading.  Such  events,  if  they  are

represented by anything present, can only be represented by images, not by

those  intermediate  stages,  between  sensations  and  images,  which  occur

during the period of fading.* See Semon, "Die mnemischen Empfindungen," chap. vi.

  Immediate memory is important both because it provides experience of

succession, and because it bridges the gulf between sensations and the images

which are their copies. But it is now time to resume the consideration of true

memory.

  Suppose  you  ask  me  what  I  ate  for  breakfast  this  morning.  Suppose,

further, that I have not thought about my breakfast in the meantime, and that I

did not, while I was eating it, put into words what it consisted of. In this case

my  recollection  will  be  true  memory,  not  habit-memory.  The  process  of

remembering will consist of calling up images of my breakfast, which will

come to me with a feeling of belief such as distinguishes memory-images

from mere imagination-images. Or sometimes words may come without the

intermediary  of  images;  but  in  this  case  equally  the  feeling  of  belief  is

essential.

  Let us omit from our consideration, for the present, the memories in which

words replace images. These are always, I think, really habit-memories, the

memories that use images being the typical true memories.

  Memory-images and imagination-images do not differ in their intrinsic

qualities, so far as we can discover. They differ by the fact that the images

that  constitute  memories,  unlike  those  that  constitute  imagination,  are

accompanied by a feeling of belief which may be expressed in the words "this

happened." The mere occurrence of images, without this feeling of belief,

constitutes imagination; it is the element of belief that is the distinctive thing

in memory.*

* For belief of a specific kind, cf. Dorothy Wrinch "On the 

Nature of Memory," "Mind," January, 1920.

  There are, if I am not mistaken, at least three different kinds of belief-

feeling, which we may call respectively memory, expectation and bare assent.

In what I call bare assent, there is no time-element in the feeling of belief,

though  there  may  be  in  the  content  of  what  is  believed.  If  I  believe  that

Caesar landed in Britain in B.C. 55, the time-determination lies, not in the

feeling of belief, but in what is believed. I do not remember the occurrence,

but have the same feeling towards it as towards the announcement of an

eclipse next year. But when I have seen a flash of lightning and am waiting

for the thunder, I have a belief-feeling analogous to memory, except that it

refers to the future: I have an image of thunder, combined with a feelingwhich may be expressed in the words: "this will happen." So, in memory, the

pastness lies, not in the content of what is believed, but in the nature of the

belief-feeling. I might have just the same images and expect their realization;

I might entertain them without any belief, as in reading a novel; or I might

entertain them together with a time-determination, and give bare assent, as in

reading history. I shall return to this subject in a later lecture, when we come

to the analysis of belief. For the present, I wish to make it clear that a certain

special kind of belief is the distinctive characteristic of memory.

  The  problem  as  to  whether  memory  can  be  explained  as  habit  or

association requires to be considered afresh in connection with the causes of

our remembering something. Let us take again the case of my being asked

what I had for breakfast this morning. In this case the question leads to my

setting  to  work  to  recollect.  It  is  a  little  strange  that  the  question  should

instruct  me  as  to  what  it  is  that  I  am  to  recall.  This  has  to  do  with

understanding  words,  which  will  be  the  topic  of  the  next  lecture;  but

something  must  be  said  about  it  now.  Our  understanding  of  the  words

"breakfast this morning" is a habit, in spite of the fact that on each fresh day

they point to a different occasion. "This morning" does not, whenever it is

used, mean the same thing, as "John" or "St. Paul's" does; it means a different

period  of  time  on  each  different  day.  It  follows  that  the  habit  which

constitutes our understanding of the words "this morning" is not the habit of

associating the words with a fixed object, but the habit of associating them

with something having a fixed time-relation to our present. This morning has,

to-day,  the  same  time-relation  to  my  present  that  yesterday  morning  had

yesterday. In order to understand the phrase "this morning" it is necessary

that we should have a way of feeling time-intervals, and that this feeling

should give what is constant in the meaning of the words "this morning." This

appreciation of time-intervals is, however, obviously a product of memory,

not a presupposition of it. It will be better, therefore, if we wish to analyse the

causation of memory by something not presupposing memory, to take some

other instance than that of a question about "this morning."

  Let us take the case of coming into a familiar room where something has

been changed—say a new picture hung on the wall. We may at first have

only  a  sense  that  SOMETHING  is  unfamiliar,  but  presently  we  shall

remember, and say "that picture was not on the wall before." In order to make

the case definite, we will suppose that we were only in the room on oneformer occasion. In this case it seems fairly clear what happens. The other

objects in the room are associated, through the former occasion, with a blank

space of wall where now there is a picture. They call up an image of a blank

wall, which clashes with perception of the picture. The image is associated

with the belief-feeling which we found to be distinctive of memory, since it

can neither be abolished nor harmonized with perception. If the room had

remained  unchanged,  we  might  have  had  only  the  feeling  of  familiarity

without the definite remembering; it is the change that drives us from the

present to memory of the past.

  We  may  generalize  this  instance  so  as  to  cover  the  causes  of  many

memories. Some present feature of the environment is associated, through

past experiences, with something now absent; this absent something comes

before us as an image, and is contrasted with present sensation. In cases of

this  sort,  habit  (or  association)  explains  why  the  present  feature  of  the

environment  brings  up  the  memory-image,  but  it  does  not  explain  the

memory-belief. Perhaps a more complete analysis could explain the memory-

belief also on lines of association and habit, but the causes of beliefs are

obscure, and we cannot investigate them yet. For the present we must content

ourselves with the fact that the memory-image can be explained by habit. As

regards the memory-belief, we must, at least provisionally, accept Bergson's

view that it cannot be brought under the head of habit, at any rate when it first

occurs, i.e. when we remember something we never remembered before.

  We must now consider somewhat more closely the content of a memory-

belief. The memory-belief confers upon the memory-image something which

we may call "meaning;" it makes us feel that the image points to an object

which existed in the past. In order to deal with this topic we must consider

the verbal expression of the memory-belief. We might be tempted to put the

memory-belief into the words: "Something like this image occurred." But

such words would be very far from an accurate translation of the simplest

kind of memory-belief. "Something like this image" is a very complicated

conception.  In  the  simplest  kind  of  memory  we  are  not  aware  of  the

difference between an image and the sensation which it copies, which may be

called its "prototype." When the image is before us, we judge rather "this

occurred." The image is not distinguished from the object which existed in

the past: the word "this" covers both, and enables us to have a memory-belief

which does not introduce the complicated notion "something like this."  It might be objected that, if we judge "this occurred" when in fact "this" is

a  present  image,  we  judge  falsely,  and  the  memory-belief,  so  interpreted,

becomes  deceptive.  This,  however,  would  be  a  mistake,  produced  by

attempting to give to words a precision which they do not possess when used

by unsophisticated people. It is true that the image is not absolutely identical

with its prototype, and if the word "this" meant the image to the exclusion of

everything else, the judgment "this occurred" would be false. But identity is a

precise  conception,  and  no  word,  in  ordinary  speech,  stands  for  anything

precise.  Ordinary  speech  does  not  distinguish  between  identity  and  close

similarity. A word always applies, not only to one particular, but to a group

of associated particulars, which are not recognized as multiple in common

thought  or  speech.  Thus  primitive  memory,  when  it  judges  that  "this

occurred," is vague, but not false.

  Vague identity, which is really close similarity, has been a source of many

of the confusions by which philosophy has lived. Of a vague subject, such as

a "this," which is both an image and its prototype, contradictory predicates

are true simultaneously: this existed and does not exist, since it is a thing

remembered, but also this exists and did not exist, since it is a present image.

Hence  Bergson's  interpenetration  of  the  present  by  the  past,  Hegelian

continuity and identity-in-diversity, and a host of other notions which are

thought  to  be  profound  because  they  are  obscure  and  confused.  The

contradictions resulting from confounding image and prototype in memory

force  us  to  precision.  But  when  we  become  precise,  our  remembering

becomes different from that of ordinary life, and if we forget this we shall go

wrong in the analysis of ordinary memory.

  Vagueness and accuracy are important notions, which it is very necessary

to understand. Both are a matter of degree. All thinking is vague to some

extent, and complete accuracy is a theoretical ideal not practically attainable.

To understand what is meant by accuracy, it will be well to consider first

instruments of measurement, such as a balance or a thermometer. These are

said to be accurate when they give different results for very slightly different

stimuli.* A clinical thermometer is accurate when it enables us to detect very

slight differences in the temperature of the blood. We may say generally that

an instrument is accurate in proportion as it reacts differently to very slightly

different  stimuli.  When  a  small  difference  of  stimulus  produces  a  great

difference of reaction, the instrument is accurate; in the contrary case it is not.* This is a necessary but not a sufficient condition. The 

subject of accuracy and vagueness will be considered again 

in Lecture XIII.

  Exactly  the  same  thing  applies  in  defining  accuracy  of  thought  or

perception. A musician will respond differently to very minute differences in

playing which would be quite imperceptible to the ordinary mortal. A negro

can  see  the  difference  between  one  negro  and  another  one  is  his  friend,

another his enemy. But to us such different responses are impossible: we can

merely  apply  the  word  "negro"  indiscriminately.  Accuracy  of  response  in

regard  to  any  particular  kind  of  stimulus  is  improved  by  practice.

Understanding a language is a case in point. Few Frenchmen can hear any

difference  between  the  sounds  "hall"  and  "hole,"  which  produce  quite

different impressions upon us. The two statements "the hall is full of water"

and "the hole is full of water" call for different responses, and a hearing

which cannot distinguish between them is inaccurate or vague in this respect.

  Precision and vagueness in thought, as in perception, depend upon the

degree of difference between responses to more or less similar stimuli. In the

case  of  thought,  the  response  does  not  follow  immediately  upon  the

sensational  stimulus,  but  that  makes  no  difference  as  regards  our  present

question.  Thus  to  revert  to  memory:  A  memory  is  "vague"  when  it  is

appropriate to many different occurrences: for instance, "I met a man" is

vague,  since  any  man  would  verify  it.  A  memory  is  "precise"  when  the

occurrences that would verify it are narrowly circumscribed: for instance, "I

met Jones" is precise as compared to "I met a man." A memory is "accurate"

when it is both precise and true, i.e. in the above instance, if it was Jones I

met. It is precise even if it is false, provided some very definite occurrence

would have been required to make it true.

  It  follows  from  what  has  been  said  that  a  vague  thought  has  more

likelihood of being true than a precise one. To try and hit an object with a

vague thought is like trying to hit the bull's eye with a lump of putty: when

the putty reaches the target, it flattens out all over it, and probably covers the

bull's eye along with the rest. To try and hit an object with a precise thought

is like trying to hit the bull's eye with a bullet. The advantage of the precise

thought  is  that  it  distinguishes  between  the  bull's  eye  and  the  rest  of  the

target. For example, if the whole target is represented by the fungus family

and the bull's eye by mushrooms, a vague thought which can only hit thetarget as a whole is not much use from a culinary point of view. And when I

merely remember that I met a man, my memory may be very inadequate to

my practical requirements, since it may make a great difference whether I

met Brown or Jones. The memory "I met Jones" is relatively precise. It is

accurate if I met Jones, inaccurate if I met Brown, but precise in either case

as against the mere recollection that I met a man.

  The  distinction  between  accuracy  and  precision  is  however,  not

fundamental.  We  may  omit  precision  from  out  thoughts  and  confine

ourselves to the distinction between accuracy and vagueness. We may then

set up the following definitions:

  An instrument is "reliable" with respect to a given set of stimuli when to

stimuli which are not relevantly different it gives always responses which are

not relevantly different.

  An instrument is a "measure" of a set of stimuli which are serially ordered

when  its  responses,  in  all  cases  where  they  are  relevantly  different,  are

arranged in a series in the same order.

  The "degree of accuracy" of an instrument which is a reliable measurer is

the ratio of the difference of response to the difference of stimulus in cases

where the difference of stimulus is small.* That is to say, if a small difference

of stimulus produces a great difference of response, the instrument is very

accurate; in the contrary case, very inaccurate.

* Strictly speaking, the limit of this, i.e. the derivative 

of the response with respect to the stimulus.

  A mental response is called "vague" in proportion to its lack of accuracy,

or rather precision.

  These definitions will be found useful, not only in the case of memory, but

in almost all questions concerned with knowledge.

  It should be observed that vague beliefs, so far from being necessarily

false, have a better chance of truth than precise ones, though their truth is less

valuable than that of precise beliefs, since they do not distinguish between

occurrences which may differ in important ways.

  The  whole  of  the  above  discussion  of  vagueness  and  accuracy  was

occasioned  by  the  attempt  to  interpret  the  word  "this"  when  we  judge  in

verbal memory that "this occurred." The word "this," in such a judgment, is a

vague word, equally applicable to the present memory-image and to the past

occurrence which is its prototype. A vague word is not to be identified with ageneral word, though in practice the distinction may often be blurred. A word

is general when it is understood to be applicable to a number of different

objects in virtue of some common property. A word is vague when it is in

fact applicable to a number of different objects because, in virtue of some

common property, they have not appeared, to the person using the word, to

be  distinct.  I  emphatically  do  not  mean  that  he  has  judged  them  to  be

identical, but merely that he has made the same response to them all and has

not judged them to be different. We may compare a vague word to a jelly and

a general word to a heap of shot. Vague words precede judgments of identity

and  difference;  both  general  and  particular  words  are  subsequent  to  such

judgments. The word "this" in the primitive memory-belief is a vague word,

not a general word; it covers both the image and its prototype because the

two are not distinguished.*

* On the vague and the general cf. Ribot: "Evolution of 

General Ideas," Open Court Co., 1899, p. 32: "The sole 

permissible formula is this: Intelligence progresses from 

the indefinite to the definite. If 'indefinite' is taken as 

synonymous with general, it may be said that the particular 

does not appear at the outset, but neither does the general 

in any exact sense: the vague would be more appropriate. In 

other words, no sooner has the intellect progressed beyond 

the moment of perception and of its immediate reproduction 

in memory, than the generic image makes its appearance, i.e. 

a state intermediate between the particular and the general, 

participating in the nature of the one and of the other—a 

confused simplification."

  But we have not yet finished our analysis of the memory-belief. The tense

in the belief that "this occurred" is provided by the nature of the belief-feeling

involved in memory; the word "this," as we have seen, has a vagueness which

we have tried to describe. But we must still ask what we mean by "occurred."

The image is, in one sense, occurring now; and therefore we must find some

other sense in which the past event occurred but the image does not occur.

  There are two distinct questions to be asked: (1) What causes us to say that

a thing occurs? (2) What are we feeling when we say this? As to the first

question, in the crude use of the word, which is what concerns us, memory-

images would not be said to occur; they would not be noticed in themselves,but merely used as signs of the past event. Images are "merely imaginary";

they have not, in crude thought, the sort of reality that belongs to outside

bodies.  Roughly  speaking,  "real"  things  would  be  those  that  can  cause

sensations, those that have correlations of the sort that constitute physical

objects. A thing is said to be "real" or to "occur" when it fits into a context of

such correlations. The prototype of our memory-image did fit into a physical

context, while our memory-image does not. This causes us to feel that the

prototype was "real," while the image is "imaginary."

  But the answer to our second question, namely as to what we are feeling

when we say a thing "occurs" or is "real," must be somewhat different. We do

not, unless we are unusually reflective, think about the presence or absence of

correlations: we merely have different feelings which, intellectualized, may

be represented as expectations of the presence or absence of correlations. A

thing  which  "feels  real"  inspires  us  with  hopes  or  fears,  expectations  or

curiosities,  which  are  wholly  absent  when  a  thing  "feels  imaginary."  The

feeling  of  reality  is  a  feeling  akin  to  respect:  it  belongs  PRIMARILY  to

whatever can do things to us without our voluntary co-operation. This feeling

of  reality,  related  to  the  memory-image,  and  referred  to  the  past  by  the

specific kind of belief-feeling that is characteristic of memory, seems to be

what constitutes the act of remembering in its pure form.

  We may now summarize our analysis of pure memory.

  Memory demands (a) an image, (b) a belief in past existence. The belief

may be expressed in the words "this existed."

  The belief, like every other, may be analysed into (1) the believing, (2)

what is believed. The believing is a specific feeling or sensation or complex

of sensations, different from expectation or bare assent in a way that makes

the belief refer to the past; the reference to the past lies in the belief-feeling,

not in the content believed. There is a relation between the belief-feeling and

the content, making the belief-feeling refer to the content, and expressed by

saying that the content is what is believed.

  The content believed may or may not be expressed in words. Let us take

first the case when it is not. In that case, if we are merely remembering that

something of which we now have an image occurred, the content consists of

(a) the image, (b) the feeling, analogous to respect, which we translate by

saying  that  something  is  "real"  as  opposed  to  "imaginary,"  (c)  a  relation

between the image and the feeling of reality, of the sort expressed when wesay that the feeling refers to the image. This content does not contain in itself

any time-determination.

  The time-determination lies in the nature of the belief feeling, which is

that  called  "remembering"  or  (better)  "recollecting."  It  is  only  subsequent

reflection upon this reference to the past that makes us realize the distinction

between  the  image  and  the  event  recollected.  When  we  have  made  this

distinction, we can say that the image "means" the past event.

  The  content  expressed  in  words  is  best  represented  by  the  words  "the

existence of this," since these words do not involve tense, which belongs to

the belief-feeling, not to the content. Here "this" is a vague term, covering the

memory-image and anything very like it, including its prototype. "Existence"

expresses the feeling of a "reality" aroused primarily by whatever can have

effects upon us without our voluntary co-operation. The word "of" in the

phrase "the existence of this" represents the relation which subsists between

the feeling of reality and the "this."

  This analysis of memory is probably extremely faulty, but I do not know

how to improve it.

  NOTE.-When I speak of a FEELING of belief, I use the word "feeling" in

a popular sense, to cover a sensation or an image or a complex of sensations

or images or both; I use this word because I do not wish to commit myself to

any special analysis of the belief-feeling.

                  LECTURE X. WORDS AND MEANING

  The  problem  with  which  we  shall  be  concerned  in  this  lecture  is  the

problem  of  determining  what  is  the  relation  called  "meaning."  The  word

"Napoleon,"  we  say,  "means"  a  certain  person.  In  saying  this,  we  are

asserting  a  relation  between  the  word  "Napoleon"  and  the  person  so

designated. It is this relation that we must now investigate.

  Let us first consider what sort of object a word is when considered simply

as a physical thing, apart from its meaning. To begin with, there are many

instances of a word, namely all the different occasions when it is employed.

Thus a word is not something unique and particular, but a set of occurrences.

If we confine ourselves to spoken words, a word has two aspects, according

as we regard it from the point of view of the speaker or from that of the

hearer. From the point of view of the speaker, a single instance of the use of a

word  consists  of  a  certain  set  of  movements  in  the  throat  and  mouth,

combined with breath. From the point of view of the hearer, a single instance

of  the  use  of  a  word  consists  of  a  certain  series  of  sounds,  each  being

approximately represented by a single letter in writing, though in practice a

letter  may  represent  several  sounds,  or  several  letters  may  represent  one

sound. The connection between the spoken word and the word as it reaches

the hearer is causal. Let us confine ourselves to the spoken word, which is the

more important for the analysis of what is called "thought." Then we may say

that a single instance of the spoken word consists of a series of movements,

and the word consists of a whole set of such series, each member of the set

being very similar to each other member. That is to say, any two instances of

the word "Napoleon" are very similar, and each instance consists of a series

of movements in the mouth.

  A single word, accordingly, is by no means simple it is a class of similar

series  of  movements  (confining  ourselves  still  to  the  spoken  word).  The

degree  of  similarity  required  cannot  be  precisely  defined:  a  man  may

pronounce the word "Napoleon" so badly that it can hardly be determined

whether he has really pronounced it or not. The instances of a word shade off

into  other  movements  by  imperceptible  degrees.  And  exactly  analogous

observations apply to words heard or written or read. But in what has been

said so far we have not even broached the question of the DEFINITION of a

word, since "meaning" is clearly what distinguishes a word from other sets ofsimilar movements, and "meaning" remains to be defined.

  It is natural to think of the meaning of a word as something conventional.

This, however, is only true with great limitations. A new word can be added

to an existing language by a mere convention, as is done, for instance, with

new scientific terms. But the basis of a language is not conventional, either

from the point of view of the individual or from that of the community. A

child learning to speak is learning habits and associations which are just as

much determined by the environment as the habit of expecting dogs to bark

and cocks to crow. The community that speaks a language has learnt it, and

modified it by processes almost all of which are not deliberate, but the results

of causes operating according to more or less ascertainable laws. If we trace

any Indo-European language back far enough, we arrive hypothetically (at

any rate according to some authorities) at the stage when language consisted

only of the roots out of which subsequent words have grown. How these

roots  acquired  their  meanings  is  not  known,  but  a  conventional  origin  is

clearly just as mythical as the social contract by which Hobbes and Rousseau

supposed civil government to have been established. We can hardly suppose

a parliament of hitherto speechless elders meeting together and agreeing to

call a cow a cow and a wolf a wolf. The association of words with their

meanings must have grown up by some natural process, though at present the

nature of the process is unknown.

  Spoken and written words are, of course, not the only way of conveying

meaning. A large part of one of Wundt's two vast volumes on language in his

"Volkerpsychologie" is concerned with gesture-language. Ants appear to be

able  to  communicate  a  certain  amount  of  information  by  means  of  their

antennae. Probably writing itself, which we now regard as merely a way of

representing  speech,  was  originally  an  independent  language,  as  it  has

remained to this day in China. Writing seems to have consisted originally of

pictures,  which  gradually  became  conventionalized,  coming  in  time  to

represent syllables, and finally letters on the telephone principle of "T for

Tommy." But it would seem that writing nowhere began as an attempt to

represent speech it began as a direct pictorial representation of what was to be

expressed. The essence of language lies, not in the use of this or that special

means  of  communication,  but  in  the  employment  of  fixed  associations

(however these may have originated) in order that something now sensible—

a spoken word, a picture, a gesture, or what not—may call up the "idea" ofsomething else. Whenever this is done, what is now sensible may be called a

"sign" or "symbol," and that of which it is intended to call up the "idea" may

be  called  its  "meaning."  This  is  a  rough  outline  of  what  constitutes

"meaning." But we must fill in the outline in various ways. And, since we are

concerned with what is called "thought," we must pay more attention than we

otherwise should do to the private as opposed to the social use of language.

Language profoundly affects our thoughts, and it is this aspect of language

that is of most importance to us in our present inquiry. We are almost more

concerned with the internal speech that is never uttered than we are with the

things said out loud to other people.

  When we ask what constitutes meaning, we are not asking what is the

meaning  of  this  or  that  particular  word.  The  word  "Napoleon"  means  a

certain individual; but we are asking, not who is the individual meant, but

what is the relation of the word to the individual which makes the one mean

the other. But just as it is useful to realize the nature of a word as part of the

physical world, so it is useful to realize the sort of thing that a word may

mean. When we are clear both as to what a word is in its physical aspect, and

as to what sort of thing it can mean, we are in a better position to discover the

relation of the two which is meaning.

  The things that words mean differ more than words do. There are different

sorts  of  words,  distinguished  by  the  grammarians;  and  there  are  logical

distinctions, which are connected to some extent, though not so closely as

was formerly supposed, with the grammatical distinctions of parts of speech.

It is easy, however, to be misled by grammar, particularly if all the languages

we  know  belong  to  one  family.  In  some  languages,  according  to  some

authorities,  the  distinction  of  parts  of  speech  does  not  exist;  in  many

languages it is widely different from that to which we are accustomed in the

Indo-European languages. These facts have to be borne in mind if we are to

avoid giving metaphysical importance to mere accidents of our own speech.

  In considering what words mean, it is natural to start with proper names,

and we will again take "Napoleon" as our instance. We commonly imagine,

when we use a proper name, that we mean one definite entity, the particular

individual who was called "Napoleon." But what we know as a person is not

simple.  There  MAY  be  a  single  simple  ego  which  was  Napoleon,  and

remained strictly identical from his birth to his death. There is no way of

proving that this cannot be the case, but there is also not the slightest reasonto  suppose  that  it  is  the  case.  Napoleon  as  he  was  empirically  known

consisted  of  a  series  of  gradually  changing  appearances:  first  a  squalling

baby, then a boy, then a slim and beautiful youth, then a fat and slothful

person very magnificently dressed This series of appearances, and various

occurrences having certain kinds of causal connections with them, constitute

Napoleon as empirically known, and therefore are Napoleon in so far as he

forms part of the experienced world. Napoleon is a complicated series of

occurrences, bound together by causal laws, not, like instances of a word, by

similarities. For although a person changes gradually, and presents similar

appearances  on  two  nearly  contemporaneous  occasions,  it  is  not  these

similarities  that  constitute  the  person,  as  appears  from  the  "Comedy  of

Errors" for example.

  Thus in the case of a proper name, while the word is a set of similar series

of movements, what it means is a series of occurrences bound together by

causal laws of that special kind that makes the occurrences taken together

constitute what we call one person, or one animal or thing, in case the name

applies to an animal or thing instead of to a person. Neither the word nor

what it names is one of the ultimate indivisible constituents of the world. In

language  there  is  no  direct  way  of  designating  one  of  the  ultimate  brief

existents that go to make up the collections we call things or persons. If we

want to speak of such existents—which hardly happens except in philosophy

—we have to do it by means of some elaborate phrase, such as "the visual

sensation which occupied the centre of my field of vision at noon on January

1, 1919." Such ultimate simples I call "particulars." Particulars MIGHT have

proper names, and no doubt would have if language had been invented by

scientifically trained observers for purposes of philosophy and logic. But as

language was invented for practical ends, particulars have remained one and

all without a name.

  We are not, in practice, much concerned with the actual particulars that

come into our experience in sensation; we are concerned rather with whole

systems to which the particulars belong and of which they are signs. What we

see makes us say "Hullo, there's Jones," and the fact that what we see is a

sign of Jones (which is the case because it is one of the particulars that make

up Jones) is more interesting to us than the actual particular itself. Hence we

give the name "Jones" to the whole set of particulars, but do not trouble to

give separate names to the separate particulars that make up the set.  Passing on from proper names, we come next to general names, such as

"man," "cat," "triangle." A word such as "man" means a whole class of such

collections of particulars as have proper names. The several members of the

class  are  assembled  together  in  virtue  of  some  similarity  or  common

property. All men resemble each other in certain important respects; hence

we want a word which shall be equally applicable to all of them. We only

give proper names to the individuals of a species when they differ inter se in

practically important respects. In other cases we do not do this. A poker, for

instance, is just a poker; we do not call one "John" and another "Peter."

  There is a large class of words, such as "eating," "walking," "speaking,"

which mean a set of similar occurrences. Two instances of walking have the

same name because they resemble each other, whereas two instances of Jones

have  the  same  name  because  they  are  causally  connected.  In  practice,

however, it is difficult to make any precise distinction between a word such

as "walking" and a general name such as "man." One instance of walking

cannot be concentrated into an instant: it is a process in time, in which there

is a causal connection between the earlier and later parts, as between the

earlier and later parts of Jones. Thus an instance of walking differs from an

instance of man solely by the fact that it has a shorter life. There is a notion

that an instance of walking, as compared with Jones, is unsubstantial, but this

seems to be a mistake. We think that Jones walks, and that there could not be

any walking unless there were somebody like Jones to perform the walking.

But it is equally true that there could be no Jones unless there were something

like walking for him to do. The notion that actions are performed by an agent

is liable to the same kind of criticism as the notion that thinking needs a

subject or ego, which we rejected in Lecture I. To say that it is Jones who is

walking is merely to say that the walking in question is part of the whole

series of occurrences which is Jones. There is no LOGICAL impossibility in

walking occurring as an isolated phenomenon, not forming part of any such

series as we call a "person."

  We may therefore class with "eating," "walking," "speaking" words such

as "rain," "sunrise," "lightning," which do not denote what would commonly

be called actions. These words illustrate, incidentally, how little we can trust

to the grammatical distinction of parts of speech, since the substantive "rain"

and  the  verb  "to  rain"  denote  precisely  the  same  class  of  meteorological

occurrences. The distinction between the class of objects denoted by such aword and the class of objects denoted by a general name such as "man,"

"vegetable," or "planet," is that the sort of object which is an instance of (say)

"lightning" is much simpler than (say) an individual man. (I am speaking of

lightning as a sensible phenomenon, not as it is described in physics.) The

distinction is one of degree, not of kind. But there is, from the point of view

of ordinary thought, a great difference between a process which, like a flash

of  lightning,  can  be  wholly  comprised  within  one  specious  present  and  a

process which, like the life of a man, has to be pieced together by observation

and  memory  and  the  apprehension  of  causal  connections.  We  may  say

broadly, therefore, that a word of the kind we have been discussing denotes a

set of similar occurrences, each (as a rule) much more brief and less complex

than a person or thing. Words themselves, as we have seen, are sets of similar

occurrences of this kind. Thus there is more logical affinity between a word

and what it means in the case of words of our present sort than in any other

case.

  There is no very great difference between such words as we have just been

considering and words denoting qualities, such as "white" or "round." The

chief  difference  is  that  words  of  this  latter  sort  do  not  denote  processes,

however brief, but static features of the world. Snow falls, and is white; the

falling is a process, the whiteness is not. Whether there is a universal, called

"whiteness," or whether white things are to be defined as those having a

certain kind of similarity to a standard thing, say freshly fallen snow, is a

question  which  need  not  concern  us,  and  which  I  believe  to  be  strictly

insoluble. For our purposes, we may take the word "white" as denoting a

certain set of similar particulars or collections of particulars, the similarity

being in respect of a static quality, not of a process.

  From the logical point of view, a very important class of words are those

that express relations, such as "in," "above," "before," "greater," and so on.

The  meaning  of  one  of  these  words  differs  very  fundamentally  from  the

meaning  of  one  of  any  of  our  previous  classes,  being  more  abstract  and

logically simpler than any of them. If our business were logic, we should

have  to  spend  much  time  on  these  words.  But  as  it  is  psychology  that

concerns us, we will merely note their special character and pass on, since the

logical classification of words is not our main business.

  We will consider next the question what is implied by saying that a person

"understands" a word, in the sense in which one understands a word in one'sown language, but not in a language of which one is ignorant. We may say

that a person understands a word when (a) suitable circumstances make him

use it, (b) the hearing of it causes suitable behaviour in him. We may call

these two active and passive understanding respectively. Dogs often have

passive understanding of some words, but not active understanding, since

they cannot use words.

  It is not necessary, in order that a man should "understand" a word, that he

should "know what it means," in the sense of being able to say "this word

means so-and-so." Understanding words does not consist in knowing their

dictionary definitions, or in being able to specify the objects to which they

are appropriate. Such understanding as this may belong to lexicographers and

students, but not to ordinary mortals in ordinary life. Understanding language

is  more  like  understanding  cricket*:  it  is  a  matter  of  habits,  acquired  in

oneself and rightly presumed in others. To say that a word has a meaning is

not to say that those who use the word correctly have ever thought out what

the meaning is: the use of the word comes first, and the meaning is to be

distilled out of it by observation and analysis. Moreover, the meaning of a

word is not absolutely definite: there is always a greater or less degree of

vagueness. The meaning is an area, like a target: it may have a bull's eye, but

the outlying parts of the target are still more or less within the meaning, in a

gradually diminishing degree as we travel further from the bull's eye. As

language grows more precise, there is less and less of the target outside the

bull's eye, and the bull's eye itself grows smaller and smaller; but the bull's

eye never shrinks to a point, and there is always a doubtful region, however

small, surrounding it.**

* This point of view, extended to the analysis of "thought" 

is urged with great force by J. B. Watson, both in his 

"Behavior," and in "Psychology from the Standpoint of a 

Behaviorist" (Lippincott. 1919), chap. ix. 


** On the understanding of words, a very admirable little 

book is Ribot's "Evolution of General Ideas," Open Court 

Co., 1899. Ribot says (p. 131): "We learn to understand a 

concept as we learn to walk, dance, fence or play a musical 

instrument: it is a habit, i.e. an organized memory. General 

terms cover an organized, latent knowledge which is the hidden capital without which we should be in a state of 

bankruptcy, manipulating false money or paper of no value. 

General ideas are habits in the intellectual order."

  A word is used "correctly" when the average hearer will be affected by it

in  the  way  intended.  This  is  a  psychological,  not  a  literary,  definition  of

"correctness." The literary definition would substitute, for the average hearer,

a  person  of  high  education  living  a  long  time  ago;  the  purpose  of  this

definition is to make it difficult to speak or write correctly.

  The relation of a word to its meaning is of the nature of a causal law

governing our use of the word and our actions when we hear it used. There is

no more reason why a person who uses a word correctly should be able to tell

what it means than there is why a planet which is moving correctly should

know Kepler's laws.

  To illustrate what is meant by "understanding" words and sentences, let us

take instances of various situations.

  Suppose you are walking in London with an absent-minded friend, and

while crossing a street you say, "Look out, there's a motor coming." He will

glance round and jump aside without the need of any "mental" intermediary.

There  need  be  no  "ideas,"  but  only  a  stiffening  of  the  muscles,  followed

quickly by action. He "understands" the words, because he does the right

thing. Such "understanding" may be taken to belong to the nerves and brain,

being habits which they have acquired while the language was being learnt.

Thus  understanding  in  this  sense  may  be  reduced  to  mere  physiological

causal laws.

  If you say the same thing to a Frenchman with a slight knowledge of

English he will go through some inner speech which may be represented by

"Que dit-il? Ah, oui, une automobile!" After this, the rest follows as with the

Englishman. Watson would contend that the inner speech must be incipiently

pronounced;  we  should  argue  that  it  MIGHT  be  merely  imaged.  But  this

point is not important in the present connection.

  If you say the same thing to a child who does not yet know the word

"motor," but does know the other words you are using, you produce a feeling

of anxiety and doubt you will have to point and say, "There, that's a motor."

After that the child will roughly understand the word "motor," though he may

include trains and steam-rollers If this is the first time the child has heard the

word "motor," he may for a long time continue to recall this scene when hehears the word.

  So far we have found four ways of understanding words:

  (1) On suitable occasions you use the word properly.

  (2) When you hear it you act appropriately.

  (3) You associate the word with another word (say in a different language)

which has the appropriate effect on behaviour.

  (4)  When  the  word  is  being  first  learnt,  you  may  associate  it  with  an

object, which is what it "means," or a representative of various objects that it

"means."

  In the fourth case, the word acquires, through association, some of the

same causal efficacy as the object. The word "motor" can make you leap

aside, just as the motor can, but it cannot break your bones. The effects which

a word can share with its object are those which proceed according to laws

other than the general laws of physics, i.e. those which, according to our

terminology,  involve  vital  movements  as  opposed  to  merely  mechanical

movements. The effects of a word that we understand are always mnemic

phenomena  in  the  sense  explained  in  Lecture  IV,  in  so  far  as  they  are

identical with, or similar to, the effects which the object itself might have.

  So far, all the uses of words that we have considered can be accounted for

on the lines of behaviourism.

  But  so  far  we  have  only  considered  what  may  be  called  the

"demonstrative" use of language, to point out some feature in the present

environment. This is only one of the ways in which language may be used.

There are also its narrative and imaginative uses, as in history and novels. Let

us take as an instance the telling of some remembered event.

  We spoke a moment ago of a child who hears the word "motor" for the

first time when crossing a street along which a motor-car is approaching. On

a  later  occasion,  we  will  suppose,  the  child  remembers  the  incident  and

relates  it  to  someone  else.  In  this  case,  both  the  active  and  passive

understanding of words is different from what it is when words are used

demonstratively. The child is not seeing a motor, but only remembering one;

the hearer does not look round in expectation of seeing a motor coming, but

"understands"  that  a  motor  came  at  some  earlier  time.  The  whole  of  this

occurrence is much more difficult to account for on behaviourist lines. It is

clear that, in so far as the child is genuinely remembering, he has a picture of

the past occurrence, and his words are chosen so as to describe the picture;and in so far as the hearer is genuinely apprehending what is said, the hearer

is acquiring a picture more or less like that of the child. It is true that this

process may be telescoped through the operation of the word-habit. The child

may not genuinely remember the incident, but only have the habit of the

appropriate words, as in the case of a poem which we know by heart, though

we cannot remember learning it. And the hearer also may only pay attention

to  the  words,  and  not  call  up  any  corresponding  picture.  But  it  is,

nevertheless,  the  possibility  of  a  memory-image  in  the  child  and  an

imagination-image  in  the  hearer  that  makes  the  essence  of  the  narrative

"meaning"  of  the  words.  In  so  far  as  this  is  absent,  the  words  are  mere

counters, capable of meaning, but not at the moment possessing it.

  Yet this might perhaps be regarded as something of an overstatement. The

words alone, without the use of images, may cause appropriate emotions and

appropriate behaviour. The words have been used in an environment which

produced certain emotions; by a telescoped process, the words alone are now

capable of producing similar emotions. On these lines it might be sought to

show that images are unnecessary. I do not believe, however, that we could

account  on  these  lines  for  the  entirely  different  response  produced  by  a

narrative and by a description of present facts. Images, as contrasted with

sensations, are the response expected during a narrative; it is understood that

present action is not called for. Thus it seems that we must maintain our

distinction words used demonstratively describe and are intended to lead to

sensations, while the same words used in narrative describe and are only

intended to lead to images.

  We have thus, in addition to our four previous ways in which words can

mean,  two  new  ways,  namely  the  way  of  memory  and  the  way  of

imagination. That is to say:

  (5) Words may be used to describe or recall a memory-image: to describe

it when it already exists, or to recall it when the words exist as a habit and are

known to be descriptive of some past experience.

  (6) Words may be used to describe or create an imagination-image: to

describe it, for example, in the case of a poet or novelist, or to create it in the

ordinary case for giving information-though, in the latter case, it is intended

that the imagination-image, when created, shall be accompanied by belief that

something of the sort occurred.

  These  two  ways  of  using  words,  including  their  occurrence  in  innerspeech, may be spoken of together as the use of words in "thinking." If we

are right, the use of words in thinking depends, at least in its origin, upon

images, and cannot be fully dealt with on behaviourist lines. And this is really

the most essential function of words, namely that, originally through their

connection with images, they bring us into touch with what is remote in time

or space. When they operate without the medium of images, this seems to be

a telescoped process. Thus the problem of the meaning of words is brought

into connection with the problem of the meaning of images.

  To  understand  the  function  that  words  perform  in  what  is  called

"thinking,"  we  must  understand  both  the  causes  and  the  effects  of  their

occurrence.  The  causes  of  the  occurrence  of  words  require  somewhat

different treatment according as the object designated by the word is sensibly

present or absent. When the object is present, it may itself be taken as the

cause of the word, through association. But when it is absent there is more

difficulty in obtaining a behaviourist theory of the occurrence of the word.

The language-habit consists not merely in the use of words demonstratively,

but also in their use to express narrative or desire. Professor Watson, in his

account of the acquisition of the language-habit, pays very little attention to

the use of words in narrative and desire. He says ("Behavior," pp. 329-330):

  "The stimulus (object) to which the child often responds, a box, e.g. by

movements such as opening and closing and putting objects into it, may serve

to illustrate our argument. The nurse, observing that the child reacts with his

hands, feet, etc., to the box, begins to say 'box' when the child is handed the

box, 'open box' when the child opens it, 'close box' when he closes it, and 'put

doll in box' when that act is executed. This is repeated over and over again. In

the process of time it comes about that without any other stimulus than that of

the box which originally called out the bodily habits, he begins to say 'box'

when  he  sees  it,  'open  box'  when  he  opens  it,  etc.  The  visible  box  now

becomes a stimulus capable of releasing either the bodily habits or the word-

habit,  i.e.  development  has  brought  about  two  things:  (1)  a  series  of

functional connections among arcs which run from visual receptor to muscles

of throat, and (2) a series of already earlier connected arcs which run from the

same receptor to the bodily muscles.... The object meets the child's vision. He

runs to it and tries to reach it and says 'box.'... Finally the word is uttered

without the movement of going towards the box being executed.... Habits are

formed of going to the box when the arms are full of toys. The child has beentaught to deposit them there. When his arms are laden with toys and no box is

there, the word-habit arises and he calls 'box'; it is handed to him, and he

opens it and deposits the toys therein. This roughly marks what we would call

the genesis of a true language-habit."(pp. 329-330).** Just the same account of language is given in Professor 

Watson's more recent book (reference above).

  We need not linger over what is said in the above passage as to the use of

the word "box" in the presence of the box. But as to its use in the absence of

the box, there is only one brief sentence, namely: "When his arms are laden

with toys and no box is there, the word-habit arises and he calls 'box.'" This is

inadequate as it stands, since the habit has been to use the word when the box

is present, and we have to explain its extension to cases in which the box is

absent.

  Having admitted images, we may say that the word "box," in the absence

of the box, is caused by an image of the box. This may or may not be true—

in fact, it is true in some cases but not in others. Even, however, if it were

true in all cases, it would only slightly shift our problem: we should now have

to ask what causes an image of the box to arise. We might be inclined to say

that desire for the box is the cause. But when this view is investigated, it is

found that it compels us to suppose that the box can be desired without the

child's having either an image of the box or the word "box." This will require

a theory of desire which may be, and I think is, in the main true, but which

removes desire from among things that actually occur, and makes it merely a

convenient fiction, like force in mechanics.* With such a view, desire is no

longer a true cause, but merely a short way of describing certain processes.

* See Lecture III, above.

  In order to explain the occurrence of either the word or the image in the

absence of the box, we have to assume that there is something, either in the

environment or in our own sensations, which has frequently occurred at about

the  same  time  as  the  word  "box."  One  of  the  laws  which  distinguish

psychology (or nerve-physiology?) from physics is the law that, when two

things have frequently existed in close temporal contiguity, either comes in

time to cause the other.* This is the basis both of habit and of association.

Thus, in our case, the arms full of toys have frequently been followed quickly

by the box, and the box in turn by the word "box." The box itself is subject to

physical  laws,  and  does  not  tend  to  be  caused  by  the  arms  full  of  toys,

however often it may in the past have followed them—always provided that,

in the case in question, its physical position is such that voluntary movements

cannot lead to it. But the word "box" and the image of the box are subject to

the law of habit; hence it is possible for either to be caused by the arms full oftoys. And we may lay it down generally that, whenever we use a word, either

aloud or in inner speech, there is some sensation or image (either of which

may be itself a word) which has frequently occurred at about the same time as

the word, and now, through habit, causes the word. It follows that the law of

habit is adequate to account for the use of words in the absence of their

objects; moreover, it would be adequate even without introducing images.

Although, therefore, images seem undeniable, we cannot derive an additional

argument in their favour from the use of words, which could, theoretically, be

explained without introducing images.

*For a more exact statement of this law, with the 

limitations suggested by experiment, see A. Wohlgemuth, "On 

Memory and the Direction of Associations," "British Journal 

of Psychology," vol. v, part iv (March, 1913).

  When we understand a word, there is a reciprocal association between it

and the images of what it "means." Images may cause us to use words which

mean them, and these words, heard or read, may in turn cause the appropriate

images. Thus speech is a means of producing in our hearers the images which

are in us. Also, by a telescoped process, words come in time to produce

directly the effects which would have been produced by the images with

which they were associated. The general law of telescoped processes is that,

if A causes B and B causes C, it will happen in time that A will cause C

directly,  without  the  intermediary  of  B.  This  is  a  characteristic  of

psychological  and  neural  causation.  In  virtue  of  this  law,  the  effects  of

images  upon  our  actions  come  to  be  produced  by  words,  even  when  the

words  do  not  call  up  appropriate  images.  The  more  familiar  we  are  with

words, the more our "thinking" goes on in words instead of images. We may,

for  example,  be  able  to  describe  a  person's  appearance  correctly  without

having at any time had any image of him, provided, when we saw him, we

thought of words which fitted him; the words alone may remain with us as a

habit, and enable us to speak as if we could recall a visual image of the man.

In this and other ways the understanding of a word often comes to be quite

free from imagery; but in first learning the use of language it would seem that

imagery always plays a very important part.

  Images  as  well  as  words  may  be  said  to  have  "meaning";  indeed,  the

meaning of images seems more primitive than the meaning of words. What

we call (say) an image of St. Paul's may be said to "mean" St. Paul's. But it isnot at all easy to say exactly what constitutes the meaning of an image. A

memory-image of a particular occurrence, when accompanied by a memory-

belief, may be said to mean the occurrence of which it is an image. But most

actual images do not have this degree of definiteness. If we call up an image

of  a  dog,  we  are  very  likely  to  have  a  vague  image,  which  is  not

representative of some one special dog, but of dogs in general. When we call

up an image of a friend's face, we are not likely to reproduce the expression

he had on some one particular occasion, but rather a compromise expression

derived from many occasions. And there is hardly any limit to the vagueness

of which images are capable. In such cases, the meaning of the image, if

defined  by  relation  to  the  prototype,  is  vague:  there  is  not  one  definite

prototype, but a number, none of which is copied exactly.*

* Cf. Semon, Mnemische Empfindungen, chap. xvi, especially 

pp. 301-308.

  There is, however, another way of approaching the meaning of images,

namely through their causal efficacy. What is called an image "of" some

definite object, say St. Paul's, has some of the effects which the object would

have. This applies especially to the effects that depend upon association. The

emotional effects, also, are often similar: images may stimulate desire almost

as strongly as do the objects they represent. And conversely desire may cause

images*: a hungry man will have images of food, and so on. In all these ways

the  causal  laws  concerning  images  are  connected  with  the  causal  laws

concerning the objects which the images "mean." An image may thus come

to fulfil the function of a general idea. The vague image of a dog, which we

spoke of a moment ago, will have effects which are only connected with dogs

in general, not the more special effects which would be produced by some

dogs but not by others. Berkeley and Hume, in their attack on general ideas,

do not allow for the vagueness of images: they assume that every image has

the definiteness that a physical object would have This is not the case, and a

vague image may well have a meaning which is general.

* This phrase is in need of interpretation, as appears from 

the analysis of desire. But the reader can easily supply the 

interpretation for himself.

  In order to define the "meaning" of an image, we have to take account

both of its resemblance to one or more prototypes, and of its causal efficacy.

If there were such a thing as a pure imagination-image, without any prototypewhatever,  it  would  be  destitute  of  meaning.  But  according  to  Hume's

principle,  the  simple  elements  in  an  image,  at  least,  are  derived  from

prototypes-except  possibly  in  very  rare  exceptional  cases.  Often,  in  such

instances as our image of a friend's face or of a nondescript dog, an image is

not  derived  from  one  prototype,  but  from  many;  when  this  happens,  the

image is vague, and blurs the features in which the various prototypes differ.

To arrive at the meaning of the image in such a case, we observe that there

are  certain  respects,  notably  associations,  in  which  the  effects  of  images

resemble those of their prototypes. If we find, in a given case, that our vague

image, say, of a nondescript dog, has those associative effects which all dogs

would have, but not those belonging to any special dog or kind of dog, we

may say that our image means "dog" in general. If it has all the associations

appropriate to spaniels but no others, we shall say it means "spaniel"; while if

it has all the associations appropriate to one particular dog, it will mean that

dog,  however  vague  it  may  be  as  a  picture.  The  meaning  of  an  image,

according to this analysis, is constituted by a combination of likeness and

associations. It is not a sharp or definite conception, and in many cases it will

be impossible to decide with any certainty what an image means. I think this

lies in the nature of things, and not in defective analysis.

  We  may  give  somewhat  more  precision  to  the  above  account  of  the

meaning of images, and extend it to meaning in general. We find sometimes

that, IN MNEMIC CAUSATION, an image or word, as stimulus, has the

same effect (or very nearly the same effect) as would belong to some object,

say, a certain dog. In that case we say that the image or word means that

object. In other cases the mnemic effects are not all those of one object, but

only those shared by objects of a certain kind, e.g. by all dogs. In this case the

meaning of the image or word is general: it means the whole kind. Generality

and particularity are a matter of degree. If two particulars differ sufficiently

little, their mnemic effects will be the same; therefore no image or word can

mean the one as opposed to the other; this sets a bound to the particularity of

meaning. On the other hand, the mnemic effects of a number of sufficiently

dissimilar objects will have nothing discoverable in common; hence a word

which aims at complete generality, such as "entity" for example, will have to

be devoid of mnemic effects, and therefore of meaning. In practice, this is not

the  case:  such  words  have  VERBAL  associations,  the  learning  of  which

constitutes the study of metaphysics.  The meaning of a word, unlike that of an image, is wholly constituted by

mnemic causal laws, and not in any degree by likeness (except in exceptional

cases). The word "dog" bears no resemblance to a dog, but its effects, like

those of an image of a dog, resemble the effects of an actual dog in certain

respects. It is much easier to say definitely what a word means than what an

image means, since words, however they originated, have been framed in

later times for the purpose of having meaning, and men have been engaged

for ages in giving increased precision to the meanings of words. But although

it is easier to say what a word means than what an image means, the relation

which constitutes meaning is much the same in both cases. A word, like an

image, has the same associations as its meaning has. In addition to other

associations, it is associated with images of its meaning, so that the word

tends to call up the image and the image tends to call up the word., But this

association is not essential to the intelligent use of words. If a word has the

right associations with other objects, we shall be able to use it correctly, and

understand  its  use  by  others,  even  if  it  evokes  no  image.  The  theoretical

understanding of words involves only the power of associating them correctly

with other words; the practical understanding involves associations with other

bodily movements.

  The  use  of  words  is,  of  course,  primarily  social,  for  the  purpose  of

suggesting  to  others  ideas  which  we  entertain  or  at  least  wish  them  to

entertain. But the aspect of words that specially concerns us is their power of

promoting our own thought. Almost all higher intellectual activity is a matter

of words, to the nearly total exclusion of everything else. The advantages of

words for purposes of thought are so great that I should never end if I were to

enumerate them. But a few of them deserve to be mentioned.

  In the first place, there is no difficulty in producing a word, whereas an

image cannot always be brought into existence at will, and when it comes it

often  contains  much  irrelevant  detail.  In  the  second  place,  much  of  our

thinking  is  concerned  with  abstract  matters  which  do  not  readily  lend

themselves to imagery, and are apt to be falsely conceived if we insist upon

finding images that may be supposed to represent them. The word is always

concrete and sensible, however abstract its meaning may be, and thus by the

help of words we are able to dwell on abstractions in a way which would

otherwise be impossible. In the third place, two instances of the same word

are so similar that neither has associations not capable of being shared by theother. Two instances of the word "dog" are much more alike than (say) a pug

and a great dane; hence the word "dog" makes it much easier to think about

dogs in general. When a number of objects have a common property which is

important but not obvious, the invention of a name for the common property

helps us to remember it and to think of the whole set of objects that possess

it. But it is unnecessary to prolong the catalogue of the uses of language in

thought.

  At the same time, it is possible to conduct rudimentary thought by means

of images, and it is important, sometimes, to check purely verbal thought by

reference to what it means. In philosophy especially the tyranny of traditional

words is dangerous, and we have to be on our guard against assuming that

grammar  is  the  key  to  metaphysics,  or  that  the  structure  of  a  sentence

corresponds  at  all  accurately  with  the  structure  of  the  fact  that  it  asserts.

Sayce  maintained  that  all  European  philosophy  since  Aristotle  has  been

dominated by the fact that the philosophers spoke Indo-European languages,

and  therefore  supposed  the  world,  like  the  sentences  they  were  used  to,

necessarily  divisible  into  subjects  and  predicates.  When  we  come  to  the

consideration of truth and falsehood, we shall see how necessary it is to avoid

assuming too close a parallelism between facts and the sentences which assert

them. Against such errors, the only safeguard is to be able, once in a way, to

discard  words  for  a  moment  and  contemplate  facts  more  directly  through

images. Most serious advances in philosophic thought result from some such

comparatively  direct  contemplation  of  facts.  But  the  outcome  has  to  be

expressed in words if it is to be communicable. Those who have a relatively

direct vision of facts are often incapable of translating their vision into words,

while those who possess the words have usually lost the vision. It is partly for

this reason that the highest philosophical capacity is so rare: it requires a

combination of vision with abstract words which is hard to achieve, and too

quickly lost in the few who have for a moment achieved it.

          LECTURE XI. GENERAL IDEAS AND THOUGHT

  It is said to be one of the merits of the human mind that it is capable of

framing abstract ideas, and of conducting nonsensational thought. In this it is

supposed to differ from the mind of animals. From Plato onward the "idea"

has played a great part in the systems of idealizing philosophers. The "idea"

has  been,  in  their  hands,  always  something  noble  and  abstract,  the

apprehension and use of which by man confers upon him a quite special

dignity.

  The thing we have to consider to-day is this: seeing that there certainly are

words of which the meaning is abstract, and seeing that we can use these

words  intelligently,  what  must  be  assumed  or  inferred,  or  what  can  be

discovered by observation, in the way of mental content to account for the

intelligent use of abstract words?

  Taken  as  a  problem  in  logic,  the  answer  is,  of  course,  that  absolutely

nothing in the way of abstract mental content is inferable from the mere fact

that we can use intelligently words of which the meaning is abstract. It is

clear  that  a  sufficiently  ingenious  person  could  manufacture  a  machine

moved  by  olfactory  stimuli  which,  whenever  a  dog  appeared  in  its

neighbourhood, would say, "There is a dog," and when a cat appeared would

throw stones at it. The act of saying "There is a dog," and the act of throwing

stones, would in such a case be equally mechanical. Correct speech does not

of itself afford any better evidence of mental content than the performance of

any other set of biologically useful movements, such as those of flight or

combat.  All  that  is  inferable  from  language  is  that  two  instances  of  a

universal, even when they differ very greatly, may cause the utterance of two

instances of the same word which only differ very slightly. As we saw in the

preceding lecture, the word "dog" is useful, partly, because two instances of

this word are much more similar than (say) a pug and a great dane. The use of

words  is  thus  a  method  of  substituting  for  two  particulars  which  differ

widely, in spite of being instances of the same universal, two other particulars

which differ very little, and which are also instances of a universal, namely

the name of the previous universal. Thus, so far as logic is concerned, we are

entirely  free  to  adopt  any  theory  as  to  general  ideas  which  empirical

observation may recommend.

  Berkeley and Hume made a vigorous onslaught on "abstract ideas." Theymeant by an idea approximately what we should call an image. Locke having

maintained that he could form an idea of triangle in general, without deciding

what  sort  of  triangle  it  was  to  be,  Berkeley  contended  that  this  was

impossible. He says:

  "Whether others, have this wonderful faculty of abstracting their ideas,

they best can tell: for myself, I dare be confident I have it not. I find, indeed, I

have indeed a faculty of imagining, or representing to myself, the ideas of

those particular things I have perceived, and of variously compounding and

dividing them. I can imagine a man with two heads, or the upper parts of a

man joined to the body of a horse. I can consider the hand, the eye, the nose,

each by itself abstracted or separated from the rest of the body. But, then,

whatever  hand  or  eye  I  imagine,  it  must  have  some  particular  shape  and

colour. Likewise the idea of a man that I frame to myself must be either of a

white, or a black, or a tawny, a straight, or a crooked, a tall, or a low, or a

middle-sized man. I cannot by any effort of thought conceive the abstract

idea above described. And it is equally impossible for me to form the abstract

idea of motion distinct from the body moving, and which is neither swift nor

slow, curvilinear nor rectilinear; and the like may be said of all other abstract

general ideas whatsoever. To be plain, I own myself able to abstract in one

sense, as when I consider some particular parts of qualities separated from

others, with which, though they are united in some object, yet it is possible

they may really exist without them. But I deny that I can abstract from one

another, or conceive separately, those qualities which it is impossible should

exist so separated; or that I can frame a general notion, by abstracting from

particulars  in  the  manner  aforesaid—which  last  are  the  two  proper

acceptations of ABSTRACTION. And there is ground to think most men will

acknowledge themselves to be in my case. The generality of men which are

simple and illiterate never pretend to ABSTRACT NOTIONS. It is said they

are difficult and not to be attained without pains and study; we may therefore

reasonably  conclude  that,  if  such  there  be,  they  are  confined  only  to  the

learned.

  "I proceed to examine what can be alleged in defence of the doctrine of

abstraction,  and  try  if  I  can  discover  what  it  is  that  inclines  the  men  of

speculation to embrace an opinion so remote from common sense as that

seems  to  be.  There  has  been  a  late  excellent  and  deservedly  esteemed

philosopher who, no doubt, has given it very much countenance, by seemingto think the having abstract general ideas is what puts the widest difference in

point of understanding betwixt man and beast. 'The having of general ideas,'

saith he, 'is that which puts a perfect distinction betwixt man and brutes, and

is an excellency which the faculties of brutes do by no means attain unto. For,

it is evident we observe no footsteps in them of making use of general signs

for universal ideas; from which we have reason to imagine that they have not

the faculty of abstracting, or making general ideas, since they have no use of

words or any other general signs.' And a little after: 'Therefore, I think, we

may suppose that it is in this that the species of brutes are discriminated from

men, and it is that proper difference wherein they are wholly separated, and

which at last widens to so wide a distance. For, if they have any ideas at all,

and are not bare machines (as some would have them), we cannot deny them

to have some reason. It seems as evident to me that they do, some of them, in

certain instances reason as that they have sense; but it is only in particular

ideas, just as they receive them from their senses. They are the best of them

tied up within those narrow bounds, and have not (as I think) the faculty to

enlarge them by any kind of abstraction.* ("Essay on Human Understanding,"

Bk. II, chap. xi, paragraphs 10 and 11.) I readily agree with this learned

author, that the faculties of brutes can by no means attain to abstraction. But,

then, if this be made the distinguishing property of that sort of animals, I fear

a great many of those that pass for men must be reckoned into their number.

The reason that is here assigned why we have no grounds to think brutes have

abstract general ideas is, that we observe in them no use of words or any

other general signs; which is built on this supposition-that the making use of

words implies the having general ideas. From which it follows that men who

use language are able to abstract or generalize their ideas. That this is the

sense  and  arguing  of  the  author  will  further  appear  by  his  answering  the

question  he  in  another  place  puts:  'Since  all  things  that  exist  are  only

particulars, how come we by general terms?' His answer is: 'Words become

general  by  being  made  the  signs  of  general  ideas.'  ("Essay  on  Human

Understanding," Bk. III, chap. III, paragraph 6.) But it seems that a word

becomes general by being made the sign, not of an abstract general idea, but

of several particular ideas, any one of which it indifferently suggests to the

mind. For example, when it is said 'the change of motion is proportional to

the  impressed  force,'  or  that  'whatever  has  extension  is  divisible,'  these

propositions are to be understood of motion and extension in general; andnevertheless it will not follow that they suggest to my thoughts an idea of

motion without a body moved, or any determinate direction and velocity, or

that I must conceive an abstract general idea of extension, which is neither

line, surface, nor solid, neither great nor small, black, white, nor red, nor of

any  other  determinate  colour.  It  is  only  implied  that  whatever  particular

motion I consider, whether it be swift or slow, perpendicular, horizontal, or

oblique, or in whatever object, the axiom concerning it holds equally true. As

does  the  other  of  every  particular  extension,  it  matters  not  whether  line,

surface, or solid, whether of this or that magnitude or figure.

  "By observing how ideas become general, we may the better judge how

words are made so. And here it is to be noted that I do not deny absolutely

there are general ideas, but only that there are any ABSTRACT general ideas;

for, in the passages we have quoted wherein there is mention of general ideas,

it is always supposed that they are formed by abstraction, after the manner set

forth in sections 8 and 9. Now, if we will annex a meaning to our words, and

speak only of what we can conceive, I believe we shall acknowledge that an

idea which, considered in itself, is particular, becomes general by being made

to represent or stand for all other particular ideas of the same sort. To make

this  plain  by  an  example,  suppose  a  geometrician  is  demonstrating  the

method of cutting a line in two equal parts. He draws, for instance, a black

line  of  an  inch  in  length:  this,  which  in  itself  is  a  particular  line,  is

nevertheless with regard to its signification general, since, as it is there used,

it represents all particular lines whatsoever; so that what is demonstrated of it

is demonstrated of all lines, or, in other words, of a line in general. And, as

THAT PARTICULAR LINE becomes general by being made a sign, so the

NAME 'line,' which taken absolutely is particular, by being a sign is made

general. And as the former owes its generality not to its being the sign of an

abstract or general line, but of all particular right lines that may possibly

exist, so the latter must be thought to derive its generality from the same

cause, namely, the various particular lines which it indifferently denotes." *

* Introduction to "A Treatise concerning the Principles of 

Human Knowledge," paragraphs 10, 11, and 12.

  Berkeley's view in the above passage, which is essentially the same as

Hume's, does not wholly agree with modern psychology, although it comes

nearer to agreement than does the view of those who believe that there are in

the  mind  single  contents  which  can  be  called  abstract  ideas.  The  way  inwhich Berkeley's view is inadequate is chiefly in the fact that images are as a

rule  not  of  one  definite  prototype,  but  of  a  number  of  related  similar

prototypes. On this subject Semon has written well. In "Die Mneme," pp. 217

ff.,  discussing  the  effect  of  repeated  similar  stimuli  in  producing  and

modifying our images, he says: "We choose a case of mnemic excitement

whose existence we can perceive for ourselves by introspection, and seek to

ekphore the bodily picture of our nearest relation in his absence, and have

thus a pure mnemic excitement before us. At first it may seem to us that a

determinate quite concrete picture becomes manifest in us, but just when we

are concerned with a person with whom we are in constant contact, we shall

find that the ekphored picture has something so to speak generalized. It is

something like those American photographs which seek to display what is

general about a type by combining a great number of photographs of different

heads  over  each  other  on  one  plate.  In  our  opinion,  the  generalizations

happen by the homophonic working of different pictures of the same face

which we have come across in the most different conditions and situations,

once pale, once reddened, once cheerful, once earnest, once in this light, and

once in that. As soon as we do not let the whole series of repetitions resound

in us uniformly, but give our attention to one particular moment out of the

many...  this  particular  mnemic  stimulus  at  once  overbalances  its

simultaneously roused predecessors and successors, and we perceive the face

in question with concrete definiteness in that particular situation." A little

later he says: "The result is—at least in man, but probably also in the higher

animals—the  development  of  a  sort  of  PHYSIOLOGICAL  abstraction.

Mnemic  homophony  gives  us,  without  the  addition  of  other  processes  of

thought, a picture of our friend X which is in a certain sense abstract, not the

concrete in any one situation, but X cut loose from any particular point of

time. If the circle of ekphored engrams is drawn even more widely, abstract

pictures of a higher order appear: for instance, a white man or a negro. In my

opinion, the first form of abstract concepts in general is based upon such

abstract  pictures.  The  physiological  abstraction  which  takes  place  in  the

above described manner is a predecessor of purely logical abstraction. It is by

no means a monopoly of the human race, but shows itself in various ways

also among the more highly organized animals." The same subject is treated

in more detail in Chapter xvi of "Die mnemischen Empfindungen," but what

is said there adds nothing vital to what is contained in the above quotations.  It is necessary, however, to distinguish between the vague and the general.

So long as we are content with Semon's composite image, we MAY get no

farther  than  the  vague.  The  question  whether  this  image  takes  us  to  the

general or not depends, I think, upon the question whether, in addition to the

generalized image, we have also particular images of some of the instances

out of which it is compounded. Suppose, for example, that on a number of

occasions you had seen one negro, and that you did not know whether this

one was the same or different on the different occasions. Suppose that in the

end  you  had  an  abstract  memory-image  of  the  different  appearances

presented by the negro on different occasions, but no memory-image of any

one of the single appearances. In that case your image would be vague. If, on

the other hand, you have, in addition to the generalized image, particular

images  of  the  several  appearances,  sufficiently  clear  to  be  recognized  as

different, and as instances of the generalized picture, you will then not feel

the generalized picture to be adequate to any one particular appearance, and

you will be able to make it function as a general idea rather than a vague idea.

If  this  view  is  correct,  no  new  general  content  needs  to  be  added  to  the

generalized image. What needs to be added is particular images compared

and  contrasted  with  the  generalized  image.  So  far  as  I  can  judge  by

introspection, this does occur in practice. Take for example Semon's instance

of a friend's face. Unless we make some special effort of recollection, the

face is likely to come before us with an average expression, very blurred and

vague,  but  we  can  at  will  recall  how  our  friend  looked  on  some  special

occasion when he was pleased or angry or unhappy, and this enables us to

realize the generalized character of the vague image.

  There is, however, another way of distinguishing between the vague, the

particular and the general, and this is not by their content, but by the reaction

which they produce. A word, for example, may be said to be vague when it is

applicable to a number of different individuals, but to each as individuals; the

name Smith, for example, is vague: it is always meant to apply to one man,

but there are many men to each of whom it applies.* The word "man," on the

other hand, is general. We say, "This is Smith," but we do not say "This is

man," but "This is a man." Thus we may say that a word embodies a vague

idea when its effects are appropriate to an individual, but are the same for

various similar individuals, while a word embodies a general idea when its

effects  are  different  from  those  appropriate  to  individuals.  In  what  thisdifference consists it is, however, not easy to say. I am inclined to think that

it consists merely in the knowledge that no one individual is represented, so

that  what  distinguishes  a  general  idea  from  a  vague  idea  is  merely  the

presence of a certain accompanying belief. If this view is correct, a general

idea differs from a vague one in a way analogous to that in which a memory-

image  differs  from  an  imagination-image.  There  also  we  found  that  the

difference consists merely of the fact that a memory-image is accompanied

by a belief, in this case as to the past.

* "Smith" would only be a quite satisfactory representation 

of vague words if we failed to discriminate between 

different people called Smith.

  It should also be said that our images even of quite particular occurrences

have  always  a  greater  or  a  less  degree  of  vagueness.  That  is  to  say,  the

occurrence might have varied within certain limits without causing our image

to vary recognizably. To arrive at the general it is necessary that we should be

able to contrast it with a number of relatively precise images or words for

particular occurrences; so long as all our images and words are vague, we

cannot  arrive  at  the  contrast  by  which  the  general  is  defined.  This  is  the

justification for the view which I quoted on p. 184 from Ribot (op. cit., p. 32),

viz. that intelligence progresses from the indefinite to the definite, and that

the vague appears earlier than either the particular or the general.

  I think the view which I have been advocating, to the effect that a general

idea is distinguished from a vague one by the presence of a judgment, is also

that intended by Ribot when he says (op. cit., p. 92): "The generic image is

never,  the  concept  is  always,  a  judgment.  We  know  that  for  logicians

(formerly at any rate) the concept is the simple and primitive element; next

comes  the  judgment,  uniting  two  or  several  concepts;  then  ratiocination,

combining two or several judgments. For the psychologists, on the contrary,

affirmation  is  the  fundamental  act;  the  concept  is  the  result  of  judgment

(explicit or implicit), of similarities with exclusion of differences."

  A  great  deal  of  work  professing  to  be  experimental  has  been  done  in

recent years on the psychology of thought. A good summary of such work up

to the year agog is contained in Titchener's "Lectures on the Experimental

Psychology of the Thought Processes" (1909). Three articles in the "Archiv

fur die gesammte Psychologie" by Watt,* Messer** and Buhler*** contain a

great  deal  of  the  material  amassed  by  the  methods  which  Titchener  callsexperimental.

* Henry J. Watt, "Experimentelle Beitrage zu einer Theorie 

des Denkens," vol. iv (1905) pp. 289-436. 


** August Messer, "Experimentell-psychologische Untersuchu 

gen uber das Denken," vol. iii (1906), pp. 1-224. 


*** Karl Buhler, "Uber Gedanken," vol. ix (1907), pp. 297-365.

  For my part I am unable to attach as much importance to this work as

many psychologists do. The method employed appears to me hardly to fulfil

the conditions of scientific experiment. Broadly speaking, what is done is,

that a set of questions are asked of various people, their answers are recorded,

and likewise their own accounts, based upon introspection, of the processes

of thought which led them to give those answers. Much too much reliance

seems to me to be placed upon the correctness of their introspection. On

introspection  as  a  method  I  have  spoken  earlier  (Lecture  VI).  I  am  not

prepared, like Professor Watson, to reject it wholly, but I do consider that it is

exceedingly fallible and quite peculiarly liable to falsification in accordance

with  preconceived  theory.  It  is  like  depending  upon  the  report  of  a

shortsighted person as to whom he sees coming along the road at a moment

when he is firmly convinced that Jones is sure to come. If everybody were

shortsighted and obsessed with beliefs as to what was going to be visible, we

might have to make the best of such testimony, but we should need to correct

its errors by taking care to collect the simultaneous evidence of people with

the most divergent expectations. There is no evidence that this was done in

the  experiments  in  question,  nor  indeed  that  the  influence  of  theory  in

falsifying the introspection was at all adequately recognized. I feel convinced

that if Professor Watson had been one of the subjects of the questionnaires,

he would have given answers totally different from those recorded in the

articles  in  question.  Titchener  quotes  an  opinion  of  Wundt  on  these

investigations,  which  appears  to  me  thoroughly  justified.  "These

experiments," he says, "are not experiments at all in the sense of a scientific

methodology; they are counterfeit experiments, that seem methodical simply

because  they  are  ordinarily  performed  in  a  psychological  laboratory,  and

involve the co-operation of two persons, who purport to be experimenter and

observer. In reality, they are as unmethodical as possible; they possess noneof  the  special  features  by  which  we  distinguish  the  introspections  of

experimental psychology from the casual introspections of everyday life."*

Titchener, of course, dissents from this opinion, but I cannot see that his

reasons for dissent are adequate. My doubts are only increased by the fact

that Buhler at any rate used trained psychologists as his subjects. A trained

psychologist  is,  of  course,  supposed  to  have  acquired  the  habit  of

observation, but he is at least equally likely to have acquired a habit of seeing

what  his  theories  require.  We  may  take  Buhler's  "Uber  Gedanken"  to

illustrate the kind of results arrived at by such methods. Buhler says (p. 303):

"We  ask  ourselves  the  general  question:  'WHAT  DO  WE  EXPERIENCE

WHEN  WE  THINK?'  Then  we  do  not  at  all  attempt  a  preliminary

determination  of  the  concept  'thought,'  but  choose  for  analysis  only  such

processes as everyone would describe as processes of thought." The most

important thing in thinking, he says, is "awareness that..." (Bewusstheit dass),

which he calls a thought. It is, he says, thoughts in this sense that are essential

to  thinking.  Thinking,  he  maintains,  does  not  need  language  or  sensuous

presentations. "I assert rather that in principle every object can be thought

(meant)  distinctly,  without  any  help  from  sensuous  presentation

(Anschauungshilfen). Every individual shade of blue colour on the picture

that hangs in my room I can think with complete distinctness unsensuously

(unanschaulich), provided it is possible that the object should be given to me

in another manner than by the help of sensations. How that is possible we

shall  see  later."  What  he  calls  a  thought  (Gedanke)  cannot  be  reduced,

according to him, to other psychic occurrences. He maintains that thoughts

consist for the most part of known rules (p. 342). It is clearly essential to the

interest of this theory that the thought or rule alluded to by Buhler should not

need to be expressed in words, for if it is expressed in words it is immediately

capable of being dealt with on the lines with which the behaviourists have

familiarized us. It is clear also that the supposed absence of words rests solely

upon the introspective testimony of the persons experimented upon. I cannot

think  that  there  is  sufficient  certainty  of  their  reliability  in  this  negative

observation to make us accept a difficult and revolutionary view of thought,

merely because they have failed to observe the presence of words or their

equivalent in their thinking. I think it far more likely, especially in view of

the  fact  that  the  persons  concerned  were  highly  educated,  that  we  are

concerned with telescoped processes, in which habit has caused a great manyintermediate terms to be elided or to be passed over so quickly as to escape

observation.

* Titchener, op. cit., p. 79.

  I am inclined to think that similar remarks apply to the general idea of

"imageless thinking," concerning which there has been much controversy.

The advocates of imageless thinking are not contending merely that there can

be thinking which is purely verbal; they are contending that there can be

thinking which proceeds neither in words nor in images. My own feeling is

that they have rashly assumed the presence of thinking in cases where habit

has  rendered  thinking  unnecessary.  When  Thorndike  experimented  with

animals in cages, he found that the associations established were between a

sensory stimulus and a bodily movement (not the idea of it), without the need

of supposing any non-physiological intermediary (op. cit., p. 100 ff.). The

same thing, it seems to me, applies to ourselves. A certain sensory situation

produces  in  us  a  certain  bodily  movement.  Sometimes  this  movement

consists in uttering words. Prejudice leads us to suppose that between the

sensory stimulus and the utterance of the words a process of thought must

have intervened, but there seems no good reason for such a supposition. Any

habitual  action,  such  as  eating  or  dressing,  may  be  performed  on  the

appropriate occasion, without any need of thought, and the same seems to be

true of a painfully large proportion of our talk. What applies to uttered speech

applies of course equally to the internal speech which is not uttered. I remain,

therefore,  entirely  unconvinced  that  there  is  any  such  phenomenon  as

thinking which consists neither of images nor of words, or that "ideas" have

to be added to sensations and images as part of the material out of which

mental phenomena are built.

  The question of the nature of our consciousness of the universal is much

affected by our view as to the general nature of the relation of consciousness

to its object. If we adopt the view of Brentano, according to which all mental

content has essential reference to an object, it is then natural to suppose that

there  is  some  peculiar  kind  of  mental  content  of  which  the  object  is  a

universal, as oppose to a particular. According to this view, a particular cat

can be PERceived or imagined, while the universal "cat" is CONceived. But

this  whole  manner  of  viewing  our  dealings  with  universals  has  to  be

abandoned  when  the  relation  of  a  mental  occurrence  to  its  "object"  is

regarded  as  merely  indirect  and  causal,  which  is  the  view  that  we  haveadopted. The mental content is, of course, always particular, and the question

as to what it "means" (in case it means anything) is one which cannot be

settled by merely examining the intrinsic character of the mental content, but

only by knowing its causal connections in the case of the person concerned.

To say that a certain thought "means" a universal as opposed to either a vague

or a particular, is to say something exceedingly complex. A horse will behave

in a certain manner whenever he smells a bear, even if the smell is derived

from a bearskin. That is to say, any environment containing an instance of the

universal "smell of a bear" produces closely similar behaviour in the horse,

but  we  do  not  say  that  the  horse  is  conscious  of  this  universal.  There  is

equally  little  reason  to  regard  a  man  as  conscious  of  the  same  universal,

because under the same circumstances he can react by saying, "I smell a

bear."  This  reaction,  like  that  of  the  horse,  is  merely  closely  similar  on

different  occasions  where  the  environment  affords  instances  of  the  same

universal. Words of which the logical meaning is universal can therefore be

employed correctly, without anything that could be called consciousness of

universals. Such consciousness in the only sense in which it can be said to

exist  is  a  matter  of  reflective  judgment  consisting  in  the  observation  of

similarities and differences. A universal never appears before the mind as a

single  object  in  the  sort  of  way  in  which  something  perceived  appears.  I

THINK a logical argument could be produced to show that universals are part

of the structure of the world, but they are an inferred part, not a part of our

data. What exists in us consists of various factors, some open to external

observation, others only visible to introspection. The factors open to external

observation  are  primarily  habits,  having  the  peculiarity  that  very  similar

reactions are produced by stimuli which are in many respects very different

from each other. Of this the reaction of the horse to the smell of the bear is an

instance, and so is the reaction of the man who says "bear" under the same

circumstances. The verbal reaction is, of course, the most important from the

point of view of what may be called knowledge of universals. A man who

can always use the word "dog" when he sees a dog may be said, in a certain

sense, to know the meaning of the word "dog," and IN THAT SENSE to have

knowledge of the universal "dog." But there is, of course, a further stage

reached by the logician in which he not merely reacts with the word "dog,"

but sets to work to discover what it is in the environment that causes in him

this  almost  identical  reaction  on  different  occasions.  This  further  stageconsists in knowledge of similarities and differences: similarities which are

necessary to the applicability of the word "dog," and differences which are

compatible with it. Our knowledge of these similarities and differences is

never exhaustive, and therefore our knowledge of the meaning of a universal

is never complete.

  In addition to external observable habits (including the habit of words),

there is also the generic image produced by the superposition, or, in Semon's

phrase, homophony, of a number of similar perceptions. This image is vague

so long as the multiplicity of its prototypes is not recognized, but becomes

universal  when  it  exists  alongside  of  the  more  specific  images  of  its

instances, and is knowingly contrasted with them. In this case we find again,

as we found when we were discussing words in general in the preceding

lecture,  that  images  are  not  logically  necessary  in  order  to  account  for

observable behaviour, i.e. in this case intelligent speech. Intelligent speech

could exist as a motor habit, without any accompaniment of images, and this

conclusion applies to words of which the meaning is universal, just as much

as to words of which the meaning is relatively particular. If this conclusion is

valid, it follows that behaviourist psychology, which eschews introspective

data, is capable of being an independent science, and of accounting for all

that part of the behaviour of other people which is commonly regarded as

evidence  that  they  think.  It  must  be  admitted  that  this  conclusion

considerably weakens the reliance which can be placed upon introspective

data. They must be accepted simply on account of the fact that we seem to

perceive them, not on account of their supposed necessity for explaining the

data of external observation.

  This, at any rate, is the conclusion to which we are forced, so long as, with

the behaviourists, we accept common-sense views of the physical world. But

if, as I have urged, the physical world itself, as known, is infected through

and  through  with  subjectivity,  if,  as  the  theory  of  relativity  suggests,  the

physical universe contains the diversity of points of view which we have

been  accustomed  to  regard  as  distinctively  psychological,  then  we  are

brought back by this different road to the necessity for trusting observations

which are in an important sense private. And it is the privacy of introspective

data which causes much of the behaviourists' objection to them.

  This  is  an  example  of  the  difficulty  of  constructing  an  adequate

philosophy of any one science without taking account of other sciences. Thebehaviourist philosophy of psychology, though in many respects admirable

from the point of view of method, appears to me to fail in the last analysis

because  it  is  based  upon  an  inadequate  philosophy  of  physics.  In  spite,

therefore,  of  the  fact  that  the  evidence  for  images,  whether  generic  or

particular,  is  merely  introspective,  I  cannot  admit  that  images  should  be

rejected, or that we should minimize their function in our knowledge of what

is remote in time or space.

                                LECTURE XII. BELIEF

  Belief, which is our subject to-day, is the central problem in the analysis

of mind. Believing seems the most "mental" thing we do, the thing most

remote from what is done by mere matter. The whole intellectual life consists

of beliefs, and of the passage from one belief to another by what is called

"reasoning." Beliefs give knowledge and error; they are the vehicles of truth

and falsehood. Psychology, theory of knowledge and metaphysics revolve

about belief, and on the view we take of belief our philosophical outlook

largely depends.

  Before embarking upon the detailed analysis of belief, we shall do well to

note certain requisites which any theory must fulfil.

  (1)  Just  as  words  are  characterized  by  meaning,  so  beliefs  are

characterized by truth or falsehood. And just as meaning consists in relation

to the object meant, so truth and falsehood consist in relation to something

that lies outside the belief. You may believe that such-and-such a horse will

win  the  Derby.  The  time  comes,  and  your  horse  wins  or  does  not  win;

according to the outcome, your belief was true or false. You may believe that

six times nine is fifty-six; in this case also there is a fact which makes your

belief false. You may believe that America was discovered in 1492, or that it

was discovered in 1066. In the one case your belief is true, in the other false;

in either case its truth or falsehood depends upon the actions of Columbus,

not upon anything present or under your control. What makes a belief true or

false I call a "fact." The particular fact that makes a given belief true or false I

call its "objective,"* and the relation of the belief to its objective I call the

"reference" or the "objective reference" of the belief. Thus, if I believe that

Columbus  crossed  the  Atlantic  in  1492,  the  "objective"  of  my  belief  is

Columbus's actual voyage, and the "reference" of my belief is the relation

between my belief and the voyage—that relation, namely, in virtue of which

the voyage makes my belief true (or, in another case, false). "Reference" of

beliefs differs from "meaning" of words in various ways, but especially in the

fact that it is of two kinds, "true" reference and "false" reference. The truth or

falsehood of a belief does not depend upon anything intrinsic to the belief,

but upon the nature of its relation to its objective. The intrinsic nature of

belief can be treated without reference to what makes it true or false. In the

remainder of the present lecture I shall ignore truth and falsehood, which willbe the subject of Lecture XIII. It is the intrinsic nature of belief that will

concern us to-day.

* This terminology is suggested by Meinong, but is not 

exactly the same as his.

  (2) We must distinguish between believing and what is believed. I may

believe that Columbus crossed the Atlantic, that all Cretans are liars, that two

and two are four, or that nine times six is fifty-six; in all these cases the

believing is just the same, and only the contents believed are different. I may

remember my breakfast this morning, my lecture last week, or my first sight

of New York. In all these cases the feeling of memory-belief is just the same,

and  only  what  is  remembered  differs.  Exactly  similar  remarks  apply  to

expectations. Bare assent, memory and expectation are forms of belief; all

three are different from what is believed, and each has a constant character

which is independent of what is believed.

  In Lecture I we criticized the analysis of a presentation into act, content

and object. But our analysis of belief contains three very similar elements,

namely the believing, what is believed and the objective. The objections to

the act (in the case of presentations) are not valid against the believing in the

case of beliefs, because the believing is an actual experienced feeling, not

something postulated, like the act. But it is necessary first to complete our

preliminary requisites, and then to examine the content of a belief. After that,

we  shall  be  in  a  position  to  return  to  the  question  as  to  what  constitutes

believing.

  (3)  What  is  believed,  and  the  believing,  must  both  consist  of  present

occurrences in the believer, no matter what may be the objective of the belief.

Suppose  I  believe,  for  example,  "that  Caesar  crossed  the  Rubicon."  The

objective of my belief is an event which happened long ago, which I never

saw and do not remember. This event itself is not in my mind when I believe

that it happened. It is not correct to say that I am believing the actual event;

what I am believing is something now in my mind, something related to the

event (in a way which we shall investigate in Lecture XIII), but obviously not

to be confounded with the event, since the event is not occurring now but the

believing  is.  What  a  man  is  believing  at  a  given  moment  is  wholly

determinate if we know the contents of his mind at that moment; but Caesar's

crossing of the Rubicon was an historical physical event, which is distinct

from the present contents of every present mind. What is believed, howevertrue it may be, is not the actual fact that makes the belief true, but a present

event related to the fact. This present event, which is what is believed, I shall

call the "content" of the belief. We have already had occasion to notice the

distinction  between  content  and  objective  in  the  case  of  memory-beliefs,

where the content is "this occurred" and the objective is the past event.

  (4) Between content and objective there is sometimes a very wide gulf, for

example in the case of "Caesar crossed the Rubicon." This gulf may, when it

is first perceived, give us a feeling that we cannot really "know" anything

about the outer world. All we can "know," it may be said, is what is now in

our thoughts. If Caesar and the Rubicon cannot be bodily in our thoughts, it

might seem as though we must remain cut off from knowledge of them. I

shall not now deal at length with this feeling, since it is necessary first to

define "knowing," which cannot be done yet. But I will say, as a preliminary

answer, that the feeling assumes an ideal of knowing which I believe to be

quite mistaken. It assumes, if it is thought out, something like the mystic

unity of knower and known. These two are often said to be combined into a

unity by the fact of cognition; hence when this unity is plainly absent, it may

seem as if there were no genuine cognition. For my part, I think such theories

and feelings wholly mistaken: I believe knowing to be a very external and

complicated relation, incapable of exact definition, dependent upon causal

laws, and involving no more unity than there is between a signpost and the

town to which it points. I shall return to this question on a later occasion; for

the moment these provisional remarks must suffice.

  (5) The objective reference of a belief is connected with the fact that all or

some  of  the  constituents  of  its  content  have  meaning.  If  I  say  "Caesar

conquered  Gaul,"  a  person  who  knows  the  meaning  of  the  three  words

composing my statement knows as much as can be known about the nature of

the  objective  which  would  make  my  statement  true.  It  is  clear  that  the

objective reference of a belief is, in general, in some way derivative from the

meanings  of  the  words  or  images  that  occur  in  its  content.  There  are,

however, certain complications which must be borne in mind. In the first

place, it might be contended that a memory-image acquires meaning only

through  the  memory-belief,  which  would  seem,  at  least  in  the  case  of

memory, to make belief more primitive than the meaning of images. In the

second place, it is a very singular thing that meaning, which is single, should

generate objective reference, which is dual, namely true and false. This is oneof the facts which any theory of belief must explain if it is to be satisfactory.

  It  is  now  time  to  leave  these  preliminary  requisites,  and  attempt  the

analysis of the contents of beliefs.

  The first thing to notice about what is believed, i.e. about the content of a

belief, is that it is always complex: We believe that a certain thing has a

certain property, or a certain relation to something else, or that it occurred or

will  occur  (in  the  sense  discussed  at  the  end  of  Lecture  IX);  or  we  may

believe that all the members of a certain class have a certain property, or that

a certain property sometimes occurs among the members of a class; or we

may believe that if one thing happens, another will happen (for example, "if it

rains I shall bring my umbrella"), or we may believe that something does not

happen, or did not or will not happen (for example, "it won't rain"); or that

one  of  two  things  must  happen  (for  example,  "either  you  withdraw  your

accusation, or I shall bring a libel action"). The catalogue of the sorts of

things we may believe is infinite, but all of them are complex.

  Language sometimes conceals the complexity of a belief. We say that a

person  believes  in  God,  and  it  might  seem  as  if  God  formed  the  whole

content of the belief. But what is really believed is that God exists, which is

very far from being simple. Similarly, when a person has a memory-image

with a memory-belief, the belief is "this occurred," in the sense explained in

Lecture IX; and "this occurred" is not simple. In like manner all cases where

the  content  of  a  belief  seems  simple  at  first  sight  will  be  found,  on

examination, to confirm the view that the content is always complex.

  The content of a belief involves not merely a plurality of constituents, but

definite relations between them; it is not determinate when its constituents

alone  are  given.  For  example,  "Plato  preceded  Aristotle"  and  "Aristotle

preceded Plato" are both contents which may be believed, but, although they

consist  of  exactly  the  same  constituents,  they  are  different,  and  even

incompatible.

  The content of a belief may consist of words only, or of images only, or of

a  mixture  of  the  two,  or  of  either  or  both  together  with  one  or  more

sensations. It must contain at least one constituent which is a word or an

image, and it may or may not contain one or more sensations as constituents.

Some examples will make these various possibilities clear.

  We may take first recognition, in either of the forms "this is of such-and-

such a kind" or "this has occurred before." In either case, present sensation isa constituent. For example, you hear a noise, and you say to yourself "tram."

Here the noise and the word "tram" are both constituents of your belief; there

is also a relation between them, expressed by "is" in the proposition "that is a

tram." As soon as your act of recognition is completed by the occurrence of

the word "tram," your actions are affected: you hurry if you want the tram, or

cease to hurry if you want a bus. In this case the content of your belief is a

sensation (the noise) and a word ("tram") related in a way which may be

called predication.

  The same noise may bring into your mind the visual image of a tram,

instead of the word "tram." In this case your belief consists of a sensation and

an image suitable related. Beliefs of this class are what are called "judgments

of  perception."  As  we  saw  in  Lecture  VIII,  the  images  associated  with  a

sensation often come with such spontaneity and force that the unsophisticated

do not distinguish them from the sensation; it is only the psychologist or the

skilled observer who is aware of the large mnemic element that is added to

sensation to make perception. It may be objected that what is added consists

merely of images without belief. This is no doubt sometimes the case, but is

certainly sometimes not the case. That belief always occurs in perception as

opposed to sensation it is not necessary for us to maintain; it is enough for

our purposes to note that it sometimes occurs, and that when it does, the

content of our belief consists of a sensation and an image suitably related.

  In a PURE memory-belief only images occur. But a mixture of words and

images  is  very  common  in  memory.  You  have  an  image  of  the  past

occurrence, and you say to yourself: "Yes, that's how it was." Here the image

and the words together make up the content of the belief. And when the

remembering of an incident has become a habit, it may be purely verbal, and

the memory-belief may consist of words alone.

  The more complicated forms of belief tend to consist only of words. Often

images of various kinds accompany them, but they are apt to be irrelevant,

and to form no part of what is actually believed. For example, in thinking of

the Solar System, you are likely to have vague images of pictures you have

seen of the earth surrounded by clouds, Saturn and his rings, the sun during

an eclipse, and so on; but none of these form part of your belief that the

planets revolve round the sun in elliptical orbits. The only images that form

an actual part of such beliefs are, as a rule, images of words. And images of

words, for the reasons considered in Lecture VIII, cannot be distinguishedwith any certainty from sensations, when, as is often, if not usually, the case,

they are kinaesthetic images of pronouncing the words.

  It is impossible for a belief to consist of sensations alone, except when, as

in the case of words, the sensations have associations which make them signs

possessed of meaning. The reason is that objective reference is of the essence

of belief, and objective reference is derived from meaning. When I speak of a

belief consisting partly of sensations and partly of words, I do not mean to

deny that the words, when they are not mere images, are sensational, but that

they occur as signs, not (so to speak) in their own right. To revert to the noise

of the tram, when you hear it and say "tram," the noise and the word are both

sensations (if you actually pronounce the word), but the noise is part of the

fact which makes your belief true, whereas the word is not part of this fact. It

is the MEANING of the word "tram," not the actual word, that forms part of

the fact which is the objective of your belief. Thus the word occurs in the

belief as a symbol, in virtue of its meaning, whereas the noise enters into both

the  belief  and  its  objective.  It  is  this  that  distinguishes  the  occurrence  of

words as symbols from the occurrence of sensations in their own right: the

objective contains the sensations that occur in their own right, but contains

only the meanings of the words that occur as symbols.

  For the sake of simplicity, we may ignore the cases in which sensations in

their own right form part of the content of a belief, and confine ourselves to

images and words. We may also omit the cases in which both images and

words occur in the content of a belief. Thus we become confined to two

cases: (a) when the content consists wholly of images, (b) when it consists

wholly  of  words.  The  case  of  mixed  images  and  words  has  no  special

importance, and its omission will do no harm.

  Let us take in illustration a case of memory. Suppose you are thinking of

some familiar room. You may call up an image of it, and in your image the

window may be to the left of the door. Without any intrusion of words, you

may  believe  in  the  correctness  of  your  image.  You  then  have  a  belief,

consisting  wholly  of  images,  which  becomes,  when  put  into  words,  "the

window is to the left of the door." You may yourself use these words and

proceed  to  believe  them.  You  thus  pass  from  an  image-content  to  the

corresponding word-content. The content is different in the two cases, but its

objective reference is the same. This shows the relation of image-beliefs to

word-beliefs  in  a  very  simple  case.  In  more  elaborate  cases  the  relationbecomes much less simple.

  It may be said that even in this very simple case the objective reference of

the  word-content  is  not  quite  the  same  as  that  of  the  image-content,  that

images have a wealth of concrete features which are lost when words are

substituted,  that  the  window  in  the  image  is  not  a  mere  window  in  the

abstract, but a window of a certain shape and size, not merely to the left of

the door, but a certain distance to the left, and so on. In reply, it may be

admitted at once that there is, as a rule, a certain amount of truth in the

objection. But two points may be urged to minimize its force. First, images

do  not,  as  a  rule,  have  that  wealth  of  concrete  detail  that  would  make  it

IMPOSSIBLE  to  express  them  fully  in  words.  They  are  vague  and

fragmentary: a finite number of words, though perhaps a large number, would

exhaust at least their SIGNIFICANT features. For—and this is our second

point—images enter into the content of a belief through the fact that they are

capable of meaning, and their meaning does not, as a rule, have as much

complexity as they have: some of their characteristics are usually devoid of

meaning.  Thus  it  may  well  be  possible  to  extract  in  words  all  that  has

meaning in an image-content; in that case the word-content and the image-

content will have exactly the same objective reference.

  The content of a belief, when expressed in words, is the same thing (or

very nearly the same thing) as what in logic is called a "proposition." A

proposition is a series of words (or sometimes a single word) expressing the

kind of thing that can be asserted or denied. "That all men are mortal," "that

Columbus discovered America," "that Charles I died in his bed," "that all

philosophers  are  wise,"  are  propositions.  Not  any  series  of  words  is  a

proposition,  but  only  such  series  of  words  as  have  "meaning,"  or,  in  our

phraseology, "objective reference." Given the meanings of separate words,

and the rules of syntax, the meaning of a proposition is determinate. This is

the reason why we can understand a sentence we never heard before. You

probably  never  heard  before  the  proposition  "that  the  inhabitants  of  the

Andaman Islands habitually eat stewed hippopotamus for dinner," but there is

no difficulty in understanding the proposition. The question of the relation

between the meaning of a sentence and the meanings of the separate words is

difficult,  and  I  shall  not  pursue  it  now;  I  brought  it  up  solely  as  being

illustrative of the nature of propositions.

  We may extend the term "proposition" so as to cover the image-contentsof beliefs consisting of images. Thus, in the case of remembering a room in

which the window is to the left of the door, when we believe the image-

content the proposition will consist of the image of the window on the left

together  with  the  image  of  the  door  on  the  right.  We  will  distinguish

propositions of this kind as "image-propositions" and propositions in words

as "word-propositions." We may identify propositions in general with the

contents of actual and possible beliefs, and we may say that it is propositions

that are true or false. In logic we are concerned with propositions rather than

beliefs, since logic is not interested in what people do in fact believe, but only

in the conditions which determine the truth or falsehood of possible beliefs.

Whenever possible, except when actual beliefs are in question, it is generally

a simplification to deal with propositions.

  It  would  seem  that  image-propositions  are  more  primitive  than  word-

propositions,  and  may  well  ante-date  language.  There  is  no  reason  why

memory-images, accompanied by that very simple belief-feeling which we

decided  to  be  the  essence  of  memory,  should  not  have  occurred  before

language arose; indeed, it would be rash to assert positively that memory of

this  sort  does  not  occur  among  the  higher  animals.  Our  more  elementary

beliefs, notably those that are added to sensation to make perception, often

remain at the level of images. For example, most of the visual objects in our

neighbourhood rouse tactile images: we have a different feeling in looking at

a sofa from what we have in looking at a block of marble, and the difference

consists chiefly in different stimulation of our tactile imagination. It may be

said that the tactile images are merely present, without any accompanying

belief; but I think this view, though sometimes correct, derives its plausibility

as a general proposition from our thinking of explicit conscious belief only.

Most of our beliefs, like most of our wishes, are "unconscious," in the sense

that we have never told ourselves that we have them. Such beliefs display

themselves  when  the  expectations  that  they  arouse  fail  in  any  way.  For

example, if someone puts tea (without milk) into a glass, and you drink it

under the impression that it is going to be beer; or if you walk on what

appears to be a tiled floor, and it turns out to be a soft carpet made to look

like tiles. The shock of surprise on an occasion of this kind makes us aware

of  the  expectations  that  habitually  enter  into  our  perceptions;  and  such

expectations must be classed as beliefs, in spite of the fact that we do not

normally  take  note  of  them  or  put  them  into  words.  I  remember  oncewatching a cock pigeon running over and over again to the edge of a looking-

glass to try to wreak vengeance on the particularly obnoxious bird whom he

expected to find there, judging by what he saw in the glass. He must have

experienced  each  time  the  sort  of  surprise  on  finding  nothing,  which  is

calculated to lead in time to the adoption of Berkeley's theory that objects of

sense are only in the mind. His expectation, though not expressed in words,

deserved, I think, to be called a belief.

  I come now to the question what constitutes believing, as opposed to the

content believed.

  To  begin  with,  there  are  various  different  attitudes  that  may  be  taken

towards the same content. Let us suppose, for the sake of argument, that you

have a visual image of your breakfast-table. You may expect it while you are

dressing in the morning; remember it as you go to your work; feel doubt as to

its  correctness  when  questioned  as  to  your  powers  of  visualizing;  merely

entertain the image, without connecting it with anything external, when you

are going to sleep; desire it if you are hungry, or feel aversion for it if you are

ill.  Suppose,  for  the  sake  of  definiteness,  that  the  content  is  "an  egg  for

breakfast." Then you have the following attitudes "I expect there will be an

egg for breakfast"; "I remember there was an egg for breakfast"; "Was there

an egg for breakfast?" "An egg for breakfast: well, what of it?" "I hope there

will be an egg for breakfast"; "I am afraid there will be an egg for breakfast

and it is sure to be bad." I do not suggest that this is a list of all possible

attitudes  on  the  subject;  I  say  only  that  they  are  different  attitudes,  all

concerned with the one content "an egg for breakfast."

  These attitudes are not all equally ultimate. Those that involve desire and

aversion  have  occupied  us  in  Lecture  III.  For  the  present,  we  are  only

concerned  with  such  as  are  cognitive.  In  speaking  of  memory,  we

distinguished three kinds of belief directed towards the same content, namely

memory, expectation and bare assent without any time-determination in the

belief-feeling. But before developing this view, we must examine two other

theories which might be held concerning belief, and which, in some ways,

would be more in harmony with a behaviourist outlook than the theory I wish

to advocate.

  (1) The first theory to be examined is the view that the differentia of belief

consists in its causal efficacy I do not wish to make any author responsible

for this theory: I wish merely to develop it hypothetically so that we mayjudge of its tenability.

  We defined the meaning of an image or word by causal efficacy, namely

by associations: an image or word acquires meaning, we said, through having

the same associations as what it means.

  We propose hypothetically to define "belief" by a different kind of causal

efficacy,  namely  efficacy  in  causing  voluntary  movements.  (Voluntary

movements are defined as those vital movements which are distinguished

from reflex movements as involving the higher nervous centres. I do not like

to distinguish them by means of such notions as "consciousness" or "will,"

because  I  do  not  think  these  notions,  in  any  definable  sense,  are  always

applicable. Moreover, the purpose of the theory we are examining is to be, as

far  as  possible,  physiological  and  behaviourist,  and  this  purpose  is  not

achieved  if  we  introduce  such  a  conception  as  "consciousness"  or  "will."

Nevertheless,  it  is  necessary  for  our  purpose  to  find  some  way  of

distinguishing  between  voluntary  and  reflex  movements,  since  the  results

would  be  too  paradoxical,  if  we  were  to  say  that  reflex  movements  also

involve  beliefs.)  According  to  this  definition,  a  content  is  said  to  be

"believed" when it causes us to move. The images aroused are the same if

you  say  to  me,  "Suppose  there  were  an  escaped  tiger  coming  along  the

street," and if you say to me, "There is an escaped tiger coming along the

street." But my actions will be very different in the two cases: in the first, I

shall remain calm; in the second, it is possible that I may not. It is suggested,

by the theory we are considering, that this difference of effects constitutes

what is meant by saying that in the second case I believe the proposition

suggested, while in the first case I do not. According to this view, images or

words are "believed" when they cause bodily movements.

  I do not think this theory is adequate, but I think it is suggestive of truth,

and not so easily refutable as it might appear to be at first sight.

  It might be objected to the theory that many things which we certainly

believe do not call for any bodily movements. I believe that Great Britain is

an island, that whales are mammals, that Charles I was executed, and so on;

and at first sight it seems obvious that such beliefs, as a rule, do not call for

any action on my part. But when we investigate the matter more closely, it

becomes more doubtful. To begin with, we must distinguish belief as a mere

DISPOSITION from actual active belief. We speak as if we always believed

that Charles I was executed, but that only means that we are always ready tobelieve it when the subject comes up. The phenomenon we are concerned to

analyse is the active belief, not the permanent disposition. Now, what are the

occasions when, we actively believe that Charles I was executed? Primarily:

examinations, when we perform the bodily movement of writing it down;

conversation,  when  we  assert  it  to  display  our  historical  erudition;  and

political  discourses,  when  we  are  engaged  in  showing  what  Soviet

government  leads  to.  In  all  these  cases  bodily  movements  (writing  or

speaking) result from our belief.

  But there remains the belief which merely occurs in "thinking." One may

set to work to recall some piece of history one has been reading, and what

one  recalls  is  believed,  although  it  probably  does  not  cause  any  bodily

movement whatever. It is true that what we believe always MAY influence

action. Suppose I am invited to become King of Georgia: I find the prospect

attractive, and go to Cook's to buy a third-class ticket to my new realm. At

the last moment I remember Charles I and all the other monarchs who have

come to a bad end; I change my mind, and walk out without completing the

transaction. But such incidents are rare, and cannot constitute the whole of

my  belief  that  Charles  I  was  executed.  The  conclusion  seems  to  be  that,

although a belief always MAY influence action if it becomes relevant to a

practical issue, it often exists actively (not as a mere disposition) without

producing any voluntary movement whatever. If this is true, we cannot define

belief by the effect on voluntary movements.

  There is another, more theoretical, ground for rejecting the view we are

examining. It is clear that a proposition can be either believed or merely

considered, and that the content is the same in both cases. We can expect an

egg for breakfast, or merely entertain the supposition that there may be an

egg for breakfast. A moment ago I considered the possibility of being invited

to become King of Georgia, but I do not believe that this will happen. Now, it

seems clear that, since believing and considering have different effects if one

produces bodily movements while the other does not, there must be some

intrinsic  difference  between  believing  and  considering*;  for  if  they  were

precisely similar, their effects also would be precisely similar. We have seen

that  the  difference  between  believing  a  given  proposition  and  merely

considering it does not lie in the content; therefore there must be, in one case

or  in  both,  something  additional  to  the  content  which  distinguishes  the

occurrence of a belief from the occurrence of a mere consideration of thesame content. So far as the theoretical argument goes, this additional element

may exist only in belief, or only in consideration, or there may be one sort of

additional  element  in  the  case  of  belief,  and  another  in  the  case  of

consideration. This brings us to the second view which we have to examine.

* Cf. Brentano, "Psychologie vom empirischen Standpunkte," 

p. 268 (criticizing Bain, "The Emotions and the Will").

  (1) The theory which we have now to consider regards belief as belonging

to  every  idea  which  is  entertained,  except  in  so  far  as  some  positive

counteracting  force  interferes.  In  this  view  belief  is  not  a  positive

phenomenon,  though  doubt  and  disbelief  are  so.  What  we  call  belief,

according to this hypothesis, involves only the appropriate content, which

will have the effects characteristic of belief unless something else operating

simultaneously inhibits them. James (Psychology, vol. ii, p. 288) quotes with

approval, though inaccurately, a passage from Spinoza embodying this view:

  "Let us conceive a boy imagining to himself a horse, and taking note of

nothing else. As this imagination involves the existence of the horse, AND

THE BOY HAS NO PERCEPTION WHICH ANNULS ITS EXISTENCE

[James's italics], he will necessarily contemplate the horse as present, nor will

he be able to doubt of its existence, however little certain of it he may be. I

deny that a man in so far as he imagines [percipit] affirms nothing. For what

is  it  to  imagine  a  winged  horse  but  to  affirm  that  the  horse  [that  horse,

namely] has wings? For if the mind had nothing before it but the winged

horse, it would contemplate the same as present, would have no cause to

doubt of its existence, nor any power of dissenting from its existence, unless

the  imagination  of  the  winged  horse  were  joined  to  an  idea  which

contradicted [tollit] its existence" ("Ethics," vol. ii, p. 49, Scholium).

  To this doctrine James entirely assents, adding in italics:

  "ANY  OBJECT  WHICH  REMAINS  UNCONTRADICTED  IS  IPSO

FACTO BELIEVED AND POSITED AS ABSOLUTE REALITY."

  If  this  view  is  correct,  it  follows  (though  James  does  not  draw  the

inference) that there is no need of any specific feeling called "belief," and that

the mere existence of images yields all that is required. The state of mind in

which we merely consider a proposition, without believing or disbelieving it,

will then appear as a sophisticated product, the result of some rival force

adding  to  the  image-proposition  a  positive  feeling  which  may  be  called

suspense or non-belief—a feeling which may be compared to that of a manabout to run a race waiting for the signal. Such a man, though not moving, is

in a very different condition from that of a man quietly at rest And so the man

who is considering a proposition without believing it will be in a state of

tension, restraining the natural tendency to act upon the proposition which he

would  display  if  nothing  interfered.  In  this  view  belief  primarily  consists

merely in the existence of the appropriate images without any counteracting

forces.

  There is a great deal to be said in favour of this view, and I have some

hesitation in regarding it as inadequate. It fits admirably with the phenomena

of dreams and hallucinatory images, and it is recommended by the way in

which it accords with mental development. Doubt, suspense of judgment and

disbelief all seem later and more complex than a wholly unreflecting assent.

Belief as a positive phenomenon, if it exists, may be regarded, in this view, as

a product of doubt, a decision after debate, an acceptance, not merely of

THIS, but of THIS-RATHER-THAN-THAT. It is not difficult to suppose

that a dog has images (possible olfactory) of his absent master, or of the

rabbit that he dreams of hunting. But it is very difficult to suppose that he can

entertain mere imagination-images to which no assent is given.

  I think it must be conceded that a mere image, without the addition of any

positive feeling that could be called "belief," is apt to have a certain dynamic

power, and in this sense an uncombated image has the force of a belief. But

although  this  may  be  true,  it  accounts  only  for  some  of  the  simplest

phenomena in the region of belief. It will not, for example, explain memory.

Nor can it explain beliefs which do not issue in any proximate action, such as

those of mathematics. I conclude, therefore, that there must be belief-feelings

of the same order as those of doubt or disbelief, although phenomena closely

analogous to those of belief can be produced by mere uncontradicted images.

  (3) I come now to the view of belief which I wish to advocate. It seems to

me that there are at least three kinds of belief, namely memory, expectation

and bare assent. Each of these I regard as constituted by a certain feeling or

complex of sensations, attached to the content believed. We may illustrate by

an example. Suppose I am believing, by means of images, not words, that it

will rain. We have here two interrelated elements, namely the content and the

expectation. The content consists of images of (say) the visual appearance of

rain, the feeling of wetness, the patter of drops, interrelated, roughly, as the

sensations would be if it were raining. Thus the content is a complex factcomposed of images. Exactly the same content may enter into the memory "it

was raining" or the assent "rain occurs." The difference of these cases from

each other and from expectation does not lie in the content. The difference

lies in the nature of the belief-feeling. I, personally, do not profess to be able

to analyse the sensations constituting respectively memory, expectation and

assent; but I am not prepared to say that they cannot be analysed. There may

be other belief-feelings, for example in disjunction and implication; also a

disbelief-feeling.

  It is not enough that the content and the belief-feeling should coexist: it is

necessary that there should be a specific relation between them, of the sort

expressed by saying that the content is what is believed. If this were not

obvious, it could be made plain by an argument. If the mere co-existence of

the content and the belief-feeling sufficed, whenever we were having (say) a

memory-feeling we should be remembering any proposition which came into

our  minds  at  the  same  time.  But  this  is  not  the  case,  since  we  may

simultaneously remember one proposition and merely consider another.

  We may sum up our analysis, in the case of bare assent to a proposition

not expressed in words, as follows: (a) We have a proposition, consisting of

interrelated images, and possibly partly of sensations; (b) we have the feeling

of assent, which is presumably a complex sensation demanding analysis; (c)

we  have  a  relation,  actually  subsisting,  between  the  assent  and  the

proposition, such as is expressed by saying that the proposition in question is

what is assented to. For other forms of belief-feeling or of content, we have

only to make the necessary substitutions in this analysis.

  If we are right in our analysis of belief, the use of words in expressing

beliefs is apt to be misleading. There is no way of distinguishing, in words,

between a memory and an assent to a proposition about the past: "I ate my

breakfast" and "Caesar conquered Gaul" have the same verbal form, though

(assuming that I remember my breakfast) they express occurrences which are

psychologically  very  different.  In  the  one  case,  what  happens  is  that  I

remember the content "eating my breakfast"; in the other case, I assent to the

content "Caesar's conquest of Gaul occurred." In the latter case, but not in the

former, the pastness is part of the content believed. Exactly similar remarks

apply to the difference between expectation, such as we have when waiting

for the thunder after a flash of lightning, and assent to a proposition about the

future, such as we have in all the usual cases of inferential knowledge as towhat will occur. I think this difficulty in the verbal expression of the temporal

aspects of beliefs is one among the causes which have hampered philosophy

in the consideration of time.

  The view of belief which I have been advocating contains little that is

novel except the distinction of kinds of belief-feeling—such as memory and

expectation.  Thus  James  says:  "Everyone  knows  the  difference  between

imagining  a  thing  and  believing  in  its  existence,  between  supposing  a

proposition and acquiescing in its truth...IN ITS INNER NATURE, BELIEF,

OR THE SENSE OF REALITY, IS A SORT OF FEELING MORE ALLIED

TO THE EMOTIONS THAN TO ANYTHING ELSE" ("Psychology," vol.

ii, p. 283. James's italics). He proceeds to point out that drunkenness, and,

still more, nitrous-oxide intoxication, will heighten the sense of belief: in the

latter case, he says, a man's very soul may sweat with conviction, and he be

all the time utterly unable to say what he is convinced of. It would seem that,

in such cases, the feeling of belief exists unattached, without its usual relation

to a content believed, just as the feeling of familiarity may sometimes occur

without being related to any definite familiar object. The feeling of belief,

when it occurs in this separated heightened form, generally leads us to look

for a content to which to attach it. Much of what passes for revelation or

mystic insight probably comes in this way: the belief-feeling, in abnormal

strength, attaches itself, more or less accidentally, to some content which we

happen to think of at the appropriate moment. But this is only a speculation,

upon which I do not wish to lay too much stress.

              LECTURE XIII. TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD

  The  definition  of  truth  and  falsehood,  which  is  our  topic  to-day,  lies

strictly outside our general subject, namely the analysis of mind. From the

psychological standpoint, there may be different kinds of belief, and different

degrees of certainty, but there cannot be any purely psychological means of

distinguishing between true and false beliefs. A belief is rendered true or

false by relation to a fact, which may lie outside the experience of the person

entertaining  the  belief.  Truth  and  falsehood,  except  in  the  case  of  beliefs

about our own minds, depend upon the relations of mental occurrences to

outside things, and thus take us beyond the analysis of mental occurrences as

they are in themselves. Nevertheless, we can hardly avoid the consideration

of truth and falsehood. We wish to believe that our beliefs, sometimes at

least, yield KNOWLEDGE, and a belief does not yield knowledge unless it is

true. The question whether our minds are instruments of knowledge, and, if

so, in what sense, is so vital that any suggested analysis of mind must be

examined in relation to this question. To ignore this question would be like

describing a chronometer without regard to its accuracy as a time-keeper, or a

thermometer without mentioning the fact that it measures temperature.

  Many difficult questions arise in connection with knowledge. It is difficult

to define knowledge, difficult to decide whether we have any knowledge, and

difficult,  even  if  it  is  conceded  that  we  sometimes  have  knowledge  to

discover whether we can ever know that we have knowledge in this or that

particular case. I shall divide the discussion into four parts:

  I. We may regard knowledge, from a behaviourist standpoint, as exhibited

in a certain kind of response to the environment. This response must have

some characteristics which it shares with those of scientific instruments, but

must also have others that are peculiar to knowledge. We shall find that this

point of view is important, but not exhaustive of the nature of knowledge.

  II.  We  may  hold  that  the  beliefs  that  constitute  knowledge  are

distinguished from such as are erroneous or uncertain by properties which are

intrinsic either to single beliefs or to systems of beliefs, being in either case

discoverable without reference to outside fact. Views of this kind have been

widely held among philosophers, but we shall find no reason to accept them.

  III. We believe that some beliefs are true, and some false. This raises the

problem  of  VERIFIABILITY:  are  there  any  circumstances  which  canjustifiably give us an unusual degree of certainty that such and such a belief

is  true?  It  is  obvious  that  there  are  circumstances  which  in  fact  cause  a

certainty of this sort, and we wish to learn what we can from examining these

circumstances.

  IV. Finally, there is the formal problem of defining truth and falsehood,

and deriving the objective reference of a proposition from the meanings of its

component words.

  We will consider these four problems in succession.

  I. We may regard a human being as an instrument, which makes various

responses to various stimuli. If we observe these responses from outside, we

shall  regard  them  as  showing  knowledge  when  they  display  two

characteristics,  ACCURACY  and  APPROPRIATENESS.  These  two  are

quite distinct, and even sometimes incompatible. If I am being pursued by a

tiger,  accuracy  is  furthered  by  turning  round  to  look  at  him,  but

appropriateness  by  running  away  without  making  any  search  for  further

knowledge of the beast. I shall return to the question of appropriateness later;

for the present it is accuracy that I wish to consider.

  When we are viewing a man from the outside, it is not his beliefs, but his

bodily  movements,  that  we  can  observe.  His  knowledge  must  be  inferred

from his bodily movements, and especially from what he says and writes. For

the present we may ignore beliefs, and regard a man's knowledge as actually

consisting in what he says and does. That is to say, we will construct, as far

as possible, a purely behaviouristic account of truth and falsehood.

  If you ask a boy "What is twice two?" and the boy says "four," you take

that as prima facie evidence that the boy knows what twice two is. But if you

go on to ask what is twice three, twice four, twice five, and so on, and the boy

always answers "four," you come to the conclusion that he knows nothing

about it. Exactly similar remarks apply to scientific instruments. I know a

certain weather-cock which has the pessimistic habit of always pointing to

the north-east. If you were to see it first on a cold March day, you would

think it an excellent weather-cock; but with the first warm day of spring your

confidence would be shaken. The boy and the weather-cock have the same

defect: they do not vary their response when the stimulus is varied. A good

instrument, or a person with much knowledge, will give different responses

to stimuli which differ in relevant ways. This is the first point in defining

accuracy of response.  We will now assume another boy, who also, when you first question him,

asserts  that  twice  two  is  four.  But  with  this  boy,  instead  of  asking  him

different questions, you make a practice of asking him the same question

every day at breakfast. You find that he says five, or six, or seven, or any

other number at random, and you conclude that he also does not know what

twice two is, though by good luck he answered right the first time. This boy

is like a weather-cock which, instead of being stuck fast, is always going

round  and  round,  changing  without  any  change  of  wind.  This  boy  and

weather-cock have the opposite defect to that of the previous pair: they give

different responses to stimuli which do not differ in any relevant way.

  In  connection  with  vagueness  in  memory,  we  already  had  occasion  to

consider  the  definition  of  accuracy.  Omitting  some  of  the  niceties  of  our

previous discussion, we may say that an instrument is ACCURATE when it

avoids the defects of the two boys and weather-cocks, that is to say, when—

  (a) It gives different responses to stimuli which differ in relevant ways;

  (b) It gives the same response to stimuli which do not differ in relevant

ways.

  What  are  relevant  ways  depends  upon  the  nature  and  purpose  of  the

instrument.  In  the  case  of  a  weather-cock,  the  direction  of  the  wind  is

relevant, but not its strength; in the case of the boy, the meaning of the words

of your question is relevant, but not the loudness of your voice, or whether

you are his father or his schoolmaster If, however, you were a boy of his own

age, that would be relevant, and the appropriate response would be different.

  It is clear that knowledge is displayed by accuracy of response to certain

kinds of stimuli, e.g. examinations. Can we say, conversely, that it consists

wholly of such accuracy of response? I do not think we can; but we can go a

certain  distance  in  this  direction.  For  this  purpose  we  must  define  more

carefully the kind of accuracy and the kind of response that may be expected

where there is knowledge.

  From our present point of view, it is difficult to exclude perception from

knowledge;  at  any  rate,  knowledge  is  displayed  by  actions  based  upon

perception. A bird flying among trees avoids bumping into their branches; its

avoidance  is  a  response  to  visual  sensations.  This  response  has  the

characteristic  of  accuracy,  in  the  main,  and  leads  us  to  say  that  the  bird

"knows," by sight, what objects are in its neighbourhood. For a behaviourist,

this  must  certainly  count  as  knowledge,  however  it  may  be  viewed  byanalytic psychology. In this case, what is known, roughly, is the stimulus; but

in  more  advanced  knowledge  the  stimulus  and  what  is  known  become

different. For example, you look in your calendar and find that Easter will be

early  next  year.  Here  the  stimulus  is  the  calendar,  whereas  the  response

concerns  the  future.  Even  this  can  be  paralleled  among  instruments:  the

behaviour of the barometer has a present stimulus but foretells the future, so

that the barometer might be said, in a sense, to know the future. However that

may be, the point I am emphasizing as regards knowledge is that what is

known may be quite different from the stimulus, and no part of the cause of

the knowledge-response. It is only in sense-knowledge that the stimulus and

what  is  known  are,  with  qualifications,  identifiable.  In  knowledge  of  the

future, it is obvious that they are totally distinct, since otherwise the response

would  precede  the  stimulus.  In  abstract  knowledge  also  they  are  distinct,

since  abstract  facts  have  no  date.  In  knowledge  of  the  past  there  are

complications, which we must briefly examine.

  Every form of memory will be, from our present point of view, in one

sense a delayed response. But this phrase does not quite clearly express what

is meant. If you light a fuse and connect it with a heap of dynamite, the

explosion  of  the  dynamite  may  be  spoken  of,  in  a  sense,  as  a  delayed

response  to  your  lighting  of  the  fuse.  But  that  only  means  that  it  is  a

somewhat late portion of a continuous process of which the earlier parts have

less emotional interest. This is not the case with habit. A display of habit has

two sorts of causes: (a) the past occurrences which generated the habit, (b)

the present occurrence which brings it into play. When you drop a weight on

your toe, and say what you do say, the habit has been caused by imitation of

your undesirable associates, whereas it is brought into play by the dropping

of  the  weight.  The  great  bulk  of  our  knowledge  is  a  habit  in  this  sense:

whenever I am asked when I was born, I reply correctly by mere habit. It

would hardly be correct to say that getting born was the stimulus, and that my

reply is a delayed response But in cases of memory this way of speaking

would  have  an  element  of  truth.  In  an  habitual  memory,  the  event

remembered was clearly an essential part of the stimulus to the formation of

the habit. The present stimulus which brings the habit into play produces a

different response from that which it would produce if the habit did not exist.

Therefore the habit enters into the causation of the response, and so do, at one

remove, the causes of the habit. It follows that an event remembered is anessential part of the causes of our remembering.

  In  spite,  however,  of  the  fact  that  what  is  known  is  SOMETIMES  an

indispensable  part  of  the  cause  of  the  knowledge,  this  circumstance  is,  I

think, irrelevant to the general question with which we are concerned, namely

What sort of response to what sort of stimulus can be regarded as displaying

knowledge?  There  is  one  characteristic  which  the  response  must  have,

namely,  it  must  consist  of  voluntary  movements.  The  need  of  this

characteristic is connected with the characteristic of APPROPRIATENESS,

which I do not wish to consider as yet. For the present I wish only to obtain a

clearer  idea  of  the  sort  of  ACCURACY  that  a  knowledge-response  must

have. It is clear from many instances that accuracy, in other cases, may be

purely mechanical. The most complete form of accuracy consists in giving

correct answers to questions, an achievement in which calculating machines

far surpass human beings. In asking a question of a calculating machine, you

must use its language: you must not address it in English, any more than you

would  address  an  Englishman  in  Chinese.  But  if  you  address  it  in  the

language it understands, it will tell you what is 34521 times 19987, without a

moment's  hesitation  or  a  hint  of  inaccuracy.  We  do  not  say  the  machine

KNOWS  the  answer,  because  it  has  no  purpose  of  its  own  in  giving  the

answer: it does not wish to impress you with its cleverness, or feel proud of

being such a good machine. But as far as mere accuracy goes, the machine

leaves nothing to be desired.

  Accuracy of response is a perfectly clear notion in the case of answers to

questions, but in other cases it is much more obscure. We may say generally

that an object whether animate or inanimate, is "sensitive" to a certain feature

of  the  environment  if  it  behaves  differently  according  to  the  presence  or

absence  of  that  feature.  Thus  iron  is  sensitive  to  anything  magnetic.  But

sensitiveness does not constitute knowledge, and knowledge of a fact which

is  not  sensible  is  not  sensitiveness  to  that  fact,  as  we  have  seen  in

distinguishing the fact known from the stimulus. As soon as we pass beyond

the  simple  case  of  question  and  answer,  the  definition  of  knowledge  by

means of behaviour demands the consideration of purpose. A carrier pigeon

flies home, and so we say it "knows" the way. But if it merely flew to some

place at random, we should not say that it "knew" the way to that place, any

more than a stone rolling down hill knows the way to the valley.

  On the features which distinguish knowledge from accuracy of response ingeneral, not much can be said from a behaviourist point of view without

referring to purpose. But the necessity of SOMETHING besides accuracy of

response may be brought out by the following consideration: Suppose two

persons,  of  whom  one  believed  whatever  the  other  disbelieved,  and

disbelieved whatever the other believed. So far as accuracy and sensitiveness

of response alone are concerned, there would be nothing to choose between

these two persons. A thermometer which went down for warm weather and

up for cold might be just as accurate as the usual kind; and a person who

always believes falsely is just as sensitive an instrument as a person who

always believes truly. The observable and practical difference between them

would be that the one who always believed falsely would quickly come to a

bad end. This illustrates once more that accuracy of response to stimulus does

not alone show knowledge, but must be reinforced by appropriateness, i.e.

suitability for realizing one's purpose. This applies even in the apparently

simple  case  of  answering  questions:  if  the  purpose  of  the  answers  is  to

deceive, their falsehood, not their truth, will be evidence of knowledge. The

proportion  of  the  combination  of  appropriateness  with  accuracy  in  the

definition  of  knowledge  is  difficult;  it  seems  that  both  enter  in,  but  that

appropriateness is only required as regards the general type of response, not

as regards each individual instance.

  II.  I  have  so  far  assumed  as  unquestionable  the  view  that  the  truth  or

falsehood  of  a  belief  consists  in  a  relation  to  a  certain  fact,  namely  the

objective  of  the  belief.  This  view  has,  however,  been  often  questioned.

Philosophers have sought some intrinsic criterion by which true and false

beliefs could be distinguished.* I am afraid their chief reason for this search

has been the wish to feel more certainty than seems otherwise possible as to

what is true and what is false. If we could discover the truth of a belief by

examining its intrinsic characteristics, or those of some collection of beliefs

of which it forms part, the pursuit of truth, it is thought, would be a less

arduous business than it otherwise appears to be. But the attempts which have

been made in this direction are not encouraging. I will take two criteria which

have been suggested, namely, (1) self-evidence, (2) mutual coherence. If we

can show that these are inadequate, we may feel fairly certain that no intrinsic

criterion hitherto suggested will suffice to distinguish true from false beliefs.* The view that such a criterion exists is generally held by 

those whose views are in any degree derived from Hegel. It 

may be illustrated by the following passage from Lossky, 

"The Intuitive Basis of Knowledge" (Macmillan, 1919), p. 

268: "Strictly speaking, a false judgment is not a judgment 

at all. The predicate does not follow from the subject S 

alone, but from the subject plus a certain addition C, WHICH 

IN NO SENSE BELONGS TO THE CONTENT OF THE JUDGMENT.

What 

takes place may be a process of association of ideas, of 

imagining, or the like, but is not a process of judging. An 

experienced psychologist will be able by careful observation 

to detect that in this process there is wanting just the 

specific element of the objective dependence of the 

predicate upon the subject which is characteristic of a 

judgment. It must be admitted, however, that an exceptional 

power of observation is needed in order to distinguish, by 

means of introspection, mere combination of ideas from 

judgments."

  (1) Self-evidence.—Some of our beliefs seem to be peculiarly indubitable.

One  might  instance  the  belief  that  two  and  two  are  four,  that  two  things

cannot be in the same place at the same time, nor one thing in two places, or

that a particular buttercup that we are seeing is yellow. The suggestion we are

to examine is that such: beliefs have some recognizable quality which secures

their truth, and the truth of whatever is deduced from them according to self-

evident  principles  of  inference.  This  theory  is  set  forth,  for  example,  by

Meinong in his book, "Ueber die Erfahrungsgrundlagen unseres Wissens."

  If this theory is to be logically tenable, self-evidence must not consist

merely in the fact that we believe a proposition. We believe that our beliefs

are sometimes erroneous, and we wish to be able to select a certain class of

beliefs which are never erroneous. If we are to do this, it must be by some

mark which belongs only to certain beliefs, not to all; and among those to

which it belongs there must be none that are mutually inconsistent. If, for

example, two propositions p and q were self-evident, and it were also self-

evident that p and q could not both be true, that would condemn self-evidence

as a guarantee of truth. Again, self-evidence must not be the same thing asthe  absence  of  doubt  or  the  presence  of  complete  certainty.  If  we  are

completely certain of a proposition, we do not seek a ground to support our

belief. If self-evidence is alleged as a ground of belief, that implies that doubt

has crept in, and that our self-evident proposition has not wholly resisted the

assaults of scepticism. To say that any given person believes some things so

firmly that he cannot be made to doubt them is no doubt true. Such beliefs he

will be willing to use as premisses in reasoning, and to him personally they

will seem to have as much evidence as any belief can need. But among the

propositions which one man finds indubitable there will be some that another

man finds it quite possible to doubt. It used to seem self-evident that there

could not be men at the Antipodes, because they would fall off, or at best

grow  giddy  from  standing  on  their  heads.  But  New  Zealanders  find  the

falsehood  of  this  proposition  self-evident.  Therefore,  if  self-evidence  is  a

guarantee of truth, our ancestors must have been mistaken in thinking their

beliefs about the Antipodes self-evident. Meinong meets this difficulty by

saying that some beliefs are falsely thought to be self-evident, but in the case

of others it is self-evident that they are self-evident, and these are wholly

reliable. Even this, however, does not remove the practical risk of error, since

we may mistakenly believe it self-evident that a certain belief is self-evident.

To remove all risk of error, we shall need an endless series of more and more

complicated  self-evident  beliefs,  which  cannot  possibly  be  realized  in

practice. It would seem, therefore, that self-evidence is useless as a practical

criterion for insuring truth.

  The same result follows from examining instances. If we take the four

instances mentioned at the beginning of this discussion, we shall find that

three of them are logical, while the fourth is a judgment of perception. The

proposition that two and two are four follows by purely logical deduction

from definitions: that means that its truth results, not from the properties of

objects, but from the meanings of symbols. Now symbols, in mathematics,

mean what we choose; thus the feeling of self-evidence, in this case, seems

explicable by the fact that the whole matter is within our control. I do not

wish to assert that this is the whole truth about mathematical propositions, for

the question is complicated, and I do not know what the whole truth is. But I

do  wish  to  suggest  that  the  feeling  of  self-evidence  in  mathematical

propositions has to do with the fact that they are concerned with the meanings

of symbols, not with properties of the world such as external observationmight reveal.

  Similar considerations apply to the impossibility of a thing being in two

places at once, or of two things being in one place at the same time. These

impossibilities result logically, if I am not mistaken, from the definitions of

one thing and one place. That is to say, they are not laws of physics, but only

part  of  the  intellectual  apparatus  which  we  have  manufactured  for

manipulating physics. Their self-evidence, if this is so, lies merely in the fact

that they represent our decision as to the use of words, not a property of

physical objects.

  Judgments of perception, such as "this buttercup is yellow," are in a quite

different position from judgments of logic, and their self-evidence must have

a different explanation. In order to arrive at the nucleus of such a judgment,

we will eliminate, as far as possible, the use of words which take us beyond

the  present  fact,  such  as  "buttercup"  and  "yellow."  The  simplest  kind  of

judgment underlying the perception that a buttercup is yellow would seem to

be the perception of similarity in two colours seen simultaneously. Suppose

we are seeing two buttercups, and we perceive that their colours are similar.

This similarity is a physical fact, not a matter of symbols or words; and it

certainly seems to be indubitable in a way that many judgments are not.

  The first thing to observe, in regard to such judgments, is that as they

stand they are vague. The word "similar" is a vague word, since there are

degrees  of  similarity,  and  no  one  can  say  where  similarity  ends  and

dissimilarity begins. It is unlikely that our two buttercups have EXACTLY

the  same  colour,  and  if  we  judged  that  they  had  we  should  have  passed

altogether outside the region of self-evidence. To make our proposition more

precise, let us suppose that we are also seeing a red rose at the same time.

Then we may judge that the colours of the buttercups are more similar to each

other than to the colour of the rose. This judgment seems more complicated,

but has certainly gained in precision. Even now, however, it falls short of

complete  precision,  since  similarity  is  not  prima  facie  measurable,  and  it

would require much discussion to decide what we mean by greater or less

similarity. To this process of the pursuit of precision there is strictly no limit.

  The next thing to observe (although I do not personally doubt that most of

our judgments of perception are true) is that it is very difficult to define any

class of such judgments which can be known, by its intrinsic quality, to be

always  exempt  from  error.  Most  of  our  judgments  of  perception  involvecorrelations, as when we judge that a certain noise is that of a passing cart.

Such judgments are all obviously liable to error, since there is no correlation

of which we have a right to be certain that it is invariable. Other judgments of

perception are derived from recognition, as when we say "this is a buttercup,"

or even merely "this is yellow." All such judgments entail some risk of error,

though  sometimes  perhaps  a  very  small  one;  some  flowers  that  look  like

buttercups are marigolds, and colours that some would call yellow others

might call orange. Our subjective certainty is usually a result of habit, and

may lead us astray in circumstances which are unusual in ways of which we

are unaware.

  For such reasons, no form of self-evidence seems to afford an absolute

criterion of truth. Nevertheless, it is perhaps true that judgments having a

high  degree  of  subjective  certainty  are  more  apt  to  be  true  than  other

judgments. But if this be the case, it is a result to be demonstrated, not a

premiss from which to start in defining truth and falsehood. As an initial

guarantee,  therefore,  neither  self-evidence  nor  subjective  certainty  can  be

accepted as adequate.

  (2)  Coherence.—Coherence  as  the  definition  of  truth  is  advocated  by

idealists, particularly by those who in the main follow Hegel. It is set forth

ably  in  Mr.  Joachim's  book,  "The  Nature  of  Truth"  (Oxford,  1906).

According to this view, any set of propositions other than the whole of truth

can be condemned on purely logical grounds, as internally inconsistent; a

single proposition, if it is what we should ordinarily call false, contradicts

itself irremediably, while if it is what we should ordinarily call true, it has

implications which compel us to admit other propositions, which in turn lead

to others, and so on, until we find ourselves committed to the whole of truth.

One  might  illustrate  by  a  very  simple  example:  if  I  say  "so-and-so  is  a

married man," that is not a self-subsistent proposition. We cannot logically

conceive of a universe in which this proposition constituted the whole of

truth. There must be also someone who is a married woman, and who is

married  to  the  particular  man  in  question.  The  view  we  are  considering

regards everything that can be said about any one object as relative in the

same sort of way as "so-and-so is a married man." But everything, according

to this view, is relative, not to one or two other things, but to all other things,

so that from one bit of truth the whole can be inferred.

  The  fundamental  objection  to  this  view  is  logical,  and  consists  in  acriticism of its doctrine as to relations. I shall omit this line of argument,

which I have developed elsewhere.* For the moment I will content myself

with saying that the powers of logic seem to me very much less than this

theory supposes. If it were taken seriously, its advocates ought to profess that

any one truth is logically inferable from any other, and that, for example, the

fact that Caesar conquered Gaul, if adequately considered, would enable us to

discover what the weather will be to-morrow. No such claim is put forward in

practice,  and  the  necessity  of  empirical  observation  is  not  denied;  but

according to the theory it ought to be.

* In the article on "The Monistic Theory of Truth" in 

"Philosophical Essays" (Longmans, 1910), reprinted from the 

"Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society," 1906-7.

  Another objection is that no endeavour is made to show that we cannot

form a consistent whole composed partly or wholly of false propositions, as

in a novel. Leibniz's conception of many possible worlds seems to accord

much better with modern logic and with the practical empiricism which is

now universal. The attempt to deduce the world by pure thought is attractive,

and in former times was largely supposed capable of success. But nowadays

most men admit that beliefs must be tested by observation, and not merely by

the fact that they harmonize with other beliefs. A consistent fairy-tale is a

different thing from truth, however elaborate it may be. But to pursue this

topic  would  lead  us  into  difficult  technicalities;  I  shall  therefore  assume,

without further argument, that coherence is not sufficient as a definition of

truth.

  III. Many difficult problems arise as regards the verifiability of beliefs.

We believe various things, and while we believe them we think we know

them. But it sometimes turns out that we were mistaken, or at any rate we

come to think we were. We must be mistaken either in our previous opinion

or in our subsequent recantation; therefore our beliefs are not all correct, and

there are cases of belief which are not cases of knowledge. The question of

verifiability is in essence this: can we discover any set of beliefs which are

never mistaken or any test which, when applicable, will always enable us to

discriminate between true and false beliefs? Put thus broadly and abstractly,

the answer must be negative. There is no way hitherto discovered of wholly

eliminating the risk of error, and no infallible criterion. If we believe we have

found a criterion, this belief itself may be mistaken; we should be begging thequestion if we tried to test the criterion by applying the criterion to itself.

  But although the notion of an absolute criterion is chimerical, there may

be relative criteria, which increase the probability of truth. Common sense

and science hold that there are. Let us see what they have to say.

  One of the plainest cases of verification, perhaps ultimately the only case,

consists  in  the  happening  of  something  expected.  You  go  to  the  station

believing that there will be a train at a certain time; you find the train, you get

into it, and it starts at the expected time This constitutes verification, and is a

perfectly definite experience. It is, in a sense, the converse of memory instead

of having first sensations and then images accompanied by belief, we have

first  images  accompanied  by  belief  and  then  sensations.  Apart  from

differences as to the time-order and the accompanying feelings, the relation

between image and sensation is closely similar in the two cases of memory

and expectation; it is a relation of similarity, with difference as to causal

efficacy—broadly,  the  image  has  the  psychological  but  not  the  physical

effects that the sensation would have. When an image accompanied by an

expectation-belief is thus succeeded by a sensation which is the "meaning" of

the  image,  we  say  that  the  expectation-belief  has  been  verified.  The

experience of verification in this sense is exceedingly familiar; it happens

every time that accustomed activities have results that are not surprising, in

eating and walking and talking and all our daily pursuits.

  But although the experience in question is common, it is not wholly easy

to  give  a  theoretical  account  of  it.  How  do  we  know  that  the  sensation

resembles the previous image? Does the image persist in presence of the

sensation, so that we can compare the two? And even if SOME image does

persist, how do we know that it is the previous image unchanged? It does not

seem as if this line of inquiry offered much hope of a successful issue. It is

better, I think, to take a more external and causal view of the relation of

expectation to expected occurrence. If the occurrence, when it comes, gives

us the feeling of expectedness, and if the expectation, beforehand, enabled us

to act in a way which proves appropriate to the occurrence, that must be held

to constitute the maximum of verification. We have first an expectation, then

a  sensation  with  the  feeling  of  expectedness  related  to  memory  of  the

expectation.  This  whole  experience,  when  it  occurs,  may  be  defined  as

verification,  and  as  constituting  the  truth  of  the  expectation.  Appropriate

action,  during  the  period  of  expectation,  may  be  regarded  as  additionalverification, but is not essential. The whole process may be illustrated by

looking up a familiar quotation, finding it in the expected words, and in the

expected part of the book. In this case we can strengthen the verification by

writing down beforehand the words which we expect to find.

  I  think  all  verification  is  ultimately  of  the  above  sort.  We  verify  a

scientific hypothesis indirectly, by deducing consequences as to the future,

which subsequent experience confirms. If somebody were to doubt whether

Caesar had crossed the Rubicon, verification could only be obtained from the

future. We could proceed to display manuscripts to our historical sceptic, in

which it was said that Caesar had behaved in this way. We could advance

arguments,  verifiable  by  future  experience,  to  prove  the  antiquity  of  the

manuscript from its texture, colour, etc. We could find inscriptions agreeing

with the historian on other points, and tending to show his general accuracy.

The causal laws which our arguments would assume could be verified by the

future occurrence of events inferred by means of them. The existence and

persistence of causal laws, it is true, must be regarded as a fortunate accident,

and how long it will continue we cannot tell. Meanwhile verification remains

often  practically  possible.  And  since  it  is  sometimes  possible,  we  can

gradually discover what kinds of beliefs tend to be verified by experience,

and what kinds tend to be falsified; to the former kinds we give an increased

degree of assent, to the latter kinds a diminished degree. The process is not

absolute or infallible, but it has been found capable of sifting beliefs and

building up science. It affords no theoretical refutation of the sceptic, whose

position  must  remain  logically  unassailable;  but  if  complete  scepticism  is

rejected, it gives the practical method by which the system of our beliefs

grows gradually towards the unattainable ideal of impeccable knowledge.

  IV. I come now to the purely formal definition of the truth or falsehood of

a belief. For this definition it is necessary first of all to consider the derivation

of  the  objective  reference  of  a  proposition  from  the  meanings  of  its

component words or images.

  Just as a word has meaning, so a proposition has an objective reference.

The objective reference of a proposition is a function (in the mathematical

sense) of the meanings of its component words. But the objective reference

differs  from  the  meaning  of  a  word  through  the  duality  of  truth  and

falsehood. You may believe the proposition "to-day is Tuesday" both when,

in fact, to-day is Tuesday, and when to-day is not Tuesday. If to-day is notTuesday, this fact is the objective of your belief that to-day is Tuesday. But

obviously the relation of your belief to the fact is different in this case from

what it is in the case when to-day is Tuesday. We may say, metaphorically,

that when to-day is Tuesday, your belief that it is Tuesday points TOWARDS

the  fact,  whereas  when  to-day  is  not  Tuesday  your  belief  points  AWAY

FROM the fact. Thus the objective reference of a belief is not determined by

the fact alone, but by the direction of the belief towards or away from the

fact.* If, on a Tuesday, one man believes that it is Tuesday while another

believes that it is not Tuesday, their beliefs have the same objective, namely

the fact that it is Tuesday but the true belief points towards the fact while the

false one points away from it. Thus, in order to define the reference of a

proposition we have to take account not only of the objective, but also of the

direction of pointing, towards the objective in the case of a true proposition

and away from it in the case of a false one.

* I owe this way of looking at the matter to my friend 

Ludwig Wittgenstein.

  This mode of stating the nature of the objective reference of a proposition

is necessitated by the circumstance that there are true and false propositions,

but not true and false facts. If to-day is Tuesday, there is not a false objective

"to-day is not Tuesday," which could be the objective of the false belief "to-

day  is  not  Tuesday."  This  is  the  reason  why  two  beliefs  which  are  each

other's contradictories have the same objective. There is, however, a practical

inconvenience, namely that we cannot determine the objective reference of a

proposition,  according  to  this  definition,  unless  we  know  whether  the

proposition is true or false. To avoid this inconvenience, it is better to adopt a

slightly different phraseology, and say: The "meaning" of the proposition "to-

day is Tuesday" consists in pointing to the fact "to-day is Tuesday" if that is a

fact, or away from the fact "to-day is not Tuesday" if that is a fact. The

"meaning"  of  the  proposition  "to-day  is  not  Tuesday"  will  be  exactly  the

opposite. By this hypothetical form we are able to speak of the meaning of a

proposition without knowing whether it is true or false. According to this

definition, we know the meaning of a proposition when we know what would

make it true and what would make it false, even if we do not know whether it

is in fact true or false.

  The  meaning  of  a  proposition  is  derivative  from  the  meanings  of  its

constituent words. Propositions occur in pairs, distinguished (in simple cases)by the absence or presence of the word "not." Two such propositions have the

same objective, but opposite meanings: when one is true, the other is false,

and when one is false, the other is true.

  The purely formal definition of truth and falsehood offers little difficulty.

What is required is a formal expression of the fact that a proposition is true

when it points towards its objective, and false when it points away from it, In

very simple cases we can give a very simple account of this: we can say that

true propositions actually resemble their objectives in a way in which false

propositions do not. But for this purpose it is necessary to revert to image-

propositions instead of word-propositions. Let us take again the illustration of

a memory-image of a familiar room, and let us suppose that in the image the

window is to the left of the door. If in fact the window is to the left of the

door, there is a correspondence between the image and the objective; there is

the same relation between the window and the door as between the images of

them. The image-memory consists of the image of the window to the left of

the image of the door. When this is true, the very same relation relates the

terms  of  the  objective  (namely  the  window  and  the  door)  as  relates  the

images which mean them. In this case the correspondence which constitutes

truth is very simple.

  In the case we have just been considering the objective consists of two

parts with a certain relation (that of left-to-right), and the proposition consists

of images of these parts with the very same relation. The same proposition, if

it were false, would have a less simple formal relation to its objective. If the

image-proposition consists of an image of the window to the left of an image

of  the  door,  while  in  fact  the  window  is  not  to  the  left  of  the  door,  the

proposition does not result from the objective by the mere substitution of

images for their prototypes. Thus in this unusually simple case we can say

that a true proposition "corresponds" to its objective in a formal sense in

which a false proposition does not. Perhaps it may be possible to modify this

notion  of  formal  correspondence  in  such  a  way  as  to  be  more  widely

applicable, but if so, the modifications required will be by no means slight.

The reasons for this must now be considered.

  To begin with, the simple type of correspondence we have been exhibiting

can hardly occur when words are substituted for images, because, in word-

propositions,  relations  are  usually  expressed  by  words,  which  are  not

themselves relations. Take such a proposition as "Socrates precedes Plato."Here the word "precedes" is just as solid as the words "Socrates" and "Plato";

it MEANS a relation, but is not a relation. Thus the objective which makes

our proposition true consists of TWO terms with a relation between them,

whereas our proposition consists of THREE terms with a relation of order

between  them.  Of  course,  it  would  be  perfectly  possible,  theoretically,  to

indicate a few chosen relations, not by words, but by relations between the

other  words.  "Socrates-Plato"  might  be  used  to  mean  "Socrates  precedes

Plato";  "Plato-Socrates"  might  be  used  to  mean  "Plato  was  born  before

Socrates  and  died  after  him";  and  so  on.  But  the  possibilities  of  such  a

method would be very limited. For aught I know, there may be languages that

use it, but they are not among the languages with which I am acquainted. And

in any case, in view of the multiplicity of relations that we wish to express,

no language could advance far without words for relations. But as soon as we

have words for relations, word-propositions have necessarily more terms than

the facts to which they refer, and cannot therefore correspond so simply with

their objectives as some image-propositions can.

  The consideration of negative propositions and negative facts introduces

further complications. An image-proposition is necessarily positive: we can

image the window to the left of the door, or to the right of the door, but we

can form no image of the bare negative "the window not to the left of the

door."  We  can  DISBELIEVE  the  image-proposition  expressed  by  "the

window to the left of the door," and our disbelief will be true if the window is

not to the left of the door. But we can form no image of the fact that the

window is not to the left of the door. Attempts have often been made to deny

such negative facts, but, for reasons which I have given elsewhere,* I believe

these attempts to be mistaken, and I shall assume that there are negative facts.

* "Monist," January, 1919, p. 42 ff.

    Word-propositions, like image-propositions, are always positive facts. The

fact that Socrates precedes Plato is symbolized in English by the fact that the

word "precedes" occurs between the words "Socrates" and "Plato." But we

cannot symbolize the fact that Plato does not precede Socrates by not putting

the word "precedes" between "Plato" and "Socrates." A negative fact is not

sensible, and language, being intended for communication, has to be sensible.

Therefore  we  symbolize  the  fact  that  Plato  does  not  precede  Socrates  by

putting the words "does not precede" between "Plato" and "Socrates." We

thus obtain a series of words which is just as positive a fact as the series"Socrates  precedes  Plato."  The  propositions  asserting  negative  facts  are

themselves positive facts; they are merely different positive facts from those

asserting positive facts.

  We have thus, as regards the opposition of positive and negative, three

different  sorts  of  duality,  according  as  we  are  dealing  with  facts,  image-

propositions, or word-propositions. We have, namely:

  (1) Positive and negative facts;

  (2) Image-propositions, which may be believed or disbelieved, but do not

allow any duality of content corresponding to positive and negative facts;

  (3) Word-propositions, which are always positive facts, but are of two

kinds: one verified by a positive objective, the other by a negative objective.

  Owing  to  these  complications,  the  simplest  type  of  correspondence  is

impossible when either negative facts or negative propositions are involved.

  Even when we confine ourselves to relations between two terms which are

both imaged, it may be impossible to form an image-proposition in which the

relation  of  the  terms  is  represented  by  the  same  relation  of  the  images.

Suppose we say "Caesar was 2,000 years before Foch," we express a certain

temporal relation between Caesar and Foch; but we cannot allow 2,000 years

to  elapse  between  our  image  of  Caesar  and  our  image  of  Foch.  This  is

perhaps not a fair example, since "2,000 years before" is not a direct relation.

But take a case where the relation is direct, say, "the sun is brighter than the

moon." We can form visual images of sunshine and moonshine, and it may

happen that our image of the sunshine is the brighter of the two, but this is by

no means either necessary or sufficient. The act of comparison, implied in

our judgment, is something more than the mere coexistence of two images,

one of which is in fact brighter than the other. It would take us too far from

our main topic if we were to go into the question what actually occurs when

we  make  this  judgment.  Enough  has  been  said  to  show  that  the

correspondence between the belief and its objective is more complicated in

this case than in that of the window to the left of the door, and this was all

that had to be proved.

  In  spite  of  these  complications,  the  general  nature  of  the  formal

correspondence which makes truth is clear from our instances. In the case of

the  simpler  kind  of  propositions,  namely  those  that  I  call  "atomic"

propositions,  where  there  is  only  one  word  expressing  a  relation,  the

objective which would verify our proposition, assuming that the word "not" isabsent,  is  obtained  by  replacing  each  word  by  what  it  means,  the  word

meaning a relation being replaced by this relation among the meanings of the

other words. For example, if the proposition is "Socrates precedes Plato," the

objective  which  verifies  it  results  from  replacing  the  word  "Socrates"  by

Socrates, the word "Plato" by Plato, and the word "precedes" by the relation

of preceding between Socrates and Plato. If the result of this process is a fact,

the proposition is true; if not, it is false. When our proposition is "Socrates

does not precede Plato," the conditions of truth and falsehood are exactly

reversed. More complicated propositions can be dealt with on the same lines.

In fact, the purely formal question, which has occupied us in this last section,

offers no very formidable difficulties.

  I do not believe that the above formal theory is untrue, but I do believe

that  it  is  inadequate.  It  does  not,  for  example,  throw  any  light  upon  our

preference  for  true  beliefs  rather  than  false  ones.  This  preference  is  only

explicable  by  taking  account  of  the  causal  efficacy  of  beliefs,  and  of  the

greater  appropriateness  of  the  responses  resulting  from  true  beliefs.  But

appropriateness depends upon purpose, and purpose thus becomes a vital part

of theory of knowledge.

                   LECTURE XIV. EMOTIONS AND WILL

  On the two subjects of the present lecture I have nothing original to say,

and I am treating them only in order to complete the discussion of my main

thesis, namely that all psychic phenomena are built up out of sensations and

images alone.

  Emotions are traditionally regarded by psychologists as a separate class of

mental occurrences: I am, of course, not concerned to deny the obvious fact

that  they  have  characteristics  which  make  a  special  investigation  of  them

necessary. What I am concerned with is the analysis of emotions. It is clear

that an emotion is essentially complex, and we have to inquire whether it ever

contains  any  non-physiological  material  not  reducible  to  sensations  and

images and their relations.

  Although what specially concerns us is the analysis of emotions, we shall

find that the more important topic is the physiological causation of emotions.

This is a subject upon which much valuable and exceedingly interesting work

has been done, whereas the bare analysis of emotions has proved somewhat

barren. In view of the fact that we have defined perceptions, sensations, and

images by their physiological causation, it is evident that our problem of the

analysis of the emotions is bound up with the problem of their physiological

causation.

  Modern views on the causation of emotions begin with what is called the

James-Lange  theory.  James  states  this  view  in  the  following  terms

("Psychology," vol. ii, p. 449):

  "Our natural way of thinking about these coarser emotions, grief, fear,

rage,  love,  is  that  the  mental  perception  of  some  fact  excites  the  mental

affection called the emotion, and that this latter state of mind gives rise to the

bodily  expression.  My  theory,  on  the  contrary,  is  that  THE  BODILY

CHANGES  FOLLOW  DIRECTLY  THE  PERCEPTION  OF  THE

EXCITING  FACT,  AND  THAT  OUR  FEELING  OF  THE  SAME

                                          IS
CHANGES  AS  THEY  OCCUR   THE  EMOTION  (James's  italics).

Common sense says: we lose our fortune, are sorry and weep; we meet a

bear, are frightened and run; we are insulted by a rival, are angry and strike.

The  hypothesis  here  to  be  defended  says  that  this  order  of  sequence  is

incorrect, that the one mental state is not immediately induced by the other,

that the bodily manifestations must first be interposed between, and that themore rational statement is that we feel sorry because we cry, angry because

we strike, afraid because we tremble, and not that we cry, strike, or tremble,

because we are sorry, angry, or fearful, as the case may be. Without the

bodily states following on the perception, the latter would be purely cognitive

in form, pale, colourless, destitute of emotional warmth."

  Round this hypothesis a very voluminous literature has grown up. The

history  of  its  victory  over  earlier  criticism,  and  its  difficulties  with  the

modern experimental work of Sherrington and Cannon, is well told by James

R.  Angell  in  an  article  called  "A  Reconsideration  of  James's  Theory  of

Emotion in the Light of Recent Criticisms."* In this article Angell defends

James's theory and to me—though I speak with diffidence on a question as to

which I have little competence—it appears that his defence is on the whole

successful.

* "Psychological Review," 1916.

  Sherrington,  by  experiments  on  dogs,  showed  that  many  of  the  usual

marks of emotion were present in their behaviour even when, by severing the

spinal cord in the lower cervical region, the viscera were cut off from all

communication with the brain, except that existing through certain cranial

nerves.  He  mentions  the  various  signs  which  "contributed  to  indicate  the

existence of an emotion as lively as the animal had ever shown us before the

spinal operation had been made."* He infers that the physiological condition

of  the  viscera  cannot  be  the  cause  of  the  emotion  displayed  under  such

circumstances, and concludes: "We are forced back toward the likelihood that

the visceral expression of emotion is SECONDARY to the cerebral action

occurring with the psychical state.... We may with James accept visceral and

organic sensations and the memories and associations of them as contributory

to primitive emotion, but we must regard them as re-enforcing rather than as

initiating the psychosis."*

* Quoted by Angell, loc. cit.

  Angell suggests that the display of emotion in such cases may be due to

past experience, generating habits which would require only the stimulation

of  cerebral  reflex  arcs.  Rage  and  some  forms  of  fear,  however,  may,  he

thinks, gain expression without the brain. Rage and fear have been especially

studied by Cannon, whose work is of the greatest importance. His results are

given in his book, "Bodily Changes in Pain, Hunger, Fear and Rage" (D.

Appleton and Co., 1916).  The most interesting part of Cannon's book consists in the investigation of

the effects produced by secretion of adrenin. Adrenin is a substance secreted

into the blood by the adrenal glands. These are among the ductless glands, the

functions of which, both in physiology and in connection with the emotions,

have only come to be known during recent years. Cannon found that pain,

fear and rage occurred in circumstances which affected the supply of adrenin,

and that an artificial injection of adrenin could, for example, produce all the

symptoms of fear. He studied the effects of adrenin on various parts of the

body; he found that it causes the pupils to dilate, hairs to stand erect, blood

vessels to be constricted, and so on. These effects were still produced if the

parts in question were removed from the body and kept alive artificially.*

* Cannon's work is not unconnected with that of Mosso, who 

maintains, as the result of much experimental work, that 

"the seat of the emotions lies in the sympathetic nervous 

system." An account of the work of both these men will be 

found in Goddard's "Psychology of the Normal and Sub-normal" 

(Kegan Paul, 1919), chap. vii and Appendix.

  Cannon's chief argument against James is, if I understand him rightly, that

similar  affections  of  the  viscera  may  accompany  dissimilar  emotions,

especially  fear  and  rage.  Various  different  emotions  make  us  cry,  and

therefore it cannot be true to say, as James does, that we "feel sorry because

we cry," since sometimes we cry when we feel glad. This argument, however,

is by no means conclusive against James, because it cannot be shown that

there  are  no  visceral  differences  for  different  emotions,  and  indeed  it  is

unlikely that this is the case.

  As  Angell  says  (loc.  cit.):  "Fear  and  joy  may  both  cause  cardiac

palpitation, but in one case we find high tonus of the skeletal muscles, in the

other case relaxation and the general sense of weakness."

  Angell's conclusion, after discussing the experiments of Sherrington and

Cannon, is: "I would therefore submit that, so far as concerns the critical

suggestions by these two psychologists, James's essential contentions are not

materially affected." If it were necessary for me to take sides on this question,

I should agree with this conclusion; but I think my thesis as to the analysis of

emotion  can  be  maintained  without  coming  to  a  probably  premature

conclusion upon the doubtful parts of the physiological problem.

  According  to  our  definitions,  if  James  is  right,  an  emotion  may  beregarded as involving a confused perception of the viscera concerned in its

causation, while if Cannon and Sherrington are right, an emotion involves a

confused perception of its external stimulus. This follows from what was said

in Lecture VII. We there defined a perception as an appearance, however

irregular, of one or more objects external to the brain. And in order to be an

appearance of one or more objects, it is only necessary that the occurrence in

question should be connected with them by a continuous chain, and should

vary when they are varied sufficiently. Thus the question whether a mental

occurrence  can  be  called  a  perception  turns  upon  the  question  whether

anything can be inferred from it as to its causes outside the brain: if such

inference  is  possible,  the  occurrence  in  question  will  come  within  our

definition of a perception. And in that case, according to the definition in

Lecture  VIII,  its  non-mnemic  elements  will  be  sensations.  Accordingly,

whether emotions are caused by changes in the viscera or by sensible objects,

they contain elements which are sensations according to our definition.

  An emotion in its entirety is, of course, something much more complex

than a perception. An emotion is essentially a process, and it will be only

what one may call a cross-section of the emotion that will be a perception, of

a bodily condition according to James, or (in certain cases) of an external

object  according  to  his  opponents.  An  emotion  in  its  entirety  contains

dynamic  elements,  such  as  motor  impulses,  desires,  pleasures  and  pains.

Desires and pleasures and pains, according to the theory adopted in Lecture

III, are characteristics of processes, not separate ingredients. An emotion—

rage,  for  example—will  be  a  certain  kind  of  process,  consisting  of

perceptions and (in general) bodily movements. The desires and pleasures

and pains involved are properties of this process, not separate items in the

stuff  of  which  the  emotion  is  composed.  The  dynamic  elements  in  an

emotion, if we are right in our analysis, contain, from our point of view, no

ingredients beyond those contained in the processes considered in Lecture III.

The ingredients of an emotion are only sensations and images and bodily

movements succeeding each other according to a certain pattern. With this

conclusion we may leave the emotions and pass to the consideration of the

will.

  The  first  thing  to  be  defined  when  we  are  dealing  with  Will  is  a

VOLUNTARY MOVEMENT. We have already defined vital movements,

and we have maintained that, from a behaviourist standpoint, it is impossibleto distinguish which among such movements are reflex and which voluntary.

Nevertheless, there certainly is a distinction. When we decide in the morning

that it is time to get up, our consequent movement is voluntary. The beating

of the heart, on the other hand, is involuntary: we can neither cause it nor

prevent it by any decision of our own, except indirectly, as e.g. by drugs.

Breathing is intermediate between the two: we normally breathe without the

help of the will, but we can alter or stop our breathing if we choose.

  James  ("Psychology,"  chap.  xxvi)  maintains  that  the  only  distinctive

characteristic of a voluntary act is that it involves an idea of the movement to

be  performed,  made  up  of  memory-images  of  the  kinaesthetic  sensations

which we had when the same movement occurred on some former occasion.

He points out that, on this view, no movement can be made voluntarily unless

it has previously occurred involuntarily.*

* "Psychology," Vol. ii, pp. 492-3.

  I see no reason to doubt the correctness of this view. We shall say, then,

that movements which are accompanied by kinaesthetic sensations tend to be

caused by the images of those sensations, and when so caused are called

VOLUNTARY.

  Volition, in the emphatic sense, involves something more than voluntary

movement. The sort of case I am thinking of is decision after deliberation.

Voluntary  movements  are  a  part  of  this,  but  not  the  whole.  There  is,  in

addition  to  them,  a  judgment:  "This  is  what  I  shall  do";  there  is  also  a

sensation of tension during doubt, followed by a different sensation at the

moment of deciding. I see no reason whatever to suppose that there is any

specifically new ingredient; sensations and images, with their relations and

causal laws, yield all that seems to be wanted for the analysis of the will,

together with the fact that kinaesthetic images tend to cause the movements

with which they are connected. Conflict of desires is of course essential in the

causation of the emphatic kind of will: there will be for a time kinaesthetic

images of incompatible movements, followed by the exclusive image of the

movement  which  is  said  to  be  willed.  Thus  will  seems  to  add  no  new

irreducible ingredient to the analysis of the mind.

          LECTURE XV. CHARACTERISTICS OF MENTAL

                                  PHENOMENA

  At the end of our journey it is time to return to the question from which we

set out, namely: What is it that characterizes mind as opposed to matter? Or,

to  state  the  same  question  in  other  terms:  How  is  psychology  to  be

distinguished from physics? The answer provisionally suggested at the outset

of  our  inquiry  was  that  psychology  and  physics  are  distinguished  by  the

nature of their causal laws, not by their subject matter. At the same time we

held  that  there  is  a  certain  subject  matter,  namely  images,  to  which  only

psychological causal laws are applicable; this subject matter, therefore, we

assigned exclusively to psychology. But we found no way of defining images

except through their causation; in their intrinsic character they appeared to

have  no  universal  mark  by  which  they  could  be  distinguished  from

sensations.

  In this last lecture I propose to pass in review various suggested methods

of distinguishing mind from matter. I shall then briefly sketch the nature of

that fundamental science which I believe to be the true metaphysic, in which

mind and matter alike are seen to be constructed out of a neutral stuff, whose

causal laws have no such duality as that of psychology, but form the basis

upon which both physics and psychology are built.

  In  search  for  the  definition  of  "mental  phenomena,"  let  us  begin  with

"consciousness," which is often thought to be the essence of mind. In the first

lecture  I  gave  various  arguments  against  the  view  that  consciousness  is

fundamental, but I did not attempt to say what consciousness is. We must

find  a  definition  of  it,  if  we  are  to  feel  secure  in  deciding  that  it  is  not

fundamental. It is for the sake of the proof that it is not fundamental that we

must now endeavour to decide what it is.

  "Consciousness," by those who regard it as fundamental, is taken to be a

character diffused throughout our mental life, distinct from sensations and

images, memories, beliefs and desires, but present in all of them.* Dr. Henry

Head, in an article which I quoted in Lecture III, distinguishing sensations

from purely physiological occurrences, says: "Sensation, in the strict sense of

the term, demands the existence of consciousness." This statement, at first

sight, is one to which we feel inclined to assent, but I believe we are mistaken

if we do so. Sensation is the sort of thing of which we MAY be conscious,but not a thing of which we MUST be conscious. We have been led, in the

course of our inquiry, to admit unconscious beliefs and unconscious desires.

There is, so far as I can see, no class of mental or other occurrences of which

we are always conscious whenever they happen.* Cf. Lecture VI.

  The first thing to notice is that consciousness must be of something. In

view of this, I should define "consciousness" in terms of that relation of an

image of a word to an object which we defined, in Lecture XI, as "meaning."

When a sensation is followed by an image which is a "copy" of it, I think it

may be said that the existence of the image constitutes consciousness of the

sensation, provided it is accompanied by that sort of belief which, when we

reflect upon it, makes us feel that the image is a "sign" of something other

than  itself.  This  is  the  sort  of  belief  which,  in  the  case  of  memory,  we

expressed in the words "this occurred"; or which, in the case of a judgment of

perception, makes us believe in qualities correlated with present sensations,

as  e.g.,  tactile  and  visual  qualities  are  correlated.  The  addition  of  some

element of belief seems required, since mere imagination does not involve

consciousness of anything, and there can be no consciousness which is not of

something.  If  images  alone  constituted  consciousness  of  their  prototypes,

such  imagination-images  as  in  fact  have  prototypes  would  involve

consciousness of them; since this is not the case, an element of belief must be

added to the images in defining consciousness. The belief must be of that sort

that constitutes objective reference, past or present. An image, together with a

belief  of  this  sort  concerning  it,  constitutes,  according  to  our  definition,

consciousness of the prototype of the image.

  But when we pass from consciousness of sensations to consciousness of

objects of perception, certain further points arise which demand an addition

to our definition. A judgment of perception, we may say, consists of a core of

sensation,  together  with  associated  images,  with  belief  in  the  present

existence of an object to which sensation and images are referred in a way

which  is  difficult  to  analyse.  Perhaps  we  might  say  that  the  belief  is  not

fundamentally  in  any  PRESENT  existence,  but  is  of  the  nature  of  an

expectation:  for  example,  when  we  see  an  object,  we  expect  certain

sensations to result if we proceed to touch it. Perception, then, will consist of

a present sensation together with expectations of future sensations. (This, of

course, is a reflective analysis, not an account of the way perception appears

to  unchecked  introspection.)  But  all  such  expectations  are  liable  to  be

erroneous, since they are based upon correlations which are usual but not

invariable.  Any  such  correlation  may  mislead  us  in  a  particular  case,  for

example,  if  we  try  to  touch  a  reflection  in  a  looking-glass  under  theimpression that it is "real." Since memory is fallible, a similar difficulty arises

as regards consciousness of past objects. It would seem odd to say that we

can be "conscious" of a thing which does not or did not exist. The only way

to avoid this awkwardness is to add to our definition the proviso that the

beliefs involved in consciousness must be TRUE.

  In the second place, the question arises as to whether we can be conscious

of images. If we apply our definition to this case, it seems to demand images

of images. In order, for example, to be conscious of an image of a cat, we

shall require, according to the letter of the definition, an image which is a

copy of our image of the cat, and has this image for its prototype. Now, it

hardly seems probable, as a matter of observation, that there are images of

images, as opposed to images of sensations. We may meet this difficulty in

two ways, either by boldly denying consciousness of images, or by finding a

sense  in  which,  by  means  of  a  different  accompanying  belief,  an  image,

instead  of  meaning  its  prototype,  can  mean  another  image  of  the  same

prototype.

  The first alternative, which denies consciousness of images, has already

been discussed when we were dealing with Introspection in Lecture VI. We

then decided that there must be, in some sense, consciousness of images. We

are therefore left with the second suggested way of dealing with knowledge

of images. According to this second hypothesis, there may be two images of

the  same  prototype,  such  that  one  of  them  means  the  other,  instead  of

meaning the prototype. It will be remembered that we defined meaning by

association a word or image means an object, we said, when it has the same

associations  as  the  object.  But  this  definition  must  not  be  interpreted  too

absolutely: a word or image will not have ALL the same associations as the

object  which  it  means.  The  word  "cat"  may  be  associated  with  the  word

"mat,"  but  it  would  not  happen  except  by  accident  that  a  cat  would  be

associated  with  a  mat.  And  in  like  manner  an  image  may  have  certain

associations which its prototype will not have, e.g. an association with the

word "image." When these associations are active, an image means an image,

instead of meaning its prototype. If I have had images of a given prototype

many times, I can mean one of these, as opposed to the rest, by recollecting

the time and place or any other distinctive association of that one occasion.

This  happens,  for  example,  when  a  place  recalls  to  us  some  thought  we

previously had in that place, so that we remember a thought as opposed to theoccurrence to which it referred. Thus we may say that we think of an image A

when  we  have  a  similar  image  B  associated  with  recollections  of

circumstances connected with A, but not with its prototype or with other

images  of  the  same  prototype.  In  this  way  we  become  aware  of  images

without the need of any new store of mental contents, merely by the help of

new associations. This theory, so far as I can see, solves the problems of

introspective  knowledge,  without  requiring  heroic  measures  such  as  those

proposed by Knight Dunlap, whose views we discussed in Lecture VI.

  According to what we have been saying, sensation itself is not an instance

of consciousness, though the immediate memory by which it is apt to be

succeeded  is  so.  A  sensation  which  is  remembered  becomes  an  object  of

consciousness as soon as it begins to be remembered, which will normally be

almost immediately after its occurrence (if at all); but while it exists it is not

an object of consciousness. If, however, it is part of a perception, say of some

familiar  person,  we  may  say  that  the  person  perceived  is  an  object  of

consciousness.  For  in  this  case  the  sensation  is  a  SIGN  of  the  perceived

object  in  much  the  same  way  in  which  a  memory-image  is  a  sign  of  a

remembered object. The essential practical function of "consciousness" and

"thought" is that they enable us to act with reference to what is distant in time

or  space,  even  though  it  is  not  at  present  stimulating  our  senses.  This

reference to absent objects is possible through association and habit. Actual

sensations, in themselves, are not cases of consciousness, because they do not

bring  in  this  reference  to  what  is  absent.  But  their  connection  with

consciousness is very close, both through immediate memory, and through

the correlations which turn sensations into perceptions.

  Enough  has,  I  hope,  been  said  to  show  that  consciousness  is  far  too

complex and accidental to be taken as the fundamental characteristic of mind.

We have seen that belief and images both enter into it. Belief itself, as we

saw in an earlier lecture, is complex. Therefore, if any definition of mind is

suggested by our analysis of consciousness, images are what would naturally

suggest  themselves.  But  since  we  found  that  images  can  only  be  defined

causally, we cannot deal with this suggestion, except in connection with the

difference between physical and psychological causal laws.

  I come next to those characteristics of mental phenomena which arise out

of mnemic causation. The possibility of action with reference to what is not

sensibly present is one of the things that might be held to characterize mind.Let us take first a very elementary example. Suppose you are in a familiar

room at night, and suddenly the light goes out. You will be able to find your

way to the door without much difficulty by means of the picture of the room

which you have in your mind. In this case visual images serve, somewhat

imperfectly it is true, the purpose which visual sensations would otherwise

serve. The stimulus to the production of visual images is the desire to get out

of  the  room,  which,  according  to  what  we  found  in  Lecture  III,  consists

essentially of present sensations and motor impulses caused by them. Again,

words heard or read enable you to act with reference to the matters about

which  they  give  information;  here,  again,  a  present  sensible  stimulus,  in

virtue of habits formed in the past, enables you to act in a manner appropriate

to an object which is not sensibly present. The whole essence of the practical

efficiency  of  "thought"  consists  in  sensitiveness  to  signs:  the  sensible

presence of A, which is a sign of the present or future existence of B, enables

us  to  act  in  a  manner  appropriate  to  B.  Of  this,  words  are  the  supreme

example,  since  their  effects  as  signs  are  prodigious,  while  their  intrinsic

interest as sensible occurrences on their own account is usually very slight.

The operation of signs may or may not be accompanied by consciousness. If

a sensible stimulus A calls up an image of B, and we then act with reference

to B, we have what may be called consciousness of B. But habit may enable

us to act in a manner appropriate to B as soon as A appears, without ever

having an image of B. In that case, although A operates as a sign, it operates

without the help of consciousness. Broadly speaking, a very familiar sign

tends to operate directly in this manner, and the intervention of consciousness

marks an imperfectly established habit.

  The power of acquiring experience, which characterizes men and animals,

is an example of the general law that, in mnemic causation, the causal unit is

not one event at one time, but two or more events at two or more times.& A

burnt  child  fears  the  fire,  that  is  to  say,  the  neighbourhood  of  fire  has  a

different effect upon a child which has had the sensations of burning than

upon one which has not. More correctly, the observed effect, when a child

which has been burnt is put near a fire, has for its cause, not merely the

neighbourhood of the fire, but this together with the previous burning. The

general formula, when an animal has acquired experience through some event

A, is that, when B occurs at some future time, the animal to which A has

happened acts differently from an animal which A has not happened. Thus Aand B together, not either separately, must be regarded as the cause of the

animal's behaviour, unless we take account of the effect which A has had in

altering the animal's nervous tissue, which is a matter not patent to external

observation except under very special circumstances. With this possibility,

we are brought back to causal laws, and to the suggestion that many things

which seem essentially mental are really neural. Perhaps it is the nerves that

acquire experience rather than the mind. If so, the possibility of acquiring

experience cannot be used to define mind.*

* Cf. Lecture IV.

  Very similar considerations apply to memory, if taken as the essence of

mind. A recollection is aroused by something which is happening now, but is

different from the effect which the present occurrence would have produced

if the recollected event had not occurred. This may be accounted for by the

physical effect of the past event on the brain, making it a different instrument

from that which would have resulted from a different experience. The causal

peculiarities  of  memory  may,  therefore,  have  a  physiological  explanation.

With  every  special  class  of  mental  phenomena  this  possibility  meets  us

afresh. If psychology is to be a separate science at all, we must seek a wider

ground for its separateness than any that we have been considering hitherto.

  We have found that "consciousness" is too narrow to characterize mental

phenomena,  and  that  mnemic  causation  is  too  wide.  I  come  now  to  a

characteristic which, though difficult to define, comes much nearer to what

we require, namely subjectivity.

  Subjectivity, as a characteristic of mental phenomena, was considered in

Lecture  VII,  in  connection  with  the  definition  of  perception.  We  there

decided  that  those  particulars  which  constitute  the  physical  world  can  be

collected into sets in two ways, one of which makes a bundle of all those

particulars that are appearances of a given thing from different places, while

the other makes a bundle of all those particulars which are appearances of

different things from a given place. A bundle of this latter sort, at a given

time, is called a "perspective"; taken throughout a period of time, it is called a

"biography."  Subjectivity  is  the  characteristic  of  perspectives  and

biographies, the characteristic of giving the view of the world from a certain

place. We saw in Lecture VII that this characteristic involves none of the

other characteristics that are commonly associated with mental phenomena,

such as consciousness, experience and memory. We found in fact that it isexhibited by a photographic plate, and, strictly speaking, by any particular

taken in conjunction with those which have the same "passive" place in the

sense defined in Lecture VII. The particulars forming one perspective are

connected together primarily by simultaneity; those forming one biography,

primarily by the existence of direct time-relations between them. To these are

to be added relations derivable from the laws of perspective. In all this we are

clearly not in the region of psychology, as commonly understood; yet we are

also hardly in the region of physics. And the definition of perspectives and

biographies, though it does not yet yield anything that would be commonly

called  "mental,"  is  presupposed  in  mental  phenomena,  for  example  in

mnemic causation: the causal unit in mnemic causation, which gives rise to

Semon's engram, is the whole of one perspective—not of any perspective, but

of a perspective in a place where there is nervous tissue, or at any rate living

tissue of some sort. Perception also, as we saw, can only be defined in terms

of  perspectives.  Thus  the  conception  of  subjectivity,  i.e.  of  the  "passive"

place of a particular, though not alone sufficient to define mind, is clearly an

essential element in the definition.

  I have maintained throughout these lectures that the data of psychology do

not  differ  in,  their  intrinsic  character  from  the  data  of  physics.  I  have

maintained that sensations are data for psychology and physics equally, while

images, which may be in some sense exclusively psychological data, can only

be distinguished from sensations by their correlations, not by what they are in

themselves.  It  is  now  necessary,  however,  to  examine  the  notion  of  a

"datum," and to obtain, if possible, a definition of this notion.

  The notion of "data" is familiar throughout science, and is usually treated

by men of science as though it were perfectly clear. Psychologists, on the

other  hand,  find  great  difficulty  in  the  conception.  "Data"  are  naturally

defined in terms of theory of knowledge: they are those propositions of which

the  truth  is  known  without  demonstration,  so  that  they  may  be  used  as

premisses in proving other propositions. Further, when a proposition which is

a datum asserts the existence of something, we say that the something is a

datum, as well as the proposition asserting its existence. Thus those objects of

whose existence we become certain through perception are said to be data.

  There is some difficulty in connecting this epistemological definition of

"data"  with  our  psychological  analysis  of  knowledge;  but  until  such  a

connection has been effected, we have no right to use the conception "data."  It is clear, in the first place, that there can be no datum apart from a belief.

A sensation which merely comes and goes is not a datum; it only becomes a

datum when it is remembered. Similarly, in perception, we do not have a

datum unless we have a JUDGMENT of perception. In the sense in which

objects (as opposed to propositions) are data, it would seem natural to say

that those objects of which we are conscious are data. But consciousness, as

we have seen, is a complex notion, involving beliefs, as well as mnemic

phenomena such as are required for perception and memory. It follows that

no datum is theoretically indubitable, since no belief is infallible; it follows

also that every datum has a greater or less degree of vagueness, since there is

always some vagueness in memory and the meaning of images.

  Data are not those things of which our consciousness is earliest in time. At

every period of life, after we have become capable of thought, some of our

beliefs are obtained by inference, while others are not. A belief may pass

from either of these classes into the other, and may therefore become, or

cease to be, a belief giving a datum. When, in what follows, I speak of data, I

do not mean the things of which we feel sure before scientific study begins,

but the things which, when a science is well advanced, appear as affording

grounds for other parts of the science, without themselves being believed on

any ground except observation. I assume, that is to say, a trained observer,

with an analytic attention, knowing the sort of thing to look for, and the sort

of thing that will be important. What he observes is, at the stage of science

which he has reached, a datum for his science. It is just as sophisticated and

elaborate as the theories which he bases upon it, since only trained habits and

much practice enable a man to make the kind of observation that will be

scientifically  illuminating.  Nevertheless,  when  once  it  has  been  observed,

belief  in  it  is  not  based  on  inference  and  reasoning,  but  merely  upon  its

having  been  seen.  In  this  way  its  logical  status  differs  from  that  of  the

theories which are proved by its means.

  In any science other than psychology the datum is primarily a perception,

in which only the sensational core is ultimately and theoretically a datum,

though  some  such  accretions  as  turn  the  sensation  into  a  perception  are

practically unavoidable. But if we postulate an ideal observer, he will be able

to isolate the sensation, and treat this alone as datum. There is, therefore, an

important sense in which we may say that, if we analyse as much as we

ought,  our  data,  outside  psychology,  consist  of  sensations,  which  includewithin themselves certain spatial and temporal relations.

  Applying this remark to physiology, we see that the nerves and brain as

physical  objects  are  not  truly  data;  they  are  to  be  replaced,  in  the  ideal

structure of science, by the sensations through which the physiologist is said

to perceive them. The passage from these sensations to nerves and brain as

physical objects belongs really to the initial stage in the theory of physics,

and ought to be placed in the reasoned part, not in the part supposed to be

observed. To say we see the nerves is like saying we hear the nightingale;

both are convenient but inaccurate expressions. We hear a sound which we

believe to be causally connected with the nightingale, and we see a sight

which we believe to be causally connected with a nerve. But in each case it is

only  the  sensation  that  ought,  in  strictness,  to  be  called  a  datum.  Now,

sensations are certainly among the data of psychology. Therefore all the data

of the physical sciences are also psychological data. It remains to inquire

whether all the data of psychology are also data of physical science, and

especially of physiology.

  If  we  have  been  right  in  our  analysis  of  mind,  the  ultimate  data  of

psychology  are  only  sensations  and  images  and  their  relations.  Beliefs,

desires,  volitions,  and  so  on,  appeared  to  us  to  be  complex  phenomena

consisting of sensations and images variously interrelated. Thus (apart from

certain relations) the occurrences which seem most distinctively mental, and

furthest  removed  from  physics,  are,  like  physical  objects,  constructed  or

inferred, not part of the original stock of data in the perfected science. From

both ends, therefore, the difference between physical and psychological data

is  diminished.  Is  there  ultimately  no  difference,  or  do  images  remain  as

irreducibly and exclusively psychological? In view of the causal definition of

the  difference  between  images  and  sensations,  this  brings  us  to  a  new

question, namely: Are the causal laws of psychology different from those of

any other science, or are they really physiological?

  Certain  ambiguities  must  be  removed  before  this  question  can  be

adequately discussed.

  First, there is the distinction between rough approximate laws and such as

appear to be precise and general. I shall return to the former presently; it is

the latter that I wish to discuss now.

  Matter, as defined at the end of Lecture V, is a logical fiction, invented

because it gives a convenient way of stating causal laws. Except in cases ofperfect regularity in appearances (of which we can have no experience), the

actual appearances of a piece of matter are not members of that ideal system

of regular appearances which is defined as being the matter in question. But

the  matter  is,  after  all,  inferred  from  its  appearances,  which  are  used  to

VERIFY  physical  laws.  Thus,  in  so  far  as  physics  is  an  empirical  and

verifiable  science,  it  must  assume  or  prove  that  the  inference  from

appearances to matter is, in general, legitimate, and it must be able to tell us,

more  or  less,  what  appearances  to  expect.  It  is  through  this  question  of

verifiability and empirical applicability to experience that we are led to a

theory of matter such as I advocate. From the consideration of this question it

results  that  physics,  in  so  far  as  it  is  an  empirical  science,  not  a  logical

phantasy, is concerned with particulars of just the same sort as those which

psychology  considers  under  the  name  of  sensations.  The  causal  laws  of

physics, so interpreted, differ from those of psychology only by the fact that

they connect a particular with other appearances in the same piece of matter,

rather than with other appearances in the same perspective. That is to say,

they  group  together  particulars  having  the  same  "active"  place,  while

psychology groups together those having the same "passive" place. Some

particulars,  such  as  images,  have  no  "active"  place,  and  therefore  belong

exclusively to psychology.

  We can now understand the distinction between physics and psychology.

The nerves and brain are matter: our visual sensations when we look at them

may  be,  and  I  think  are,  members  of  the  system  constituting  irregular

appearances of this matter, but are not the whole of the system. Psychology is

concerned, inter alia, with our sensations when we see a piece of matter, as

opposed  to  the  matter  which  we  see.  Assuming,  as  we  must,  that  our

sensations have physical causes, their causal laws are nevertheless radically

different  from  the  laws  of  physics,  since  the  consideration  of  a  single

sensation requires the breaking up of the group of which it is a member.

When a sensation is used to verify physics, it is used merely as a sign of a

certain material phenomenon, i.e. of a group of particulars of which it is a

member. But when it is studied by psychology, it is taken away from that

group  and  put  into  quite  a  different  context,  where  it  causes  images  or

voluntary  movements.  It  is  primarily  this  different  grouping  that  is

characteristic of psychology as opposed to all the physical sciences, including

physiology;  a  secondary  difference  is  that  images,  which  belong  topsychology, are not easily to be included among the aspects which constitute

a physical thing or piece of matter.

  There  remains,  however,  an  important  question,  namely:  Are  mental

events  causally  dependent  upon  physical  events  in  a  sense  in  which  the

converse dependence does not hold? Before we can discuss the answer to this

question, we must first be clear as to what our question means.

  When, given A, it is possible to infer B, but given B, it is not possible to

infer A, we say that B is dependent upon A in a sense in which A is not

dependent upon B. Stated in logical terms, this amounts to saying that, when

we know a many-one relation of A to B, B is dependent upon A in respect of

this  relation.  If  the  relation  is  a  causal  law,  we  say  that  B  is  causally

dependent upon A. The illustration that chiefly concerns us is the system of

appearances  of  a  physical  object.  We  can,  broadly  speaking,  infer  distant

appearances from near ones, but not vice versa. All men look alike when they

are a mile away, hence when we see a man a mile off we cannot tell what he

will look like when he is only a yard away. But when we see him a yard

away, we can tell what he will look like a mile away. Thus the nearer view

gives  us  more  valuable  information,  and  the  distant  view  is  causally

dependent upon it in a sense in which it is not causally dependent upon the

distant view.

  It is this greater causal potency of the near appearance that leads physics

to state its causal laws in terms of that system of regular appearances to

which the nearest appearances increasingly approximate, and that makes it

value information derived from the microscope or telescope. It is clear that

our sensations, considered as irregular appearances of physical objects, share

the  causal  dependence  belonging  to  comparatively  distant  appearances;

therefore in our sensational life we are in causal dependence upon physical

laws.

  This,  however,  is  not  the  most  important  or  interesting  part  of  our

question. It is the causation of images that is the vital problem. We have seen

that they are subject to mnenic causation, and that mnenic causation may be

reducible  to  ordinary  physical  causation  in  nervous  tissue.  This  is  the

question  upon  which  our  attitude  must  turn  towards  what  may  be  called

materialism. One sense of materialism is the view that all mental phenomena

are causally dependent upon physical phenomena in the above-defined sense

of causal dependence. Whether this is the case or not, I do not profess toknow. The question seems to me the same as the question whether mnemic

causation is ultimate, which we considered without deciding in Lecture IV.

But I think the bulk of the evidence points to the materialistic answer as the

more probable.

  In  considering  the  causal  laws  of  psychology,  the  distinction  between

rough generalizations and exact laws is important. There are many rough

generalizations in psychology, not only of the sort by which we govern our

ordinary behaviour to each other, but also of a more nearly scientific kind.

Habit and association belong among such laws. I will give an illustration of

the  kind  of  law  that  can  be  obtained.  Suppose  a  person  has  frequently

experienced A and B in close temporal contiguity, an association will be

established, so that A, or an image of A, tends to cause an image of B. The

question arises: will the association work in either direction, or only from the

one which has occurred earlier to the one which has occurred later? In an

article by Mr. Wohlgemuth, called "The Direction of Associations" ("British

Journal of Psychology," vol. v, part iv, March, 1913), it is claimed to be

proved  by  experiment  that,  in  so  far  as  motor  memory  (i.e.  memory  of

movements) is concerned, association works only from earlier to later, while

in  visual  and  auditory  memory  this  is  not  the  case,  but  the  later  of  two

neighbouring experiences may recall the earlier as well as the earlier the later.

It is suggested that motor memory is physiological, while visual and auditory

memory  are  more  truly  psychological.  But  that  is  not  the  point  which

concerns us in the illustration. The point which concerns us is that a law of

association,  established  by  purely  psychological  observation,  is  a  purely

psychological law, and may serve as a sample of what is possible in the way

of  discovering  such  laws.  It  is,  however,  still  no  more  than  a  rough

generalization, a statistical average. It cannot tell us what will result from a

given cause on a given occasion. It is a law of tendency, not a precise and

invariable law such as those of physics aim at being.

  If we wish to pass from the law of habit, stated as a tendency or average,

to something more precise and invariable, we seem driven to the nervous

system. We can more or less guess how an occurrence produces a change in

the brain, and how its repetition gradually produces something analogous to

the  channel  of  a  river,  along  which  currents  flow  more  easily  than  in

neighbouring  paths.  We  can  perceive  that  in  this  way,  if  we  had  more

knowledge, the tendency to habit through repetition might be replaced by aprecise  account  of  the  effect  of  each  occurrence  in  bringing  about  a

modification of the sort from which habit would ultimately result. It is such

considerations that make students of psychophysiology materialistic in their

methods, whatever they may be in their metaphysics. There are, of course,

exceptions,  such  as  Professor  J.  S.  Haldane,*  who  maintains  that  it  is

theoretically  impossible  to  obtain  physiological  explanations  of  psychical

phenomena,  or  physical  explanations  of  physiological  phenomena.  But  I

think the bulk of expert opinion, in practice, is on the other side.

*See his book, "The New Physiology and Other Addresses" 

(Charles Griffin & Co., 1919).

  The question whether it is possible to obtain precise causal laws in which

the causes are psychological, not material, is one of detailed investigation. I

have done what I could to make clear the nature of the question, but I do not

believe that it is possible as yet to answer it with any confidence. It seems to

be by no means an insoluble question, and we may hope that science will be

able to produce sufficient grounds for regarding one answer as much more

probable than the other. But for the moment I do not see how we can come to

a decision.

  I think, however, on grounds of the theory of matter explained in Lectures

V and VII, that an ultimate scientific account of what goes on in the world, if

it were ascertainable, would resemble psychology rather than physics in what

we found to be the decisive difference between them. I think, that is to say,

that such an account would not be content to speak, even formally, as though

matter, which is a logical fiction, were the ultimate reality. I think that, if our

scientific knowledge were adequate to the task, which it neither is nor is

likely to become, it would exhibit the laws of correlation of the particulars

constituting a momentary condition of a material unit, and would state the

causal laws* of the world in terms of these particulars, not in terms of matter.

Causal  laws  so  stated  would,  I  believe,  be  applicable  to  psychology  and

physics  equally;  the  science  in  which  they  were  stated  would  succeed  in

achieving what metaphysics has vainly attempted, namely a unified account

of what really happens, wholly true even if not the whole of truth, and free

from all convenient fictions or unwarrantable assumptions of metaphysical

entities.  A  causal  law  applicable  to  particulars  would  count  as  a  law  of

physics if it could be stated in terms of those fictitious systems of regular

appearances which are matter; if this were not the case, it would count as alaw of psychology if one of the particulars were a sensation or an image, i.e.

were  subject  to  mnemic  causation.  I  believe  that  the  realization  of  the

complexity of a material unit, and its analysis into constituents analogous to

sensations,  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  philosophy,  and  vital  for  any

understanding  of  the  relations  between  mind  and  matter,  between  our

perceptions and the world which they perceive. It is in this direction, I am

convinced, that we must look for the solution of many ancient perplexities.

* In a perfected science, causal laws will take the form of 

differential equations—or of finite-difference equations, 

if the theory of quanta should prove correct.

  It  is  probable  that  the  whole  science  of  mental  occurrences,  especially

where  its  initial  definitions  are  concerned,  could  be  simplified  by  the

development of the fundamental unifying science in which the causal laws of

particulars  are  sought,  rather  than  the  causal  laws  of  those  systems  of

particulars  that  constitute  the  material  units  of  physics.  This  fundamental

science  would  cause  physics  to  become  derivative,  in  the  sort  of  way  in

which  theories  of  the  constitution  of  the  atom  make  chemistry  derivative

from physics; it would also cause psychology to appear less singular and

isolated among sciences. If we are right in this, it is a wrong philosophy of

matter which has caused many of the difficulties in the philosophy of mind—

difficulties which a right philosophy of matter would cause to disappear.

  The conclusions at which we have arrived may be summed up as follows:

  I. Physics and psychology are not distinguished by their material. Mind

and matter alike are logical constructions; the particulars out of which they

are constructed, or from which they are inferred, have various relations, some

of which are studied by physics, others by psychology. Broadly speaking,

physics group particulars by their active places, psychology by their passive

places.

  II. The two most essential characteristics of the causal laws which would

naturally  be  called  psychological  are  SUBJECTIVITY  and  MNEMIC

CAUSATION; these are not unconnected, since the causal unit in mnemic

causation is the group of particulars having a given passive place at a given

time, and it is by this manner of grouping that subjectivity is defined.

  III. Habit, memory and thought are all developments of mnemic causation.

It is probable, though not certain, that mnemic causation is derivative from

ordinary physical causation in nervous (and other) tissue.  IV. Consciousness is a complex and far from universal characteristic of

mental phenomena.

  V.  Mind  is  a  matter  of  degree,  chiefly  exemplified  in  number  and

complexity of habits.

  VI.  All  our  data,  both  in  physics  and  psychology,  are  subject  to

psychological causal laws; but physical causal laws, at least in traditional

physics, can only be stated in terms of matter, which is both inferred and

constructed,  never  a  datum.  In  this  respect  psychology  is  nearer  to  what

actually exists.

 

             Proposed Roads to Freedom: Socialism,

                    Anarchism and Syndicalism

 

                                       Contents

      INTRODUCTION

                                          PART I 

                                      HISTORICAL

    CHAPTER I MARX AND SOCIALIST DOCTRINE

    CHAPTER II BAKUNIN AND ANARCHISM

    CHAPTER III THE SYNDICALIST REVOLT

 

                                          PART II 

                            PROBLEMS OF THE FUTURE

    CHAPTER IV WORK AND PAY

    CHAPTER V GOVERNMENT AND LAW

    CHAPTER VI INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

    CHAPTER VII SCIENCE AND ART UNDER SOCIALISM

    CHAPTER VIII THE WORLD AS IT COULD BE MADE

 
 
 

                                   INTRODUCTION

THE attempt to conceive imaginatively a better ordering of human society

than the destructive and cruel chaos in which mankind has hitherto existed is

by no means modern: it is at least as old as Plato, whose ``Republic'' set the

model for the Utopias of subsequent philosophers. Whoever contemplates the

world in the light of an ideal—whether what he seeks be intellect, or art, or

love, or simple happiness, or all together—must feel a great sorrow in the

evils that men needlessly allow to continue, and—if he be a man of force and

vital energy—an urgent desire to lead men to the realization of the good

which inspires his creative vision. It is this desire which has been the primary

force  moving  the  pioneers  of  Socialism  and  Anarchism,  as  it  moved  the

inventors of ideal commonwealths in the past. In this there is nothing new.

What is new in Socialism and Anarchism, is that close relation of the ideal to

the  present  sufferings  of  men,  which  has  enabled  powerful  political

movements to grow out of the hopes of solitary thinkers. It is this that makes

Socialism and Anarchism important, and it is this that makes them dangerous

to  those  who  batten,  consciously  or  unconsciously  upon  the  evils  of  our

present order of society.

  The great majority of men and women, in ordinary times, pass through life

without  ever  contemplating  or  criticising,  as  a  whole,  either  their  own

conditions or those of the world at large. They find themselves born into a

certain place in society, and they accept what each day brings forth, without

any effort of thought beyond what the immediate present requires. Almost as

instinctively as the beasts of the field, they seek the satisfaction of the needs

of the moment, without much forethought, and without considering that by

sufficient  effort  the  whole  conditions  of  their  lives  could  be  changed.  A

certain percentage, guided by personal ambition, make the effort of thought

and will which is necessary to place themselves among the more fortunate

members  of  the  community;  but  very  few  among  these  are  seriously

concerned to secure for all the advantages which they seek for themselves. It

is only a few rare and exceptional men who have that kind of love toward

mankind at large that makes them unable to endure patiently the general mass

of evil and suffering, regardless of any relation it may have to their own lives.

These few, driven by sympathetic pain, will seek, first in thought and then in

action, for some way of escape, some new system of society by which life

may become richer, more full of joy and less full of preventable evils than itis at present. But in the past such men have, as a rule, failed to interest the

very  victims  of  the  injustices  which  they  wished  to  remedy.  The  more

unfortunate  sections  of  the  population  have  been  ignorant,  apathetic  from

excess  of  toil  and  weariness,  timorous  through  the  imminent  danger  of

immediate punishment by the holders of power, and morally unreliable owing

to the loss of self-respect resulting from their degradation. To create among

such classes any conscious, deliberate effort after general amelioration might

have seemed a hopeless task, and indeed in the past it has generally proved

so. But the modern world, by the increase of education and the rise in the

standard of comfort among wage-earners, has produced new conditions, more

favorable  than  ever  before  to  the  demand  for  radical  reconstruction.  It  is

above all the Socialists, and in a lesser degree the Anarchists (chiefly as the

inspirers of Syndicalism), who have become the exponents of this demand.

  What  is  perhaps  most  remarkable  in  regard  to  both  Socialism  and

Anarchism is the association of a widespread popular movement with ideals

for a better world. The ideals have been elaborated, in the first instance, by

solitary  writers  of  books,  and  yet  powerful  sections  of  the  wage-earning

classes have accepted them as their guide in the practical affairs of the world.

In regard to Socialism this is evident; but in regard to Anarchism it is only

true with some qualification. Anarchism as such has never been a widespread

creed, it is only in the modified form of Syndicalism that it has achieved

popularity. Unlike Socialism and Anarchism, Syndicalism is primarily the

outcome, not of an idea, but of an organization: the fact of Trade Union

organization came first, and the ideas of Syndicalism are those which seemed

appropriate to this organization in the opinion of the more advanced French

Trade Unions. But the ideas are, in the main, derived from Anarchism, and

the men who gained acceptance for them were, for the most part, Anarchists.

Thus we may regard Syndicalism as the Anarchism of the market-place as

opposed  to  the  Anarchism  of  isolated  individuals  which  had  preserved  a

precarious life throughout the previous decades. Taking this view, we find in

Anarchist-Syndicalism the same combination of ideal and organization as we

find in Socialist political parties. It is from this standpoint that our study of

these movements will be undertaken.

  Socialism and Anarchism, in their modern form, spring respectively from

two  protagonists,  Marx  and  Bakunin,  who  fought  a  lifelong  battle,

culminating in a split in the first International. We shall begin our study withthese two men—first their teaching, and then the organizations which they

founded or inspired. This will lead us to the spread of Socialism in more

recent years, and thence to the Syndicalist revolt against Socialist emphasis

on the State and political action, and to certain movements outside France

which  have  some  affinity  with  Syndicalism—  notably  the  I.  W.  W.  in

America  and  Guild  Socialism  in  England.  From  this  historical  survey  we

shall pass to the consideration of some of the more pressing problems of the

future, and shall try to decide in what respects the world would be happier if

the aims of Socialists or Syndicalists were achieved.

  My own opinion—which I may as well indicate at the outset—is that pure

Anarchism, though it should be the ultimate ideal, to which society should

continually approximate, is for the present impossible, and would not survive

more than a year or two at most if it were adopted. On the other hand, both

Marxian Socialism and Syndicalism, in spite of many drawbacks, seem to me

calculated to give rise to a happier and better world than that in which we

live. I do not, however, regard either of them as the best practicable system.

Marxian Socialism, I fear, would give far too much power to the State, while

Syndicalism, which aims at abolishing the State, would, I believe, find itself

forced to reconstruct a central authority in order to put an end to the rivalries

of different groups of producers. The BEST practicable system, to my mind,

is that of Guild Socialism, which concedes what is valid both in the claims of

the State Socialists and in the Syndicalist fear of the State, by adopting a

system of federalism among trades for reasons similar to those which are

recommending federalism among nations. The grounds for these conclusions

will appear as we proceed.

  Before  embarking  upon  the  history  of  recent  movements  In  favor  of

radical  reconstruction,  it  will  be  worth  while  to  consider  some  traits  of

character  which  distinguish  most  political  idealists,  and  are  much

misunderstood by the general public for other reasons besides mere prejudice.

I wish to do full justice to these reasons, in order to show the more effectually

why they ought not to be operative.

  The leaders of the more advanced movements are, in general, men of quite

unusual disinterestedness, as is evident from a consideration of their careers.

Although they have obviously quite as much ability as many men who rise to

positions  of  great  power,  they  do  not  themselves  become  the  arbiters  of

contemporary events, nor do they achieve wealth or the applause of the massof their contemporaries. Men who have the capacity for winning these prizes,

and who work at least as hard as those who win them, but deliberately adopt

a line which makes the winning of them impossible, must be judged to have

an aim in life other than personal advancement; whatever admixture of self-

seeking may enter into the detail of their lives, their fundamental motive must

be  outside  Self.  The  pioneers  of  Socialism,  Anarchism,  and  Syndicalism

have, for the most part, experienced prison, exile, and poverty, deliberately

incurred  because  they  would  not  abandon  their  propaganda;  and  by  this

conduct  they  have  shown  that  the  hope  which  inspired  them  was  not  for

themselves, but for mankind.

  Nevertheless,  though  the  desire  for  human  welfare  is  what  at  bottom

determines the broad lines of such men's lives, it often happens that, in the

detail of their speech and writing, hatred is far more visible than love. The

impatient idealist—and without some impatience a man will hardly prove

effective—is  almost  sure  to  be  led  into  hatred  by  the  oppositions  and

disappointments which he encounters in his endeavors to bring happiness to

the world. The more certain he is of the purity of his motives and the truth of

his gospel, the more indignant he will become when his teaching is rejected.

Often  he  will  successfully  achieve  an  attitude  of  philosophic  tolerance  as

regards  the  apathy  of  the  masses,  and  even  as  regards  the  whole-hearted

opposition of professed defenders of the status quo. But the men whom he

finds it impossible to forgive are those who profess the same desire for the

amelioration of society as he feels himself, but who do not accept his method

of  achieving  this  end.  The  intense  faith  which  enables  him  to  withstand

persecution for the sake of his beliefs makes him consider these beliefs so

luminously  obvious  that  any  thinking  man  who  rejects  them  must  be

dishonest, and must be actuated by some sinister motive of treachery to the

cause. Hence arises the spirit of the sect, that bitter, narrow orthodoxy which

is the bane of those who hold strongly to an unpopular creed. So many real

temptations to treachery exist that suspicion is natural. And among leaders,

ambition, which they mortify in their choice of a career, is sure to return in a

new form: in the desire for intellectual mastery and for despotic power within

their  own  sect.  From  these  causes  it  results  that  the  advocates  of  drastic

reform divide themselves into opposing schools, hating each other with a

bitter hatred, accusing each other often of such crimes as being in the pay of

the police, and demanding, of any speaker or writer whom they are to admire,that he shall conform exactly to their prejudices, and make all his teaching

minister to their belief that the exact truth is to be found within the limits of

their  creed.  The  result  of  this  state  of  mind  is  that,  to  a  casual  and

unimaginative attention, the men who have sacrificed most through the wish

to benefit mankind APPEAR to be actuated far more by hatred than by love.

And the demand for orthodoxy is stifling to any free exercise of intellect.

This  cause,  as  well  as  economic  prejudice,  has  made  it  difficult  for  the

``intellectuals'' to co-operate prac- tically with the more extreme reformers,

however they may sympathize with their main purposes and even with nine-

tenths of their program.

  Another reason why radical reformers are misjudged by ordinary men is

that  they  view  existing  society  from  outside,  with  hostility  towards  its

institutions. Although, for the most part, they have more belief than their

neighbors in human nature's inherent capacity for a good life, they are so

conscious of the cruelty and oppression resulting from existing institutions

that they make a wholly misleading impression of cynicism. Most men have

instinctively two entirely different codes of behavior: one toward those whom

they regard as companions or colleagues or friends, or in some way members

of the same ``herd''; the other toward those whom they regard as enemies or

outcasts or a danger to society. Radical reformers are apt to concentrate their

attention upon the behavior of society toward the latter class, the class of

those toward whom the ``herd'' feels ill-will. This class includes, of course,

enemies  in  war,  and  criminals;  in  the  minds  of  those  who  consider  the

preservation of the existing order essential to their own safety or privileges, it

includes all who advocate any great political or economic change, and all

classes which, through their poverty or through any other cause, are likely to

feel a dangerous degree of discontent. The ordinary citizen probably seldom

thinks about such individuals or classes, and goes through life believing that

he and his friends are kindly people, because they have no wish to injure

those toward whom they entertain no group-hostility. But the man whose

attention is fastened upon the relations of a group with those whom it hates or

fears will judge quite differently. In these relations a surprising ferocity is apt

to be developed, and a very ugly side of human nature comes to the fore. The

opponents of capitalism have learned, through the study of certain historical

facts, that this ferocity has often been shown by the capitalists and by the

State toward the wage-earning classes, particularly when they have venturedto  protest  against  the  unspeakable  suffering  to  which  industrialism  has

usually  condemned  them.  Hence  arises  a  quite  different  attitude  toward

existing society from that of the ordinary well-to-do citizen: an attitude as

true  as  his,  perhaps  also  as  untrue,  but  equally  based  on  facts,  facts

concerning his relations to his enemies instead of to his friends.

  The class-war, like wars between nations, produces two opposing views,

each equally true and equally untrue. The citizen of a nation at war, when he

thinks of his own countrymen, thinks of them primarily as he has experienced

them, in dealings with their friends, in their family relations, and so on. They

seem to him on the whole kindly, decent folk. But a nation with which his

country  is  at  war  views  his  compatriots  through  the  medium  of  a  quite

different set of experiences: as they appear in the ferocity of battle, in the

invasion  and  subjugation  of  a  hostile  territory,  or  in  the  chicanery  of  a

juggling diplomacy. The men of whom these facts are true are the very same

as the men whom their compatriots know as husbands or fathers or friends,

but they are judged differently because they are judged on different data. And

so  it  is  with  those  who  view  the  capitalist  from  the  standpoint  of  the

revolutionary wage-earner: they appear inconceivably cynical and misjudging

to the capitalist, because the facts upon which their view is based are facts

which he either does not know or habitually ignores. Yet the view from the

outside is just as true as the view from the inside. Both are necessary to the

complete truth; and the Socialist, who emphasizes the outside view, is not a

cynic, but merely the friend of the wage-earners, maddened by the spectacle

of the needless misery which capitalism inflicts upon them.

  I have placed these general reflections at the beginning of our study, in

order to make it clear to the reader that, whatever bitterness and hate may be

found in the movements which we are to examine, it is not bitterness or hate,

but love, that is their mainspring. It is difficult not to hate those who torture

the objects of our love. Though difficult, it is not impossible; but it requires a

breadth of outlook and a comprehensiveness of understanding which are not

easy to preserve amid a desperate contest. If ultimate wisdom has not always

been preserved by Socialists and Anarchists, they have not differed in this

from their opponents; and in the source of their inspiration they have shown

themselves  superior  to  those  who  acquiesce  ignorantly  or  supinely  in  the

injustices and oppressions by which the existing system is preserved.

                                           PART I

                                    HISTORICAL

                                       CHAPTER I

                MARX AND SOCIALIST DOCTRINE

  SOCIALISM, like everything else that is vital, is rather a tendency than a

strictly definable body of doctrine. A definition of Socialism is sure either to

include some views which many would regard as not Socialistic, or to

exclude others which claim to be included. But I think we shall come nearest

to the essence of Socialism by defining it as the advocacy of communal

ownership of land and capital. Communal ownership may mean ownership

by a democratic State, but cannot be held to include ownership by any State

which is not democratic. Communal ownership may also be understood, as

Anarchist Communism understands it, in the sense of ownership by the free

association of the men and women in a community without those compulsory

powers which are necessary to constitute a State. Some Socialists expect

communal ownership to arrive suddenly and completely by a catastrophic

revolution, while others expect it to come gradually, first in one industry,

then in another. Some insist upon the necessity of completeness in the

acquisition of land and capital by the public, while others would be content to

see lingering islands of private ownership, provided they were not too

extensive or powerful. What all forms have in common is democracy and the

abolition, virtual or complete, of the present capitalistic system. The

distinction between Socialists, Anarchists and Syndicalists turns largely upon

the kind of democracy which they desire. Orthodox Socialists are content

with parliamentary democracy in the sphere of government, holding that the

evils apparent in this form of constitution at present would disappear with the

disappearance of capitalism. Anarchists and Syndicalists, on the other hand,

object to the whole parliamentary machinery, and aim at a different method

of regulating the political affairs of the community. But all alike are

democratic in the sense that they aim at abolishing every kind of privilege

and every kind of artificial inequality: all alike are champions of the wage-

earner in existing society. All three also have much in common in their

economic doctrine. All three regard capital and the wages system as a means

of exploiting the laborer in the interests of the possessing classes, and hold

that communal ownership, in one form or another, is the only means of

bringing freedom to the producers. But within the framework of this common

doctrine there are many divergences, and even among those who are strictly

to be called Socialists, there is a very considerable diversity of schools.

  Socialism as a power in Europe may be said to begin with Marx. It is truethat before his time there were Socialist theories, both in England and in

France. It is also true that in France, during the revolution of 1848, Socialism

for  a  brief  period  acquired  considerable  influence  in  the  State.  But  the

Socialists who preceded Marx tended to indulge in Utopian dreams and failed

to found any strong or stable political party. To Marx, in collaboration with

Engels, are due both the formulation of a coherent body of Socialist doctrine,

sufficiently true or plausible to dominate the minds of vast numbers of men,

and  the  formation  of  the  International  Socialist  movement,  which  has

continued to grow in all European countries throughout the last fifty years.

  In order to understand Marx's doctrine, it is necessary to know something

of the influences which formed his outlook. He was born in 1818 at Treves in

the  Rhine  Provinces,  his  father  being  a  legal  official,  a  Jew  who  had

nominally  accepted  Christianity.  Marx  studied  jurisprudence,  philosophy,

political economy and history at various German universities. In philosophy

he imbibed the doctrines of Hegel, who was then at the height of his fame,

and something of these doctrines dominated his thought throughout his life.

Like Hegel, he saw in history the development of an Idea. He conceived the

changes in the world as forming a logical development, in which one phase

passes by revolution into another, which is its antithesis—a conception which

gave to his views a certain hard abstractness, and a belief in revolution rather

than evolution. But of Hegel's more definite doctrines Marx retained nothing

after his youth. He was recognized as a brilliant student, and might have had

a prosperous career as a professor or an official, but his interest in politics

and his Radical views led him into more arduous paths. Already in 1842 he

became  editor  of  a  newspaper,  which  was  suppressed  by  the  Prussian

Government early in the following year on account of its advanced opinions.

This led Marx to go to Paris, where he became known as a Socialist and

acquired a knowledge of his French predecessors.[1] Here in the year 1844

began his lifelong friendship with Engels, who had been hitherto in business

in Manchester, where he had become acquainted with English Socialism and

had in the main adopted its doctrines.[2] In 1845 Marx was expelled from

Paris and went with Engels to live in Brussels. There he formed a German

Working  Men's  Association  and  edited  a  paper  which  was  their  organ.

Through  his  activities  in  Brussels  he  became  known  to  the  German

Communist League in Paris, who, at the end of 1847, invited him and Engels

to draw up for them a manifesto, which appeared in January, 1848. This is thefamous ``Communist Manifesto,'' in which for the first time Marx's system is

set  forth.  It  appeared  at  a  fortunate  moment.  In  the  following  month,

February,  the  revolution  broke  out  in  Paris,  and  in  March  it  spread  to

Germany. Fear of the revolution led the Brussels Government to expel Marx

from Belgium, but the German revolution made it possible for him to return

to his own country. In Germany he again edited a paper, which again led him

into  a  conflict  with  the  authorities,  increasing  in  severity  as  the  reaction

gathered force. In June, 1849, his paper was suppressed, and he was expelled

from Prussia. He returned to Paris, but was expelled from there also. This led

him to settle in England—at that time an asylum for friends of freedom—and

in England, with only brief intervals for purposes of agitation, he continued

to live until his death in 1883.

[1] Chief among these were Fourier and Saint-Simon, who constructed

somewhat fantastic Socialistic ideal commonwealths. Proudhon, with whom

Marx had some not wholly friendly relations, is to be regarded as a

forerunner of the Anarchists rather than of orthodox Socialism.

  [2] Marx mentions the English Socialists with praise in ``The Poverty of

Philosophy''  (1847).  They,  like  him,  tend  to  base  their  arguments  upon  a

Ricardian  theory  of  value,  but  they  have  not  his  scope  or  erudition  or

scientific breadth. Among them may be mentioned Thomas Hodgskin (1787-

1869), originally an officer in the Navy, but dismissed for a pamphlet critical

of the methods of naval discipline, author of ``Labour Defended Against the

Claims of Capital'' (1825) and other works; William Thompson (1785-1833),

author  of  ``Inquiry  into  the  Principles  of  Distribution  of  Wealth  Most

Conducive to Human Happiness'' (1824), and ``Labour Rewarded'' (1825);

and Piercy Ravenstone, from whom Hodgskin's ideas are largely derived.

Perhaps more important than any of these was Robert Owen.

The bulk of his time was occupied in the composition of his great book,

``Capital.''[3] His other important work during his later years was the

formation and spread of the International Working Men's Association. From

1849 onward the greater part of his time was spent in the British Museum,

accumulating, with German patience, the materials for his terrific indictment

of capitalist society, but he retained his hold on the International Socialist

movement. In several countries he had sons-in-law as lieutenants, like

Napoleon's brothers, and in the various internal contests that arose his will

generally prevailed.[3] The first and most important volume appeared in 1867; the other two

volumes were published posthumously (1885 and 1894).

The most essential of Marx's doctrines may be reduced to three: first, what

is called the material- istic interpretation of history; second, the law of the

concentration of capital; and, third, the class-war.

  1. The Materialistic Interpretation of History.— Marx holds that in the

main  all  the  phenomena  of  human  society  have  their  origin  in  material

conditions, and these he takes to be embodied in economic systems. Political

constitutions, laws, religions, philosophies—all these he regards as, in their

broad outlines, expressions of the economic regime in the society that gives

rise  to  them.  It  would  be  unfair  to  represent  him  as  maintaining  that  the

conscious economic motive is the only one of importance; it is rather that

economics molds character and opinion, and is thus the prime source of much

that appears in consciousness to have no connection with them. He applies

his doctrine in particular to two revolutions, one in the past, the other in the

future. The revolution in the past is that of the bourgeoisie against feudalism,

which  finds  its  expression,  according  to  him,  particularly  in  the  French

Revolution. The one in the future is the revolution of the wage- earners, or

proletariat,  against  the  bourgeoisie,  which  is  to  establish  the  Socialist

Commonwealth.  The  whole  movement  of  history  is  viewed  by  him  as

necessary, as the effect of material causes operating upon human beings. He

does not so much advocate the Socialist revolution as predict it. He holds, it

is true, that it will be beneficent, but he is much more concerned to prove that

it  must  inevitably  come.  The  same  sense  of  necessity  is  visible  in  his

exposition of the evils of the capitalist system. He does not blame capitalists

for the cruelties of which he shows them to have been guilty; he merely

points out that they are under an inherent necessity to behave cruelly so long

as private ownership of land and capital continues. But their tyranny will not

last forever, for it generates the forces that must in the end overthrow it.

  2.  The  Law  of  the  Concentration  of  Capital.—  Marx  pointed  out  that

capitalist  undertakings  tend  to  grow  larger  and  larger.  He  foresaw  the

substitution of trusts for free competition, and predicted that the number of

capitalist enterprises must diminish as the magnitude of single enterprises

increased. He supposed that this process must involve a diminution, not only

in the number of businesses, but also in the number of capitalists. Indeed, he

usually  spoke  as  though  each  business  were  owned  by  a  single  man.Accordingly,  he  expected  that  men  would  be  continually  driven  from  the

ranks of the capitalists into those of the proletariat, and that the capitalists, in

the course of time, would grow numerically weaker and weaker. He applied

this principle not only to industry but also to agriculture. He expected to find

the landowners growing fewer and fewer while their estates grew larger and

larger.  This  process  was  to  make  more  and  more  glaring  the  evils  and

injustices of the capitalist system, and to stimulate more and more the forces

of opposition.

  3. The Class War.—Marx conceives the wage- earner and the capitalist in

a sharp antithesis. He imagines that every man is, or must soon become,

wholly the one or wholly the other. The wage- earner, who possesses nothing,

is  exploited  by  the  capitalists,  who  possess  everything.  As  the  capitalist

system works itself out and its nature becomes more clear, the opposition of

bourgeoisie and proletariat becomes more and more marked. The two classes,

since  they  have  antagonistic  interests,  are  forced  into  a  class  war  which

generates  within  the  capitalist  regime  internal  forces  of  disruption.  The

working men learn gradually to combine against their exploiters, first locally,

then  nationally,  and  at  last  internationally.  When  they  have  learned  to

combine internationally they must be victorious. They will then decree that

all land and capital shall be owned in common; exploitation will cease; the

tyranny of the owners of wealth will no longer be possible; there will no

longer be any division of society into classes, and all men will be free.

  All these ideas are already contained in the ``Communist Manifesto,'' a

work  of  the  most  amazing  vigor  and  force,  setting  forth  with  terse

compression  the  titanic  forces  of  the  world,  their  epic  battle,  and  the

inevitable  consummation.  This  work  is  of  such  importance  in  the

development  of  Socialism  and  gives  such  an  admirable  statement  of  the

doctrines set forth at greater length and with more pedantry in ``Capital,'' that

its salient passages must be known by anyone who wishes to understand the

hold  which  Marxian  Socialism  has  acquired  over  the  intellect  and

imagination of a large proportion of working-class leaders.

  ``A spectre is haunting Europe,'' it begins, ``the spectre of Communism.

All the Powers of old Europe have entered into a holy alliance to exorcise

this spectre—Pope and Czar, Metternich and Guizot, French Radicals and

German  police-spies.  Where  is  the  party  in  opposition  that  has  not  been

decried as communistic by its opponents in power? Where the Oppositionthat has not hurled back the branding reproach of Communism against the

more  advanced  opposition  parties,  as  well  as  against  its  re-actionary

adversaries?''

  The existence of a class war is nothing new: ``The history of all hitherto

existing society is the history of class struggles.'' In these struggles the fight

``each time ended, either in a revolutionary re-constitution of society at large,

or in the common ruin of the contending classes.''

  ``Our epoch, the epoch of the bourgeoisie . . . has simplified the class

antagonisms. Society as a whole is more and more splitting up into two great

hostile camps, into two great classes directly facing each other: Bourgeoisie

and Proletariat.'' Then follows a history of the fall of feudalism, leading to a

description of the bourgeoisie as a revolutionary force. ``The bourgeoisie,

historically, has played a most revolutionary part.'' ``For exploitation, veiled

by religious and political illusions, it has substituted naked, shameless, direct,

brutal  exploitation.''  ``The  need  of  a  constantly  expanding  market  for  its

products chases the bourgeoisie over the whole surface of the globe.'' ``The

bourgeoisie, during its rule of scarce one hundred years, has created more

massive  and  more  colossal  productive  forces  than  have  all  preceding

generations together.'' Feudal relations became fetters: ``They had to be burst

asunder; they were burst asunder. . . . A similar movement is going on before

our own eyes.'' ``The weapons with which the bourgeoisie felled feudalism to

the ground are now turned against the bourgeoisie itself. But not only has the

bourgoisie forged the weapons that bring death to itself; it has also called into

existence the men who are to wield those weapons— the modern working

class—the proletarians.''

  The cause of the destitution of the proletariat are then set forth. ``The cost

of production of a workman is restricted, almost entirely, to the means of

subsistence that he requires for his maintenance and for the propagation of

his race. But the price of a commodity, and therefore also of labor, is equal to

its cost of production. In proportion, therefore, as the repulsiveness of the

work increases, the wage decreases. Nay more, in proportion as the use of

machinery  and  diversion  of  labor  increases,  in  the  same  proportion  the

burden of toil also increases.''

  ``Modern  industry  has  converted  the  little  workshop  of  the  patriarchal

master into the great factory of the industrial capitalist. Masses of laborers,

crowded  into  the  factory,  are  organized  like  soldiers.  As  privates  of  theindustrial army they are placed under the command of a perfect hierarchy of

officers and sergeants. Not only are they slaves of the bourgeois class, and of

the bourgeois State, they are daily and hourly enslaved by the machine, by

the  over-looker,  and,  above  all,  by  the  individual  bourgeois  manufacturer

himself. The more openly this despotism proclaims gain to be its end and

aim, the more petty, the more hateful, and the more embittering it is.''

  The Manifesto tells next the manner of growth of the class struggle. ``The

proletariat goes through various stages of development. With its birth begins

its  struggle  with  the  bourgeoisie.  At  first  the  contest  is  carried  on  by

individual  laborers,  then  by  the  workpeople  of  a  factory,  then  by  the

operatives of one trade, in one locality, against the individual bourgeois who

directly exploits them. They direct their attacks not against the bourgeois

conditions  of  production,  but  against  the  instruments  of  production

themselves.''

  ``At this stage the laborers still form an incoherent mass scattered over the

whole country, and broken up by their mutual competition. If anywhere they

unite to form more compact bodies, this is not yet the consequence of their

own active union, but of the union of the bourgeoisie, which class, in order to

attain  its  own  political  ends,  is  compelled  to  set  the  whole  proletariat  in

motion, and is moreover yet, for a time, able to do so.''

  ``The  collisions  between  individual  workmen  and  individual  bourgeois

take  more  and  more  the  character  of  collisions  between  two  classes.

Thereupon the workers begin to form combinations (Trades Unions) against

the bourgeois; they club together in order to keep up the rate of wages; they

found  permanent  associations  in  order  to  make  provision  beforehand  for

these occasional revolts. Here and there the contest breaks out into riots. Now

and then the workers are victorious, but only for a time. The real fruit of their

battles lies, not in the immediate result, but in the ever-expanding union of

the  workers.  This  union  is  helped  on  by  the  im-  proved  means  of

communication  that  are  created  by  modern  industry,  and  that  place  the

workers of different localities in contact with one another. It was just this

contact that was needed to centralize the numerous local struggles, all of the

same character, into one national struggle between classes. But every class

struggle is a political struggle. And that union, to attain which the burghers of

the  Middle  Ages,  with  their  miserable  highways,  required  centuries,  the

modern  proletarians,  thanks  to  railways,  achieve  in  a  few  years.  Thisorganization of the proletarians into a class, and consequently into a political

party,  is  continually  being  upset  again  by  the  competition  between  the

workers themselves. But it ever rises up again, stronger, firmer, mightier. It

compels  legislative  recognition  of  particular  interests  of  the  workers,  by

taking advantage of the divisions among the bourgeoisie itself.''

  ``In  the  conditions  of  the  proletariat,  those  of  old  society  at  large  are

already virtually swamped. The proletarian is without property; his relation to

his wife and children has no longer anything in common with the bourgeois

family-relations; modern industrial labor, modern subjection to capital, the

same in England as in France, in America as in Germany, has stripped him of

every trace of national character. Law, morality, religion, are to him so many

bourgeois prejudices, behind which lurk in ambush just as many bourgeois

interests. All the preceding classes that got the upper hand, sought to fortify

their already acquired status by subjecting society at large to their conditions

of appropriation. The proletarians cannot become masters of the productive

forces  of  society,  except  by  abolishing  their  own  previous  mode  of

appropriation, and thereby also every other previous mode of appropriation.

They have nothing of their own to secure and to fortify; their mission is to

destroy all previous securities for, and insurances of, individual property. All

previous  historical  movements  were  movements  of  minorities,  or  in  the

interest  of  minorities.  The  proletarian  movement  is  the  self-conscious,

independent  movement  of  the  immense  majority,  in  the  interest  of  the

immense majority. The proletariat, the lowest stratum of our present society,

cannot stir, cannot raise itself up, without the whole super- incumbent strata

of official society being sprung into the air.''

  The Communists, says Marx, stand for the proletariat as a whole. They are

international.  ``The  Communists  are  further  reproached  with  desiring  to

abolish countries and nationality. The working men have no country. We

cannot take from them what they have not got.''

  The immediate aim of the Communists is the conquests of political power

by the proletariat. ``The theory of the Communists may be summed up in the

single sentence: Abolition of private property.''

  The materialistic interpretation of history is used to answer such charges

as  that  Communism  is  anti-Christian.  ``The  charges  against  Communism

made from a religious, a philosophical, and, generally, from an ideological

standpoint, are not deserving of serious examination. Does it require deepintuition  to  comprehend  that  man's  ideas,  views  and  conceptions,  in  one

word, man's consciousness, changes with every change in the conditions of

his material existence, in his social relations, and in his social life?''

  The attitude of the Manifesto to the State is not altogether easy to grasp.

``The executive of the modern State,'' we are told, ``is but a Committee for

managing the common affairs of the whole bourgeoisie.'' Nevertheless, the

first step for the proletariat must be to acquire control of the State. ``We have

seen above, that the first step in the revolution by the working class, is to

raise  the  proletariat  to  the  position  of  ruling  class,  to  win  the  battle  of

democracy.  The  proletariat  will  use  its  political  supremacy  to  wrest,  by

degrees,  all  capital  from  the  bourgeoisie,  to  centralize  all  instruments  of

production in the hands of the State, i.e., of the proletariat organized as the

ruling  class;  and  to  increase  the  total  of  productive  forces  as  rapidly  as

possible.''

  The  Manifesto  passes  on  to  an  immediate  program  of  reforms,  which

would in the first instance much increase the power of the existing State, but

it is contended that when the Socialist revolution is accomplished, the State,

as we know it, will have ceased to exist. As Engels says elsewhere, when the

proletariat seizes the power of the State ``it puts an end to all differences of

class and antagonisms of class, and consequently also puts an end to the State

as a State.'' Thus, although State Socialism might, in fact, be the outcome of

the proposals of Marx and Engels, they cannot themselves be accused of any

glorification of the State.

  The Manifesto ends with an appeal to the wage- earners of the world to

rise on behalf of Communism. ``The Communists disdain to conceal their

views and aims. They openly declare that their ends can be attained only by

the forcible overthrow of all existing social conditions. Let the ruling classes

tremble at a Communistic revolution. The proletarians have nothing to lose

but their chains. They have a world to win. Working men of all countries,

unite!''

  In all the great countries of the Continent, except Russia, a revolution

followed quickly on the publication of the Communist Manifesto, but the

revolution  was  not  economic  or  international,  except  at  first  in  France.

Everywhere else it was inspired by the ideas of nationalism. Accordingly, the

rulers of the world, momentarily terrified, were able to recover power by

fomenting the enmities inherent in the nationalist idea, and everywhere, aftera very brief triumph, the revolution ended in war and reaction. The ideas of

the Communist Manifesto appeared before the world was ready for them, but

its  authors  lived  to  see  the  beginnings  of  the  growth  of  that  Socialist

movement  in  every  country,  which  has  pressed  on  with  increasing  force,

influencing  Governments  more  and  more,  dominating  the  Russian

Revolution, and perhaps capable of achieving at no very distant date that

international triumph to which the last sentences of the Manifesto summon

the wage-earners of the world.

  Marx's magnum opus, ``Capital,'' added bulk and substance to the theses

of  the  Communist  Manifesto.  It  contributed  the  theory  of  surplus  value,

which professed to explain the actual mechanism of capitalist exploitation.

This doctrine is very complicated and is scarcely tenable as a contribution to

pure theory. It is rather to be viewed as a translation into abstract terms of the

hatred with which Marx regarded the system that coins wealth out of human

lives, and it is in this spirit, rather than in that of disinterested analysis, that it

has been read by its admirers. A critical examination of the theory of surplus

value would require much difficult and abstract discussion of pure economic

theory without having much bearing upon the practical truth or falsehood of

Socialism; it has therefore seemed impossible within the limits of the present

volume. To my mind the best parts of the book are those which deal with

economic facts, of which Marx's knowledge was encyclopaedic. It was by

these facts that he hoped to instil into his disciples that firm and undying

hatred that should make them soldiers to the death in the class war. The facts

which  he  accumulates  are  such  as  are  practically  unknown  to  the  vast

majority of those who live comfortable lives. They are very terrible facts, and

the economic system which generates them must be acknowledged to be a

very terrible system. A few examples of his choice of facts will serve to

explain the bitterness of many Socialists:—

Mr. Broughton Charlton, county magistrate, declared, as chairman of a

meeting held at the Assembly Rooms, Nottingham, on the 14th January,

1860, ``that there was an amount of privation and suffering among that

portion of the population connected with the lace trade, unknown in other

parts of the kingdom, indeed, in the civilized world. . . . Children of nine or

ten years are dragged from their squalid beds at two, three, or four o clock in

the morning and compelled to work for a bare subsistence until ten, eleven, or

twelve at night, their limbs wearing away, their frames dwindling, their faceswhitening, and their humanity absolutely sinking into a stone-like torpor,

utterly horrible to contemplate.''[4]

[4] Vol. i, p. 227.

Three railway men are standing before a London coroner's jury—a guard,

an engine-driver, a signalman. A tremendous railway accident has hurried

hundreds of passengers into another world. The negligence of the employes is

the cause of the misfortune. They declare with one voice before the jury that

ten or twelve years before, their labor only lasted eight hours a day. During

the last five or six years it had been screwed up to 14, 18, and 20 hours, and

under a specially severe pressure of holiday-makers, at times of excursion

trains, it often lasted 40 or 50 hours without a break. They were ordinary

men, not Cyclops. At a certain point their labor-power failed. Torpor seized

them. Their brain ceased to think, their eyes to see. The thoroughly

``respectable'' British jurymen answered by a verdict that sent them to the

next assizes on a charge of manslaughter, and, in a gentle ``rider'' to their

verdict, expressed the pious hope that the capitalistic magnates of the

railways would, in future, be more extravagant in the purchase of a sufficient

quantity of labor-power, and more ``abstemious,'' more ``self-denying,'' more

``thrifty,'' in the draining of paid labor-power.[5]

[5] Vol. i, pp. 237, 238.

In the last week of June, 1863, all the London daily papers published a

paragraph with the ``sensational'' heading, ``Death from simple over-work.'' It

dealt with the death of the milliner, Mary Anne Walkley, 20 years of age,

employed in a highly respectable dressmaking establishment, exploited by a

lady with the pleasant name of Elise. The old, often-told story was once more

recounted. This girl worked, on an average, 16 1/2 hours, during the season

often 30 hours, without a break, whilst her failing labor-power was revived

by occasional supplies of sherry, port, or coffee. It was just now the height of

the season. It was necessary to conjure up in the twinkling of an eye the

gorgeous dresses for the noble ladies bidden to the ball in honor of the newly-

imported Princess of Wales. Mary Anne Walkley had worked without

intermission for 26 1/2 hours, with 60 other girls, 30 in one room, that only

afforded 1/3 of the cubic feet of air required for them. At night, they slept in

pairs in one of the stifling holes into which the bedroom was divided by

partitions of board. And this was one of the best millinery establishments in

London. Mary Anne Walkley fell ill on the Friday, died on Sunday, without,

to the astonishment of Madame Elise, having previously completed the workin hand. The doctor, Mr. Keys, called too late to the death bed, duly bore

witness before the coroner's jury that ``Mary Anne Walkley had died from

long hours of work in an over- crowded workroom, and a too small and badly

ventilated bedroom.'' In order to give the doctor a lesson in good manners, the

coroner's jury thereupon brought in a verdict that ``the deceased had died of

apoplexy, but there was reason to fear that her death had been accelerated by

over-work in an over-crowded workroom, &c.'' ``Our white slaves,'' cried the

``Morning Star,'' the organ of the free-traders, Cobden and Bright, ``our white

slaves, who are toiled into the grave, for the most part silently pine and

die.''[6]

[6] Vol. i, pp. 239, 240.

  Edward VI: A statue of the first year of his reign, 1547, ordains that if

anyone refuses to work, he shall be condemned as a slave to the person who

has denounced him as an idler. The master shall feed his slave on bread and

water, weak broth and such refuse meat as he thinks fit. He has the right to

force him to do any work, no matter how disgusting, with whip and chains. If

the slave is absent a fortnight, he is condemned to slavery for life and is to be

branded on forehead or back with the letter S; if he runs away thrice, he is to

be executed as a felon. The master can sell him, bequeath him, let him out on

hire as a slave, just as any other personal chattel or cattle. If the slaves

attempt anything against the masters, they are also to be executed. Justices of

the peace, on information, are to hunt the rascals down. If it happens that a

vagabond has been idling about for three days, he is to be taken to his

birthplace, branded with a redhot iron with the letter V on the breast and be

set to work, in chains, in the streets or at some other labor. If the vagabond

gives a false birthplace, he is then to become the slave for life of this place, of

its inhabitants, or its corporation, and to be branded with an S. All persons

have the right to take away the children of the vagabonds and to keep them as

apprentices, the young men until the 24th year, the girls until the 20th. If they

run away, they are to become up to this age the slaves of their masters, who

can put them in irons, whip them, &c., if they like. Every master may put an

iron ring around the neck, arms or legs of his slave, by which to know him

more easily and to be more certain of him. The last part of this statute

provides that certain poor people may be employed by a place or by persons,

who are willing to give them food and drink and to find them work. This kind

of parish-slaves was kept up in England until far into the 19th century under

the name of ``roundsmen.''[7][7] Vol. i, pp. 758, 759.

Page after page and chapter after chapter of facts of this nature, each

brought up to illustrate some fatalistic theory which Marx professes to have

proved by exact reasoning, cannot but stir into fury any passionate working-

class reader, and into unbearable shame any possessor of capital in whom

generosity and justice are not wholly extinct.

  Almost at the end of the volume, in a very brief chapter, called ``Historical

Tendency of Capitalist Accumulation,'' Marx allows one moment's glimpse of

the hope that lies beyond the present horror:—

As soon as this process of transformation has sufficiently decomposed the

old society from top to bottom, as soon as the laborers are turned into

proletarians, their means of labor into capital, as soon as the capitalist mode

of production stands on its own feet, then the further socialization of labor

and further transformation of the land and other means of production into so-

cially exploited and, therefore, common means of production, as well as the

further expropriation of private proprietors, takes a new form. That which is

now to be expropriated is no longer the laborer working for himself, but the

capitalist exploiting many laborers. This expropriation is accomplished by the

action of the immanent laws of capitalistic production itself, by the

centralization of capital. One capitalist always kills many, and in hand with

this centralization, or this expropriation of many capitalists by few, develop,

on an ever extending scale, the co-operative form of the labor-process, the

conscious technical application of science, the methodical cultivation of the

soil, the transformation of the instruments of labor into instruments of labor

only usable in common, the economizing of all means of production by their

use as the means of production of combined, socialized labor, the

entanglement of all peoples in the net of the world-market, and with this, the

international character of the capitalistic regime. Along with the constantly

diminishing number of the magnates of capital, who usurp and monopolize

all advantages of this process of transformation, grows the mass of misery,

oppression, slavery, degradation, exploitation; but with this, too, grows the

revolt of the working- class, a class always increasing in numbers, and

disciplined, united, organized by the very mechanism of the process of

capitalist production itself. The monopoly of capital becomes a fetter upon

the mode of production, which has sprung up and flourished along with, and

under it. Centralization of the means of production and socialization of labor

at last reach a point where they become incompatible with their capitalistintegument. This integument is burst asunder. The knell of capitalist private

property sounds. The expropriators are expropriated,[8]

[8] Vol. i pp. 788, 789.

That is all. Hardly another word from beginning to end is allowed to relieve

the gloom, and in this relentless pressure upon the mind of the reader lies a

great part of the power which this book has acquired.

  Two questions are raised by Marx's work: First, Are his laws of historical

development  true?  Second,  Is  Socialism  desirable?  The  second  of  these

questions  is  quite  independent  of  the  first.  Marx  professes  to  prove  that

Socialism must come, but scarcely concerns himself to argue that when it

comes it will be a good thing. It may be, however, that if it comes, it will be a

good thing, even though all Marx's arguments to prove that it must come

should  be  at  fault.  In  actual  fact,  time  has  shown  many  flaws  in  Marx's

theories.  The  development  of  the  world  has  been  sufficiently  like  his

prophecy to prove him a man of very unusual penetration, but has not been

sufficiently like to make either political or economic history exactly such as

he  predicted  that  it  would  be.  Nationalism,  so  far  from  diminishing,  has

increased, and has failed to be conquered by the cosmopolitan tendencies

which  Marx  rightly  discerned  in  finance.  Although  big  businesses  have

grown bigger and have over a great area reached the stage of monopoly, yet

the number of shareholders in such enterprises is so large that the actual

number  of  individuals  interested  in  the  capitalist  system  has  continually

increased. Moreover, though large firms have grown larger, there has been a

simultaneous increase in firms of medium size. Meanwhile the wage-earners,

who  were,  according  to  Marx,  to  have  remained  at  the  bare  level  of

subsistence  at  which  they  were  in  the  England  of  the  first  half  of  the

nineteenth century, have instead profited by the general increase of wealth,

though in a lesser degree than the capitalists. The supposed iron law of wages

has been proved untrue, so far as labor in civilized countries is concerned. If

we wish now to find examples of capitalist cruelty analogous to those with

which Marx's book is filled, we shall have to go for most of our material to

the Tropics, or at any rate to regions where there are men of inferior races to

exploit. Again: the skilled worker of the present day is an aristocrat in the

world of labor. It is a question with him whether he shall ally himself with

the unskilled worker against the capitalist, or with the capitalist against the

unskilled worker. Very often he is himself a capitalist in a small way, and ifhe is not so individually, his trade union or his friendly society is pretty sure

to be so. Hence the sharpness of the class war has not been maintained. There

are gradations, intermediate ranks between rich and poor, instead of the clear-

cut  logical  antithesis  between  the  workers  who  have  nothing  and  the

capitalists  who  have  all.  Even  in  Germany,  which  became  the  home  of

orthodox  Marxianism  and  developed  a  powerful  Social-Democratic  party,

nominally  accepting  the  doctrine  of  ``Das  Kapital''  as  all  but  verbally

inspired, even there the enormous increase of wealth in all classes in the years

preceding  the  war  led  Socialists  to  revise  their  beliefs  and  to  adopt  an

evolutionary  rather  than  a  revolutionary  attitude.  Bernstein,  a  German

Socialist  who  lived  long  in  England,  inaugurated  the  ``Revisionist''

movement which at last conquered the bulk of the party. His criticisms of

Marxian  orthodoxy  are  set  forth  in  his  ``Evolutionary  Socialism.''[9]

Bernstein's work, as is common in Broad Church writers, consists largely in

showing that the Founders did not hold their doctrines so rigidly as their

followers have done. There is much in the writings of Marx and Engels that

cannot  be  fitted  into  the  rigid  orthodoxy  which  grew  up  among  their

disciples. Bernstein's main criticisms of these disciples, apart from such as we

have already mentioned, consist in a defense of piecemeal action as against

revolution. He protests against the attitude of undue hostility to Liberalism

which  is  common  among  Socialists,  and  he  blunts  the  edge  of  the

Internationalism which undoubtedly is part of the teachings of Marx. The

workers, he says, have a Fatherland as soon as they become citizens, and on

this  basis  he  defends  that  degree  of  nationalism  which  the  war  has  since

shown to be prevalent in the ranks of Socialists. He even goes so far as to

maintain that European nations have a right to tropical territory owing to their

higher civilization. Such doctrines diminish revolutionary ardor and tend to

transform Socialists into a left wing of the Liberal Party. But the increasing

prosperity  of  wage-earners  before  the  war  made  these  developments

inevitable. Whether the war will have altered conditions in this respect, it is

as yet impossible to know. Bernstein concludes with the wise remark that:

``We  have  to  take  working  men  as  they  are.  And  they  are  neither  so

universally paupers as was set out in the Communist Manifesto, nor so free

from prejudices and weaknesses as their courtiers wish to make us believe.''

[9] Die Voraussetzungen des Sozialismus und die Aufgaben der Sozial-

Demokratie.''  In March, 1914, Bernstein delivered a lecture in Budapest in which he

withdrew  from  several  of  the  positions  he  had  taken  up  (vide  Budapest

``Volkstimme,'' March 19, 1914).

Berstein represents the decay of Marxian orthodoxy from within.

Syndicalism represents an attack against it from without, from the standpoint

of a doctrine which professes to be even more radical and more revolutionary

than that of Marx and Engels. The attitude of Syndicalists to Marx may be

seen in Sorel's little book, ``La Decomposition du Marxisme,'' and in his

larger work, ``Reflections on Violence,'' authorized translation by T. E.

Hulme (Allen & Unwin, 1915). After quoting Bernstein, with approval in so

far as he criticises Marx, Sorel proceeds to other criticisms of a different

order. He points out (what is true) that Marx's theoretical economics remain

very near to Manchesterism: the orthodox political economy of his youth was

accepted by him on many points on which it is now known to be wrong.

According to Sorel, the really essential thing in Marx's teaching is the class

war. Whoever keeps this alive is keeping alive the spirit of Socialism much

more truly than those who adhere to the letter of Social-Democratic

orthodoxy. On the basis of the class war, French Syndicalists developed a

criticism of Marx which goes much deeper than those that we have been

hitherto considering. Marx's views on historical development may have been

in a greater or less degree mistaken in fact, and yet the economic and political

system which he sought to create might be just as desirable as his followers

suppose. Syndicalism, however, criticises, not only Marx's views of fact, but

also the goal at which he aims and the general nature of the means which he

recommends. Marx's ideas were formed at a time when democracy did not

yet exist. It was in the very year in which ``Das Kapital'' appeared that urban

working men first got the vote in England and universal suffrage was granted

by Bismarck in Northern Germany. It was natural that great hopes should be

entertained as to what democracy would achieve. Marx, like the orthodox

economists, imagined that men's opinions are guided by a more or less

enlightened view of economic self-interest, or rather of economic class

interest. A long experience of the workings of political democracy has shown

that in this respect Disraeli and Bismarck were shrewder judges of human

nature than either Liberals or Socialists. It has become increasingly difficult

to put trust in the State as a means to liberty, or in political parties as

instruments sufficiently powerful to force the State into the service of the

people. The modern State, says Sorel, ``is a body of intellectuals, which isinvested with privileges, and which possesses means of the kind called

political for defending itself against the attacks made on it by other groups of

intellectuals, eager to possess the profits of public employment. Parties are

constituted in order to acquire the conquest of these employments, and they

are analogous to the State.''[10]

[10] La Decomposition du Marxisme,'' p. 53.

  Syndicalists aim at organizing men, not by party, but by occupation. This,

they say, alone represents the true conception and method of the class war.

Accordingly they despise all POLITICAL action through the medium of

Parliament and elections: the kind of action that they recommend is direct

action by the revolutionary syndicate or trade union. The battle- cry of

industrial versus political action has spread far beyond the ranks of French

Syndicalism. It is to be found in the I. W. W. in America, and among

Industrial Unionists and Guild Socialists in Great Britain. Those who

advocate it, for the most part, aim also at a different goal from that of Marx.

They believe that there can be no adequate individual freedom where the

State is all-powerful, even if the State be a Socialist one. Some of them are

out-and- out Anarchists, who wish to see the State wholly abolished; others

only wish to curtail its authority. Owing to this movement, opposition to

Marx, which from the Anarchist side existed from the first, has grown very

strong. It is this opposition in its older form that will occupy us in our next

chapter.

                                       CHAPTER II

                      BAKUNIN AND ANARCHISM

IN the popular mind, an Anarchist is a person who throws bombs and

commits other outrages, either because he is more or less insane, or because

he uses the pretense of extreme political opinions as a cloak for criminal

proclivities. This view is, of course, in every way inadequate. Some

Anarchists believe in throwing bombs; many do not. Men of almost every

other shade of opinion believe in throwing bombs in suitable circumstances:

for example, the men who threw the bomb at Sarajevo which started the

present war were not Anarchists, but Nationalists. And those Anarchists who

are in favor of bomb-throwing do not in this respect differ on any vital

principle from the rest of the community, with the exception of that

infinitesimal portion who adopt the Tolstoyan attitude of non-resistance.

Anarchists, like Socialists, usually believe in the doctrine of the class war,

and if they use bombs, it is as Governments use bombs, for purposes of war:

but for every bomb manufactured by an Anarchist, many millions are

manufactured by Governments, and for every man killed by Anarchist

violence, many millions are killed by the violence of States. We may,

therefore, dismiss from our minds the whole question of violence, which

plays so large a part in the popular imagination, since it is neither essential

nor peculiar to those who adopt the Anarchist position.

  Anarchism, as its derivation indicates, is the theory which is opposed to

every  kind  of  forcible  government.  It  is  opposed  to  the  State  as  the

embodiment of the force employed in the government of the community.

Such government as Anarchism can tolerate must be free government, not

merely in the sense that it is that of a majority, but in the sense that it is that

assented to by all. Anarchists object to such institutions as the police and the

criminal law, by means of which the will of one part of the community is

forced upon another part. In their view, the democratic form of government is

not  very  enormously  preferable  to  other  forms  so  long  as  minorities  are

compelled  by  force  or  its  potentiality  to  submit  to  the  will  of  majorities.

Liberty is the supreme good in the Anarchist creed, and liberty is sought by

the direct road of abolishing all forcible control over the individual by the

community.

  Anarchism, in this sense, is no new doctrine. It is set forth admirably by

Chuang Tzu, a Chinese philosopher, who lived about the year 300 B. C.:—  Horses have hoofs to carry them over frost and snow; hair, to protect them

from wind and cold. They eat grass and drink water, and fling up their heels

over the champaign. Such is the real nature of horses. Palatial dwellings are

of no use to them.

  One  day  Po  Lo  appeared,  saying:  ``I  understand  the  management  of

horses.''

  So he branded them, and clipped them, and pared their hoofs, and put

halters on them, tying them up by the head and shackling them by the feet,

and disposing them in stables, with the result that two or three in every ten

died. Then he kept them hungry and thirsty, trotting them and galloping them,

and grooming, and trimming, with the misery of the tasselled bridle before

and the fear of the knotted whip behind, until more than half of them were

dead.

  The potter says: ``I can do what I will with Clay. If I want it round, I use

compasses; if rectangular, a square.''

  The carpenter says: ``I can do what I will with wood. If I want it curved, I

use an arc; if straight, a line.''

  But on what grounds can we think that the natures of clay and wood desire

this application of compasses and square, of arc and line? Nevertheless, every

age extols Po Lo for his skill in managing horses, and potters and carpenters

for their skill with clay and wood. Those who govern the empire make the

same mistake.

  Now I regard government of the empire from quite a different point of

view.

  The  people  have  certain  natural  instincts:—to  weave  and  clothe

themselves, to till and feed themselves. These are common to all humanity,

and all are agreed thereon. Such instincts are called ``Heaven-sent.''

  And so in the days when natural instincts prevailed, men moved quietly

and gazed steadily. At that time there were no roads over mountains, nor

boats, nor bridges over water. All things were produced, each for its own

proper sphere. Birds and beasts multiplied, trees and shrubs grew up. The

former  might  be  led  by  the  hand;  you  could  climb  up  and  peep  into  the

raven's nest. For then man dwelt with birds and beasts, and all creation was

one.  There  were  no  distinctions  of  good  and  bad  men.  Being  all  equally

without knowledge, their virtue could not go astray. Being all equally without

evil desires, they were in a state of natural integrity, the perfection of humanexistence.

  But when Sages appeared, tripping up people over charity and fettering

them with duty to their neighbor, doubt found its way into the world. And

then, with their gushing over music and fussing over ceremony, the empire

became divided against itself.[11]

[11] ``Musings of a Chinese Mystic.'' Selections from the Philosophy of

Chuang Tzu. With an Introduction by Lionel Giles, M.A. (Oxon.). Wisdom

of the East Series, John Murray, 1911. Pages 66-68.

  The modern Anarchism, in the sense in which we shall be concerned with

it, is associated with belief in the communal ownership of land and capital,

and is thus in an important respect akin to Socialism. This doctrine is

properly called Anarchist Com- munism, but as it embraces practically all

modern Anarchism, we may ignore individualist Anarchism altogether and

concentrate attention upon the communistic form. Socialism and Anarchist

Communism alike have arisen from the perception that private capital is a

source of tyranny by certain individuals over others. Orthodox Socialism

believes that the individual will become free if the State becomes the sole

capitalist. Anarchism, on the contrary, fears that in that case the State might

merely inherit the tyrannical propensities of the private capitalist.

Accordingly, it seeks for a means of reconciling communal ownership with

the utmost possible diminution in the powers of the State, and indeed

ultimately with the complete abolition of the State. It has arisen mainly

within the Socialist movement as its extreme left wing.

  In  the  same  sense  in  which  Marx  may  be  regarded  as  the  founder  of

modern Socialism, Bakunin may be regarded as the founder of Anarchist

Communism.  But  Bakunin  did  not  produce,  like  Marx,  a  finished  and

systematic body of doctrine. The nearest approach to this will be found in the

writings of his follower, Kropotkin. In order to explain modern Anarchism

we shall begin with the life of Bakunin[12] and the history of his conflicts

with Marx, and shall then give a brief account of Anarchist theory as set forth

partly in his writings, but more in those of Kropotkin.[13]

  [12] An account of the life of Bakunin from the Anarchist standpoint will

be found in vol. ii of the complete edition of his works: ``Michel Bakounine,

OEuvres,'' Tome II. Avec une notice biographique, des avant-propos et des

notes, par James Guillaume. Paris, P.-V, Stock, editeur, pp. v-lxiii.

  [13] Criticism of these theories will be reserved for Part II.Michel Bakunin was born in 1814 of a Russian aristocratic family. His

father was a diplomatist, who at the time of Bakunin's birth had retired to his

country estate in the Government of Tver. Bakunin entered the school of

artillery in Petersburg at the age of fifteen, and at the age of eighteen was sent

as an ensign to a regiment stationed in the Government of Minsk. The Polish

insurrection of 1880 had just been crushed. ``The spectacle of terrorized

Poland,'' says Guillaume, ``acted powerfully on the heart of the young officer,

and contributed to inspire in him the horror of despotism.'' This led him to

give up the military career after two years' trial. In 1834 he resigned his

commission and went to Moscow, where he spent six years studying

philosophy. Like all philosophical students of that period, he became a

Hegelian, and in 1840 he went to Berlin to continue his studies, in the hope of

ultimately becoming a professor. But after this time his opinions underwent a

rapid change. He found it impossible to accept the Hegelian maxim that

whatever is, is rational, and in 1842 he migrated to Dresden, where he

became associated with Arnold Ruge, the publisher of ``Deutsche

Jahrbuecher.'' By this time he had become a revolutionary, and in the

following year he incurred the hostility of the Saxon Government. This led

him to go to Switzerland, where he came in contact with a group of German

Communists, but, as the Swiss police importuned him and the Russian

Government demanded his return, he removed to Paris, where he remained

from 1843 to 1847. These years in Paris were important in the formation of

his outlook and opinions. He became acquainted with Proudhon, who

exercised a considerable influence on him; also with George Sand and many

other well- known people. It was in Paris that he first made the acquaintance

of Marx and Engels, with whom he was to carry on a lifelong battle. At a

much later period, in 1871, he gave the following account of his relations

with Marx at this time:—

Marx was much more advanced than I was, as he remains to-day not more

advanced but incomparably more learned than I am. I knew then nothing of

political economy. I had not yet rid myself of metaphysical abstractions, and

my Socialism was only instinctive. He, though younger than I, was already an

atheist, an instructed materialist, a well-considered Socialist. It was just at

this time that he elaborated the first foundations of his present system. We

saw each other fairly often, for I respected him much for his learning and his

passionate and serious devotion (always mixed, however, with personal

vanity) to the cause of the proletariat, and I sought eagerly his conversation,which was always instructive and clever, when it was not inspired by a paltry

hate, which, alas! happened only too often. But there was never any frank

intimacy between as. Our temperaments would not suffer it. He called me a

sentimental idealist, and he was right; I called him a vain man, perfidious and

crafty, and I also was right.

Bakunin never succeeded in staying long in one place without incurring the

enmity of the authorities. In November, 1847, as the result of a speech

praising the Polish rising of 1830, he was expelled from France at the request

of the Russian Embassy, which, in order to rob him of public sympathy,

spread the unfounded report that he had been an agent of the Russian

Government, but was no longer wanted because he had gone too far. The

French Government, by calculated reticence, encouraged this story, which

clung to him more or less throughout his life.

  Being compelled to leave France, he went to Brussels, where he renewed

acquaintance with Marx. A letter of his, written at this time, shows that he

entertained already that bitter hatred for which afterward he had so much

reason. ``The Germans, artisans, Bornstedt, Marx and Engels—and, above

all,  Marx—are  here,  doing  their  ordinary  mischief.  Vanity,  spite,  gossip,

theoretical overbearingness and practical pusillanimity—reflections on life,

action and simplicity, and complete absence of life, action and simplicity—

literary  and  argumentative  artisans  and  repulsive  coquetry  with  them:

`Feuerbach is a bourgeois,' and the word `bourgeois' grown into an epithet

and  repeated  ad  nauseum,  but  all  of  them  themselves  from  head  to  foot,

through  and  through,  provincial  bourgeois.  With  one  word,  lying  and

stupidity, stupidity and lying. In this society there is no possibility of drawing

a free, full breath. I hold myself aloof from them, and have declared quite

decidedly that I will not join their communistic union of artisans, and will

have nothing to do with it.''

  The Revolution of 1848 led him to return to Paris and thence to Germany.

He had a quarrel with Marx over a matter in which he himself confessed later

that Marx was in the right. He became a member of the Slav Congress in

Prague, where he vainly endeavored to promote a Slav insurrection. Toward

the end of 1848, he wrote an ``Appeal to Slavs,'' calling on them to combine

with other revolutionaries to destroy the three oppressive monarchies, Russia,

Austria and Prussia. Marx attacked him in print, saying, in effect, that the

movement for Bohemian independence was futile because the Slavs had nofuture, at any rate in those regions where they hap- pened to be subject to

Germany and Austria. Bakunin accused Mars of German patriotism in this

matter, and Marx accused him of Pan-Slavism, no doubt in both cases justly.

Before this dispute, however, a much more serious quarrel had taken place.

Marx's paper, the ``Neue Rheinische Zeitung,'' stated that George Sand had

papers proving Bakunin to be a Russian Government agent and one of those

responsible for the recent arrest of Poles. Bakunin, of course, repudiated the

charge, and George Sand wrote to the ``Neue Rheinische Zeitung,'' denying

this statement in toto. The denials were published by Marx, and there was a

nominal reconciliation, but from this time onward there was never any real

abatement of the hostility between these rival leaders, who did not meet again

until 1864.

  Meanwhile, the reaction had been everywhere gaining ground. In May,

1849,  an  insurrection  in  Dresden  for  a  moment  made  the  revolutionaries

masters  of  the  town.  They  held  it  for  five  days  and  established  a

revolutionary government. Bakunin was the soul of the defense which they

made against the Prussian troops. But they were overpowered, and at last

Bakunin  was  captured  while  trying  to  escape  with  Heubner  and  Richard

Wagner, the last of whom, fortunately for music, was not captured.

  Now began a long period of imprisonment in many prisons and various

countries. Bakunin was sentenced to death on the 14th of January, 1850, but

his sentence was commuted after five months, and he was delivered over to

Austria, which claimed the privilege of punishing him. The Austrians, in their

turn, condemned him to death in May, 1851, and again his sentence was

commuted to imprisonment for life. In the Austrian prisons he had fetters on

hands and feet, and in one of them he was even chained to the wall by the

belt. There seems to have been some peculiar pleasure to be derived from the

punishment of Bakunin, for the Russian Government in its turn demanded

him of the Austrians, who delivered him up. In Russia he was confined, first

in  the  Peter  and  Paul  fortress  and  then  in  the  Schluesselburg.  There  be

suffered  from  scurvy  and  all  his  teeth  fell  out.  His  health  gave  way

completely, and he found almost all food impossible to assimilate. ``But, if

his  body  became  enfeebled,  his  spirit  remained  inflexible.  He  feared  one

thing above all. It was to find himself some day led, by the debilitating action

of prison, to the condition of degradation of which Silvio Pellico offers a

well-known type. He feared that he might cease to hate, that he might feel thesentiment of revolt which upheld him becoming extinguished in his hearts

that he might come to pardon his persecutors and resign himself to his fate.

But this fear was superfluous; his energy did not abandon him a single day,

and he emerged from his cell the same man as when he entered.''[14]

[14] Ibid. p. xxvi.

After the death of the Tsar Nicholas many political prisoners were

amnested, but Alexander II with his own hand erased Bakunin's name from

the list. When Bakunin's mother succeeded in obtaining an interview with the

new Tsar, he said to her, ``Know, Madame, that so long as your son lives, he

can never be free.'' However, in 1857, after eight years of captivity, he was

sent to the comparative freedom of Siberia. From there, in 1861, he

succeeded in escaping to Japan, and thence through America to London. He

had been imprisoned for his hostility to governments, but, strange to say, his

sufferings had not had the intended effect of making him love those who

inflicted them. From this time onward, he devoted himself to spreading the

spirit of Anarchist revolt, without, however, having to suffer any further term

of imprisonment. For some years he lived in Italy, where he founded in 1864

an ``International Fraternity'' or ``Alliance of Socialist Revolutionaries.'' This

contained men of many countries, but apparently no Germans. It devoted

itself largely to combating Mazzini's nationalism. In 1867 he moved to

Switzerland, where in the following year he helped to found the

``International Alliance of So- cialist Democracy,'' of which he drew up the

program. This program gives a good succinct resume of his opinions:—

The Alliance declares itself atheist; it desires the definitive and entire

abolition of classes and the political equality and social equalization of

individuals of both sexes. It desires that the earth, the instrument of labor,

like all other capital, becoming the collective property of society as a whole,

shall be no longer able to be utilized except by the workers, that is to say, by

agricultural and industrial associations. It recognizes that all actually existing

political and authoritarian States, reducing themselves more and more to the

mere administrative functions of the public services in their respective

countries, must disappear in the universal union of free associations, both

agricultural and industrial.

The International Alliance of Socialist Democracy desired to become a

branch of the International Working Men's Association, but was refused

admission on the ground that branches must be local, and could not

themselves be international. The Geneva group of the Alliance, however, wasadmitted later, in July, 1869.

  The  International  Working  Men's  Association  had  been  founded  in

London  in  1864,  and  its  statutes  and  program  were  drawn  up  by  Marx.

Bakunin at first did not expect it to prove a success and refused to join it. But

it spread with remarkable rapidity in many countries and soon became a great

power for the propagation of Socialist ideas. Originally it was by no means

wholly Socialist, but in successive Congresses Marx won it over more and

more to his views. At its third Congress, in Brussels in September, 1868, it

became  definitely  Socialist.  Meanwhile  Bakunin,  regretting  his  earlier

abstention, had decided to join it, and he brought with him a considerable

following  in  French-Switzerland,  France,  Spain  and  Italy.  At  the  fourth

Congress,  held  at  Basle  in  September,  1869,  two  currents  were  strongly

marked. The Germans and English followed Marx in his belief in the State as

it was to become after the abolition of private property; they followed him

also  in  his  desire  to  found  Labor  Parties  in  the  various  countries,  and  to

utilize  the  machinery  of  democracy  for  the  election  of  representatives  of

Labor  to  Parliaments.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Latin  nations  in  the  main

followed Bakunin in opposing the State and disbelieving in the machinery of

representative government. The conflict between these two groups grew more

and  more  bitter,  and  each  accused  the  other  of  various  offenses.  The

statement that Bakunin was a spy was repeated, but was withdrawn after

investigation. Marx wrote in a confidential communication to his German

friends that Bakunin was an agent of the Pan-Slavist party and received from

them 25,000 francs a year. Meanwhile, Bakunin became for a time interested

in the attempt to stir up an agrarian revolt in Russia, and this led him to

neglect  the  contest  in  the  International  at  a  crucial  moment.  During  the

Franco-Prussian war Bakunin passionately took the side of France, especially

after  the  fall  of  Napoleon  III.  He  endeavored  to  rouse  the  people  to

revolutionary resistance like that of 1793, and became involved in an abortive

attempt at revolt in Lyons. The French Government accused him of being a

paid  agent  of  Prussia,  and  it  was  with  difficulty  that  he  escaped  to

Switzerland.  The  dispute  with  Marx  and  his  followers  had  become

exacerbated  by  the  national  dispute.  Bakunin,  like  Kropotkin  after  him,

regarded the new power of Germany as the greatest menace to liberty in the

world.  He  hated  the  Germans  with  a  bitter  hatred,  partly,  no  doubt,  on

account of Bismarck, but probably still more on account of Marx. To thisday,  Anarchism  has  remained  confined  almost  exclusively  to  the  Latin

countries, and has been associated with, a hatred of Germany, growing out of

the contests between Marx and Bakunin in the International.

  The  final  suppression  of  Bakunin's  faction  occurred  at  the  General

Congress of the International at the Hague in 1872. The meeting-place was

chosen by the General Council (in which Marx was unopposed), with a view

—so Bakunin's friends contend— to making access impossible for Bakunin

(on account of the hostility of the French and German governments) and

difficult for his friends. Bakunin was expelled from the International as the

result of a report accusing him inter alia of theft backed; up by intimidation.

  The orthodoxy of the International was saved, but at the cost of its vitality.

From  this  time  onward,  it  ceased  to  be  itself  a  power,  but  both  sections

continued  to  work  in  their  various  groups,  and  the  Socialist  groups  in

particular grew rapidly. Ultimately a new International was formed (1889)

which continued down to the outbreak of the present war. As to the future of

International Socialism it would be rash to prophesy, though it would seem

that the international idea has acquired sufficient strength to need again, after

the  war,  some  such  means  of  expression  as  it  found  before  in  Socialist

congresses.

  By  this  time  Bakunin's  health  was  broken,  and  except  for  a  few  brief

intervals, he lived in retirement until his death in 1876.

  Bakunin's  life,  unlike  Marx's,  was  a  very  stormy  one.  Every  kind  of

rebellion against authority always aroused his sympathy, and in his support

he  never  paid  the  slightest  attention  to  personal  risk.  His  influence,

undoubtedly very great, arose chiefly through the influence of his personality

upon important individuals. His writings differ from Marx's as much as his

life does, and in a similar way. They are chaotic, largely, aroused by some

passing  occasion,  abstract  and  metaphysical,  except  when  they  deal  with

current politics. He does not come to close quarters with economic facts, but

dwells usually in the regions of theory and metaphysics. When he descends

from these regions, he is much more at the mercy of current international

politics than Marx, much less imbued with the consequences of the belief that

it is economic causes that are fundamental. He praised Marx for enunciating

this doctrine,[15] but nevertheless continued to think in terms of nations. His

longest work, ``L'Empire Knouto-Germanique et la Revolution Sociale,'' is

mainly concerned with the situation in France during the later stages of theFranco-Prussian War, and with the means of resisting German imperialism.

Most  of  his  writing  was  done  in  a  hurry  in  the  interval  between  two

insurrections. There is something of Anarchism in his lack of literary order.

His  best-known  work  is  a  fragment  entitled  by  its  editors  ``God  and  the

State.''[16]

In this work he represents belief in God and belief in the State as the two

great obstacles to human liberty. A typical passage will serve to illustrate its

style.

[15] ``Marx, as a thinker, is on the right road. He has established as a

principle that all the evolutions, political, religious, and juridical, in history

are, not the causes, but the effects of economic evolutions. This is a great and

fruitful thought, which he has not absolutely invented; it has been glimpsed,

expressed in part, by many others besides him; but in any case to him belongs

the honor of having solidly established it and of having enunciated it as the

basis of his whole economic system. (1870; ib. ii. p. xiii.)

  [16] This title is not Bakunin's, but was invented by Cafiero and Elisee

Reclus,  who  edited  it,  not  knowing  that  it  was  a  fragment  of  what  was

intended to he the second version of ``L'Empire Knouto-Germanique'' (see ib.

ii. p 283).

  The State is not society, it is only an historical form of it, as brutal as it is

abstract. It was born historically in all countries of the marriage of violence,

rapine, pillage, in a word, war and conquest, with the gods successively

created by the theological fantasy of nations. It has been from its origin, and

it remains still at present, the divine sanction of brutal force and triumphant

inequality.

  The State is authority; it is force; it is the ostentation and infatuation of

force: it does not insinuate itself; it does not seek to convert. . . . Even when it

commands what is good, it hinders and spoils it, just because it commands it,

and because every command provokes and excites the legitimate revolts of

liberty;  and  because  the  good,  from  the  moment  that  it  is  commanded,

becomes evil from the point of view of true morality, of human morality

(doubtless not of divine), from the point of view of human respect and of

liberty. Liberty, morality, and the human dignity of man consist precisely in

this,  that  he  does  good,  not  because  it  is  commanded,  but  because  he

conceives it, wills it and loves it.

We do not find in Bakunin's works a clear picture of the society at which heaimed, or any argument to prove that such a society could be stable. If we

wish to understand Anarchism we must turn to his followers, and especially

to Kropotkin—like him, a Russian aristocrat familiar with the prisons of

Europe, and, like him, an Anarchist who, in spite of his internationalism, is

imbued with a fiery hatred of the Germans.

  Kropotkin  has  devoted  much  of  his  writing  to  technical  questions  of

production.  In  ``Fields,  Factories  and  Workshops''  and  ``The  Conquest  of

Bread'' he has set himself to prove that, if production were more scientific

and better organized, a comparatively small amount of quite agreeable work

would suffice to keep the whole population in comfort. Even assuming, as we

probably  must,  that  he  somewhat  exaggerates  what  is  possible  with  our

present  scientific  knowledge,  it  must  nevertheless  be  conceded  that  his

contentions contain a very large measure of truth. In attacking the subject of

production he has shown that he knows what is the really crucial question. If

civilization and progress are to be compatible with equality, it is necessary

that equality should not involve long hours of painful toil for little more than

the necessaries of life, since, where there is no leisure, art and science will die

and all progress will become impossible. The objection which some feel to

Socialism and Anarchism alike on this ground cannot be upheld in view of

the possible productivity of labor.

  The system at which Kropotkin aims, whether or not it be possible, is

certainly one which demands a very great improvement in the methods of

production above what is common at present. He desires to abolish wholly

the system of wages, not only, as most Socialists do, in the sense that a man

is  to  be  paid  rather  for  his  willingness  to  work  than  for  the  actual  work

demanded  of  him,  but  in  a  more  fundamental  sense:  there  is  to  be  no

obligation to work, and all things are to be shared in equal proportions among

the whole population. Kropotkin relies upon the possibility of making work

pleasant:  he  holds  that,  in  such  a  community  as  he  foresees,  practically

everyone  will  prefer  work  to  idleness,  because  work  will  not  involve

overwork or slavery, or that excessive specialization that industrialism has

brought about, but will be merely a pleasant activity for certain hours of the

day, giving a man an outlet for his spontaneous constructive impulses. There

is to be no compulsion, no law, no government exercising force; there will

still be acts of the community, but these are to spring from universal consent,

not from any enforced submission of even the smallest minority. We shallexamine in a later chapter how far such an ideal is realizable, but it cannot be

denied  that  Kropotkin  presents  it  with  extraordinary  persuasiveness  and

charm.

  We should be doing more than justice to Anarchism if we did not say

something of its darker side, the side which has brought it into conflict with

the police and made it a word of terror to ordinary citizens. In its general

doctrines there is nothing essentially involving violent methods or a virulent

hatred of the rich, and many who adopt these general doctrines are personally

gentle and temperamentally averse from violence. But the general tone of the

Anarchist press and public is bitter to a degree that seems scarcely sane, and

the appeal, especially in Latin countries, is rather to envy of the fortunate

than to pity for the unfortunate. A vivid and readable, though not wholly

reliable, account, from a hostile point of view, is given in a book called ``Le

Peril  Anarchiste,''  by  Felix  Dubois,[17]  which  incidentally  reproduces  a

number of cartoons from anarchist journals. The revolt against law naturally

leads, except in those who are controlled by a real passion for humanity, to a

relaxation of all the usually accepted moral rules, and to a bitter spirit of

retaliatory cruelty out of which good can hardly come.

[17] Paris, 1894.

One of the most curious features of popular Anarchism is its martyrology,

aping Christian forms, with the guillotine (in France) in place of the cross.

Many who have suffered death at the hands of the authorities on account of

acts of violence were no doubt genuine sufferers for their belief in a cause,

but others, equally honored, are more questionable. One of the most curious

examples of this outlet for the repressed religious impulse is the cult of

Ravachol, who was guillotined in 1892 on account of various dynamite

outrages. His past was dubious, but he died defiantly; his last words were

three lines from a well-known Anarchist song, the ``Chant du Pere

Duchesne'':—

  Si tu veux etre heureux,

Nom de Dieu!

Pends ton proprietaire.

  As was natural, the leading Anarchists took no part in the canonization of

his memory; nevertheless it proceeded, with the most amazing extravagances.

  It would be wholly unfair to judge Anarchist doctrine, or the views of its

leading exponents, by such phenomena; but it remains a fact that Anarchismattracts to itself much that lies on the borderland of insanity and common

crime.[18] This must be remembered in exculpation of the authorities and the

thoughtless public, who often confound in a common detestation the parasites

of  the  movement  and  the  truly  heroic  and  high-minded  men  who  have

elaborated  its  theories  and  sacrificed  comfort  and  success  to  their

propagation.

[18] The attitude of all the better Anarchists is that expressed by L. S.

Bevington in the words: ``Of course we know that among those who call

themselves Anarchists there are a minority of unbalanced enthusiasts who

look upon every illegal and sensational act of violence as a matter for

hysterical jubilation. Very useful to the police and the press, unsteady in

intellect and of weak moral principle, they have repeatedly shown themselves

accessible to venal considerations. They, and their violence, and their

professed Anarchism are purchasable, and in the last resort they are welcome

and efficient partisans of the bourgeoisie in its remorseless war against the

deliverers of the people.'' His conclusion is a very wise one: ``Let us leave

indiscriminate killing and injuring to the Government—to its Statesmen, its

Stockbrokers, its Officers, and its Law.'' (``Anarchism and Violence,'' pp. 9-

10. Liberty Press, Chiswick, 1896.)

The terrorist campaign in which such men as Ravachol were active

practically came to an end in 1894. After that time, under the influence of

Pelloutier, the better sort of Anarchists found a less harmful outlet by

advocating Revolutionary Syndicalism in the Trade Unions and Bourses du

Travail.[19]

[19] See next Chapter.

The ECONOMIC organization of society, as conceived by Anarchist

Communists, does not differ greatly from that which is sought by Socialists.

Their difference from Socialists is in the matter of government: they demand

that government shall require the consent of all the governed, and not only of

a majority. It is undeniable that the rule of a majority may be almost as

hostile to freedom as the rule of a minority: the divine right of majorities is a

dogma as little possessed of absolute truth as any other. A strong democratic

State may easily be led into oppression of its best citizens, namely, those

those independence of mind would make them a force for progress.

Experience of democratic parliamentary government has shown that it falls

very far short of what was expected of it by early Socialists, and the

Anarchist revolt against it is not surprising. But in the form of pureAnarchism, this revolt has remained weak and sporadic. It is Syndicalism,

and the movements to which Syndicalism has given rise, that have

popularized the revolt against parliamentary government and purely political

means of emancipating the wage earner. But this movement must be dealt

with in a separate chapter.

                                     CHAPTER III

                      THE SYNDICALIST REVOLT

  SYNDICALISM arose in France as a revolt against political Socialism, and

in order to understand it we must trace in brief outline the positions attained

by Socialist parties in the various countries.

  After a severe setback, caused by the Franco- Prussian war, Socialism

gradually revived, and in all the countries of Western Europe Socialist parties

have increased their numerical strength almost continuously during the last

forty years; but, as is invariably the case with a growing sect, the intensity of

faith has diminished as the number of believers has increased.

  In  Germany  the  Socialist  party  became  the  strongest  faction  of  the

Reichstag,  and,  in  spite  of  differences  of  opinion  among  its  members,  it

preserved  its  formal  unity  with  that  instinct  for  military  discipline  which

characterizes the German nation. In the Reichstag election of 1912 it polled a

third of the total number of votes cast, and returned 110 members out of a

total of 397. After the death of Bebel, the Revisionists, who received their

first  impulse  from  Bernstein,  overcame  the  more  strict  Marxians,  and  the

party became in effect merely one of advanced Radicalism. It is too soon to

guess what will be the effect of the split between Majority and Minority

Socialists which has occurred during the war. There is in Germany hardly a

trace of Syndicalism; its characteristic doctrine, the preference of industrial to

political action, has found scarcely any support.

  In England Marx has never had many followers. Socialism there has been

inspired in the main by the Fabians (founded in 1883), who threw over the

advocacy of revolution, the Marxian doctrine of value, and the class-war.

What remained was State Socialism and a doctrine of ``permeation.'' Civil

servants  were  to  be  permeated  with  the  realization  that  Socialism  would

enormously increase their power. Trade Unions were to be permeated with

the belief that the day for purely industrial action was past, and that they must

look to government (inspired secretly by sympathetic civil servants) to bring

about, bit by bit, such parts of the Socialist program as were not likely to

rouse much hostility in the rich. The Independent Labor Party (formed in

1893)  was  largely  inspired  at  first  by  the  ideas  of  the  Fabians,  though

retaining to the present day, and especially since the outbreak of the war,

much more of the original Socialist ardor. It aimed always at co-operationwith  the  industrial  organizations  of  wage-earners,  and,  chiefly  through  its

efforts, the Labor Party[20] was formed in 1900 out of a combination of the

Trade Unions and the political Socialists. To this party, since 1909, all the

important Unions have belonged, but in spite of the fact that its strength is

derived  from  Trade  Unions,  it  has  stood  always  for  political  rather  than

industrial action. Its Socialism has been of a theoretical and academic order,

and in practice, until the outbreak of war, the Labor members in Parliament

(of whom 30 were elected in 1906 and 42 in December, 1910) might be

reckoned almost as a part of the Liberal Party.

[20] Of which the Independent Labor Party is only a section.

France, unlike England and Germany, was not content merely to repeat the

old shibboleths with continually diminishing conviction. In France[21] a new

movement, originally known as Revolutionary Syndicalism—and afterward

simply as Syndicalism— kept alive the vigor of the original impulse, and

remained true to the spirit of the older Socialists, while departing from the

letter. Syndicalism, unlike Socialism and Anarchism, began from an existing

organization and developed the ideas appropriate to it, whereas Socialism and

Anarchism began with the ideas and only afterward developed the

organizations which were their vehicle. In order to understand Syndicalism,

we have first to describe Trade Union organization in France, and its political

environment. The ideas of Syndicalism will then appear as the natural

outcome of the political and economic situation. Hardly any of these ideas are

new; almost all are derived from the Bakunist section of the old International.

[21] The old International had considerable success in France before the

Franco- Prussian War; indeed, in 1869, it is estimated to have had a French

membership of a quarter of a million. What is practically the Syndicalist

program was advocated by a French delegate to the Congress of the

International at Bale in that same year.[22]

[20] And also in Italy. A good, short account of the Italian movement is

given by A. Lanzillo, ``Le Mouvement Ouvrier en Italie,'' Bibliotheque du

Mouvement Proletarien. See also Paul Louis, ``Le Syndicalisme Europeen,''

chap. vi. On the other hand Cole (``World of Labour,'' chap. vi) considers the

strength of genuine Syndicalism in Italy to be small.

  [21]  This  is  often  recognized  by  Syndicalists  themselves.  See,  e.g.,  an

article  on  ``The  Old  International''  in  the  Syndicalist  of  February,  1913,

which, after giving an account of the struggle between Marx and Bakunin

from the standpoint of a sympathizer with the latter, says: ``Bakounin's ideasare now more alive than ever.''

  [22] See pp. 42-43, and 160 of ``Syndicalism in France,'' Louis Levine,

Ph.D. (Columbia University Studies in Political Science, vol. xlvi, No. 3.)

This is a very objective and reliable account of the origin and progress of

French  Syndicalism.  An  admirable  short  discussion  of  its  ideas  and  its

present position will be found in Cole's ``World of Labour'' (G. Bell & Sons),

especially chapters iii, iv, and xi.

The war of 1870 put an end for the time being to the Socialist Movement in

France. Its revival was begun by Jules Guesde in 1877. Unlike the Ger- man

Socialists, the French have been split into many different factions. In the

early eighties there was a split between the Parliamentary Socialists and the

Communist Anarchists. The latter thought that the first act of the Social

Revolution should be the destruction of the State, and would therefore have

nothing to do with Parliamentary politics. The Anarchists, from 1883 onward,

had success in Paris and the South. The Socialists contended that the State

will disappear after the Socialist society has been firmly established. In 1882

the Socialists split between the followers of Guesde, who claimed to

represent the revolutionary and scientific Socialism of Marx, and the

followers of Paul Brousse, who were more opportunist and were also called

possibilists and cared little for the theories of Marx. In 1890 there was a

secession from the Broussists, who followed Allemane and absorbed the

more revolutionary elements of the party and became leading spirits in some

of the strongest syndicates. Another group was the Independent Socialists,

among whom were Jaures, Millerand and Viviani.[23]

[23] See Levine, op. cit., chap. ii.

The disputes between the various sections of Socialists caused difficulties

in the Trade Unions and helped to bring about the resolution to keep politics

out of the Unions. From this to Syndicalism was an easy step.

  Since the year 1905, as the result of a union between the Parti Socialiste

de France (Part; Ouvrier Socialiste Revolutionnaire Francais led by Guesde)

and the Parti Socialiste Francais (Jaures), there have been only two groups of

Socialists,  the  United  Socialist  Party  and  the  Independents,  who  are

intellectuals or not willing to be tied to a party. At the General Election of

1914 the former secured 102 members and the latter 30, out of a total of 590.

  Tendencies  toward  a  rapprochement  between  the  various  groups  were

seriously interfered with by an event which had considerable importance forthe whole development of advanced political ideas in France, namely, the

acceptance  of  office  in  the  Waldeck-  Rousseau  Ministry  by  the  Socialist

Millerand in 1899. Millerand, as was to be expected, soon ceased to be a

Socialist, and the opponents of political action pointed to his development as

showing the vanity of political triumphs. Very many French politicians who

have risen to power have begun their political career as Socialists, and have

ended  it  not  infrequently  by  employing  the  army  to  oppress  strikers.

Millerand's action was the most notable and dramatic among a number of

others of a similar kind. Their cumulative effect has been to produce a certain

cynicism  in  regard  to  politics  among  the  more  class-conscious  of  French

wage-earners,  and  this  state  of  mind  greatly  assisted  the  spread  of

Syndicalism.

  Syndicalism stands essentially for the point of view of the producer as

opposed to that of the consumer; it is concerned with reforming actual work,

and the organization of industry, not MERELY with securing greater rewards

for work. From this point of view its vigor and its distinctive character are

derived. It aims at substituting industrial for political action, and at using

Trade Union organization for purposes for which orthodox Socialism would

look to Parliament. ``Syndicalism'' was originally only the French name for

Trade Unionism, but the Trade Unionists of France became divided into two

sections,  the  Reformist  and  the  Revolutionary,  of  whom  the  latter  only

professed the ideas which we now associate with the term ``Syndicalism.'' It

is quite impossible to guess how far either the organization or the ideas of the

Syndicalists will remain intact at the end of the war, and everything that we

shall say is to be taken as applying only to the years before the war. It may be

that French Syndicalism as a distinctive movement will be dead, but even in

that case it will not have lost its importance, since it has given a new impulse

and direction to the more vigorous part of the labor movement in all civilized

countries, with the possible exception of Germany.

  The  organization  upon  which  Syndicalism  de-  pended  was  the

Confederation Generale du Travail, commonly known as the C. G. T., which

was founded in 1895, but only achieved its final form in 1902. It has never

been numerically very powerful, but has derived its influence from the fact

that in moments of crisis many who were not members were willing to follow

its guidance. Its membership in the year before the war is estimated by Mr.

Cole at somewhat more than half a million. Trade Unions (Syndicats) werelegalized by Waldeck-Rousseau in 1884, and the C. G. T., on its inauguration

in 1895, was formed by the Federation of 700 Syndicats. Alongside of this

organization there existed another, the Federation des Bourses du Travail,

formed in 1893. A Bourse du Travail is a local organization, not of any one

trade, but of local labor in general, intended to serve as a Labor Exchange and

to perform such functions for labor as Chambers of Commerce perform for

the employer.[24] A Syndicat is in general a local organization of a single

industry, and is thus a smaller unit than the Bourse du Travail.[25] Under the

able leadership of Pelloutier, the Federation des Bourses prospered more than

the  C.  G.  T.,  and  at  last,  in  1902,  coalesced  with  it.  The  result  was  an

organization in which the local Syndicat was fed- erated twice over, once

with the other Syndicat in its locality, forming together the local Bourse du

Travail, and again with the Syndicats in the same industry in other places. ``It

was the purpose of the new organization to secure twice over the membership

of every syndicat, to get it to join both its local Bourse du Travail and the

Federation of its industry. The Statutes of the C. G. T. (I. 3) put this point

plainly: `No Syndicat will be able to form a part of the C. G. T. if it is not

federated nationally and an adherent of a Bourse du Travail or a local or

departmental Union of Syndicats grouping different associations.' Thus, M.

Lagardelle explains, the two sections will correct each other's point of view:

national federation of industries will prevent parochialism (localisme), and

local  organization  will  check  the  corporate  or  `Trade  Union'  spirit.  The

workers will learn at once the solidarity of all workers in a locality and that of

all workers in a trade, and, in learning this, they will learn at the same time

the complete solidarity of the whole working-class.''[26]

[24] Cole, ib., p. 65.

  [25]  ``Syndicat  in  France  still  means  a  local  union—there  are  at  the

present day only four national syndicats'' (ib., p. 66).

  [26] Cole, ib. p. 69.

This organization was largely the work of Pellouties, who was Secretary of

the Federation des Bourses from 1894 until his death in 1901. He was an

Anarchist Communist and impressed his ideas upon the Federation and

thence posthumously on the C. G. T. after its combination with the

Federation des Bourses. He even carried his principles into the government of

the Federation; the Committee had no chairman and votes very rarely took

place. He stated that ``the task of the revolution is to free mankind, not onlyfrom all authority, but also from every institution which has not for its

essential purpose the development of production.''

  The C. G. T. allows much autonomy to each unit in the organization. Each

Syndicat  counts  for  one,  whether  it  be  large  or  small.  There  are  not  the

friendly society activities which form so large a part of the work of English

Unions. It gives no orders, but is purely advisory. It does not allow politics to

be introduced into the Unions. This decision was originally based upon the

fact that the divisions among Socialists disrupted the Unions, but it is now

reinforced  in  the  minds  of  an  important  section  by  the  general  Anarchist

dislike  of  politics.  The  C.  G.  T.  is  essentially  a  fighting  organization;  in

strikes, it is the nucleus to which the other workers rally.

  There is a Reformist section in the C. G. T., but it is practically always in a

minority,  and  the  C.  G.  T.  is,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  the  organ  of

revolutionary Syndicalism, which is simply the creed of its leaders.

  The essential doctrine of Syndicalism is the class- war, to be conducted by

industrial  rather  than  politi-  cal  methods.  The  chief  industrial  methods

advocated are the strike, the boycott, the label and sabotage.

  The boycott, in various forms, and the label, showing that the work has

been done under trade- union conditions, have played a considerable part in

American labor struggles.

  Sabotage is the practice of doing bad work, or spoiling machinery or work

which has already been done, as a method of dealing with employers in a

dispute when a strike appears for some reason undesirable or impossible. It

has many forms, some clearly innocent, some open to grave objections. One

form  of  sabotage  which  has  been  adopted  by  shop  assistants  is  to  tell

customers the truth about the articles they are buying; this form, however it

may damage the shopkeeper's business, is not easy to object to on moral

grounds. A form which has been adopted on railways, particularly in Italian

strikes, is that of obeying all rules literally and exactly, in such a way as to

make the running of trains practically impossible. Another form is to do all

the work with minute care, so that in the end it is better done, but the output

is small. From these innocent forms there is a continual progression, until we

come  to  such  acts  as  all  ordinary  morality  would  consider  criminal;  for

example, causing railway accidents. Advocates of sabotage justify it as part

of war, but in its more violent forms (in which it is seldom defended) it is

cruel and probably inexpedient, while even in its milder forms it must tend toencourage slovenly habits of work, which might easily persist under the new

regime  that  the  Syndicalists  wish  to  introduce.  At  the  same  time,  when

capitalists express a moral horror of this method, it is worth while to observe

that they themselves are the first to practice it when the occasion seems to

them appropriate. If report speaks truly, an example of this on a very large

scale has been seen during the Russian Revolution.

  By  far  the  most  important  of  the  Syndicalist  methods  is  the  strike.

Ordinary strikes, for specific objects, are regarded as rehearsals, as a means

of perfecting organization and promoting enthusiasm, but even when they are

victorious  so  far  as  concerns  the  specific  point  in  dispute,  they  are  not

regarded  by  Syndicalists  as  affording  any  ground  for  industrial  peace.

Syndicalists aim at using the strike, not to secure such improvements of detail

as employers may grant, but to destroy the whole system of employer and

employed and win the complete emancipation of the worker. For this purpose

what is wanted is the General Strike, the complete cessation of work by a

sufficient proportion of the wage-earners to secure the paralysis of capitalism.

Sorel,  who  represents  Syndicalism  too  much  in  the  minds  of  the  reading

public, suggests that the General Strike is to be regarded as a myth, like the

Second Coming in Christian doctrine. But this view by no means suits the

active Syndicalists. If they were brought to believe that the General Strike is a

mere myth, their energy would flag, and their whole outlook would become

disillusioned. It is the actual, vivid belief in its possibility which inspires

them. They are much criticised for this belief by the political Socialists who

consider that the battle is to be won by obtaining a Parliamentary majority.

But Syndicalists have too little faith in the honesty of politicians to place any

reliance on such a method or to believe in the value of any revolution which

leaves the power of the State intact.

  Syndicalist aims are somewhat less definite than Syndicalist methods. The

intellectuals who endeavor to interpret them—not always very faithfully—

represent them as a party of movement and change, following a Bergsonian

elan vital, without needing any very clear prevision of the goal to which it is

to take them. Nevertheless, the negative part, at any rate, of their objects is

sufficiently clear.

  They  wish  to  destroy  the  State,  which  they  regard  as  a  capitalist

institution,  designed  essentially  to  terrorize  the  workers.  They  refuse  to

believe that it would be any better under State Socialism. They desire to seeeach industry self-governing, but as to the means of adjusting the relations

between different industries, they are not very clear. They are anti-militarist

because  they  are  anti-State,  and  because  French  troops  have  often  been

employed against them in strikes; also because they are internationalists, who

believe that the sole interest of the working man everywhere is to free himself

from the tyranny of the capitalist. Their outlook on life is the very reverse of

pacifist, but they oppose wars between States on the ground that these are not

fought for objects that in any way concern the workers. Their anti-militarism,

more than anything else, brought them into conflict with the authorities in the

years preceding the war. But, as was to be expected, it did not survive the

actual invasion of France.

  The doctrines of Syndicalism may be illustrated by an article introducing

it to English readers in the first number of ``The Syndicalist Railwayman,''

September, 1911, from which the following is quoted:—

``All Syndicalism, Collectivism, Anarchism aims at abolishing the present

economic status and existing private ownership of most things; but while

Collectivism would substitute ownership by everybody, and Anarchism

ownership by nobody, Syndicalism aims at ownership by Organized Labor. It

is thus a purely Trade Union reading of the economic doctrine and the class

war preached by Socialism. It vehemently repudiates Parliamentary action on

which Collectivism relies; and it is, in this respect, much more closely allied

to Anarchism, from which, indeed, it differs in practice only in being more

limited in range of action.'' (Times, Aug. 25, 1911).

  In truth, so thin is the partition between Syndicalism and Anarchism that

the newer and less familiar ``ism'' has been shrewdly defined as ``Organized

Anarchy.''  It  has  been  created  by  the  Trade  Unions  of  France;  but  it  is

obviously an international plant, whose roots have already found the soil of

Britain most congenial to its growth and fructification.

  Collectivist  or  Marxian  Socialism  would  have  us  believe  that  it  is

distinctly a LABOR Movement; but it is not so. Neither is Anarchism. The

one is substantially bourgeois; the other aristocratic, plus an abundant output

of book-learning, in either case. Syndicalism, on the contrary, is indubitably

laborist  in  origin  and  aim,  owing  next  to  nothing  to  the  ``Classes,''  and,

indeed,, resolute to uproot them. The Times (Oct. 13, 1910), which almost

single-handed in the British Press has kept creditably abreast of Continental

Syndicalism, thus clearly set forth the significance of the General Strike:``To understand what it means, we must remember that there is in France a

powerful Labor Organization which has for its open and avowed object a

Revolution, in which not only the present order of Society, but the State

itself, is to be swept away. This movement is called Syndicalism. It is not

Socialism, but, on the contrary, radically opposed to Socialism, because the

Syndicalists hold that the State is the great enemy and that the Socialists'

ideal of State or Collectivist Ownership would make the lot of the Workers

much worse than it is now under private employers. The means by which

they hope to attain their end is the General Strike, an idea which was invented

by a French workman about twenty years ago,[27] and was adopted by the

French Labor Congress in 1894, after a furious battle with the Socialists, in

which the latter were worsted. Since then the General Strike has been the

avowed policy of the Syndicalists, whose organization is the Confederation

Generale du Travail.''

[27] In fact the General Strike was invented by a Londoner William

Benbow, an Owenite, in 1831.

Or, to put it otherwise, the intelligent French worker has awakened, as he

believes, to the fact that Society (Societas) and the State (Civitas) connote

two separable spheres of human activity, between which there is no

connection, necessary or desirable. Without the one, man, being a gregarious

animal, cannot subsist: while without the other he would simply be in clover.

The ``statesman'' whom office does not render positively nefarious is at best

an expensive superfluity.

  Syndicalists have had many violent encounters with the forces of

government. In 1907 and 1908, protesting against bloodshed which had

occurred in the suppression of strikes, the Committee of the C. G. T. issued

manifestoes speaking of the Government as ``a Government of assassins'' and

alluding to the Prime Minister as ``Clemenceau the murderer.'' Similar events

in the strike at Villeneuve St. Georges in 1908 led to the arrest of all the

leading members of the Committee. In the railway strike of October, 1910,

Monsieur Briand arrested the Strike Committee, mobilized the railway men

and sent soldiers to replace strikers. As a result of these vigorous measures

the strike was completely defeated, and after this the chief energy of the C. G.

T. was directed against militarism and nationalism.

  The attitude of Anarchism to the Syndicalist movement is sympathetic,

with the reservation that such methods as the General Strike are not to be

regarded  as  substitutes  for  the  violent  revolution  which  most  Anarchistsconsider  necessary.  Their  attitude  in  this  matter  was  defined  at  the

International Anarchist Congress held in Amsterdam in August, 1907. This

Congress recommended ``comrades of all countries to actively participate in

autonomous movements of the working class, and to develop in Syndicalist

organizations the ideas of revolt, individual initiative and solidarity, which

are the essence of Anarchism.'' Comrades were to ``propagate and support

only  those  forms  and  manifestations  of  direct  action  which  carry,  in

themselves,  a  revolutionary  character  and  lead  to  the  transformation  of

society.'' It was resolved that ``the Anarchists think that the destruction of the

capitalist and authoritary society can only be realized by armed insurrection

and violent expropriation, and that the use of the more or less General Strike

and the Syndicalist movement must not make us forget the more direct means

of struggle against the military force of government.''

  Syndicalists might retort that when the movement is strong enough to win

by  armed  insurrection  it  will  be  abundantly  strong  enough  to  win  by  the

General Strike. In Labor movements generally, success through violence can

hardly be expected except in circumstances where success without violence is

attainable. This argument alone, even if there were no other, would be a very

powerful reason against the methods advocated by the Anarchist Congress.

  Syndicalism stands for what is known as industrial unionism as opposed to

craft  unionism.  In  this  respect,  as  also  in  the  preference  of  industrial  to

political  methods,  it  is  part  of  a  movement  which  has  spread  far  beyond

France. The distinction between industrial and craft unionism is much dwelt

on by Mr. Cole. Craft unionism ``unites in a single association those workers

who are engaged on a single industrial process, or on processes so nearly akin

that any one can do another's work.'' But ``organization may follow the lines,

not of the work done, but of the actual structure of industry. All workers

working at producing a particular kind of commodity may be organized in a

single Union. . . . The basis of organization would be neither the craft to

which a man belonged nor the employer under whom he worked, but the

service on which he was engaged. This is Industrial Unionism properly so

called.[28]

[28] ``World of Labour,'' pp. 212, 213.

Industrial unionism is a product of America, and from America it has to

some extent spread to Great Britain. It is the natural form of fighting

organization when the union is regarded as the means of carrying on the classwar with a view, not to obtaining this or that minor amelioration, but to a

radical revolution in the economic system. This is the point of view adopted

by the ``Industrial Workers of the World,'' commonly known as the I. W. W.

This organization more or less corresponds in America to what the C. G. T.

was in France before the war. The differences between the two are those due

to the different economic circumstances of the two countries, but their spirit

is closely analogous. The I. W. W. is not united as to the ultimate form which

it wishes society to take. There are Socialists, Anarchists and Syndicalists

among its members. But it is clear on the immediate practical issue, that the

class war is the fundamental reality in the present relations of labor and

capital, and that it is by industrial action, especially by the strike, that

emancipation must be sought. The I. W. W., like the C. G. T., is not nearly so

strong numerically as it is supposed to be by those who fear it. Its influence is

based, not upon its numbers, but upon its power of enlisting the sympathies

of the workers in moments of crisis.

  The labor movement in America has been characterized on both sides by

very great violence. Indeed, the Secretary of the C. G. T., Monsieur Jouhaux,

recognizes that the C. G. T. is mild in comparison with the I. W. W. ``The I.

W. W.,'' he says, ``preach a policy of militant action, very necessary in parts

of America, which would not do in France.''[29] A very interesting account of

it, from the point of view of an author who is neither wholly on the side of

labor nor wholly on the side of the capitalist, but disinterestedly anxious to

find some solution of the social question short of violence and revolution, is

the work of Mr. John Graham Brooks, called ``American Syndicalism: the I.

W.  W.''  (Macmillan,  1913).  American  labor  conditions  are  very  different

from those of Europe. In the first place, the power of the trusts is enormous;

the concentration of capital has in this respect proceeded more nearly on

Marxian lines in America than anywhere else. In the second place, the great

influx of foreign labor makes the whole problem quite different from any that

arises in Europe. The older skilled workers, largely American born, have long

been organized in the American Federation of Labor under Mr. Gompers.

These  represent  an  aristocracy  of  labor.  They  tend  to  work  with  the

employers against the great mass of unskilled immigrants, and they cannot be

regarded  as  forming  part  of  anything  that  could  be  truly  called  a  labor

movement.  ``There  are,''  says  Mr.  Cole,  ``now  in  America  two  working

classes,  with  different  standards  of  life,  and  both  are  at  present  almostimpotent in the face of the employers. Nor is it possible for these two classes

to unite or to put forward any demands. . . . The American Federation of

Labor  and  the  Industrial  Workers  of  the  World  represent  two  different

principles of combination; but they also represent two different classes of

labor.''[30]  The  I.  W.  W.  stands  for  industrial  unionism,  whereas  the

American Federation of Labor stands for craft unionism. The I. W. W. were

formed in 1905 by a union of organizations, chief among which was the

Western Federation of Miners, which dated from 1892. They suffered a split

by the loss of the followers of Deleon, who was the leader of the ``Socialist

Labor Party'' and advocated a ``Don't vote'' policy, while reprobating violent

methods. The headquarters of the party which he formed are at Detroit, and

those of the main body are at Chicago. The I. W. W., though it has a less

definite philosophy than French Syndicalism, is quite equally determined to

destroy the capitalist system. As its secretary has said: ``There is but one

bargain  the  I.  W.  W.  will  make  with  the  employing  class—  complete

surrender  of  all  control  of  industry  to  the  organized  workers.''[31]  Mr.

Haywood, of the Western Federation of Miners, is an out-and-out follower of

Marx so far as concerns the class war and the doctrine of surplus value. But,

like all who are in this movement, he attaches more importance to industrial

as against political action than do the European followers of Marx. This is no

doubt partly explicable by the special circumstances of America, where the

recent immigrants are apt to be voteless. The fourth convention of the I. W.

W. revised a preamble giving the general principles underlying its action.

``The working class and the employing class,'' they say, ``have nothing in

common. There can be no peace so long as hunger and want are found among

millions of the working people and the few, who make up the employing

class, have all the good things of life. Between these two classes, a struggle

must go on until the workers of the world organize as a class, take possession

of the earth and the machinery of production, and abolish the wage system. . .

. Instead of the conservative motto, `A fair day's wages for a fair day's work,'

we must inscribe on our banner the revolutionary watchword, `Abolition of

the wage system.' ''[32]

[29] Quoted in Cole, ib. p. 128.

  [30] Ib., p. 135.

  [31] Brooks, op. cit., p. 79.

  [32] Brooks, op. cit., pp. 86-87.  Numerous strikes have been conducted or encouraged by the I. W. W. and

the Western Federation of Miners. These strikes illustrate the class-war in a

more bitter and extreme form than is to be found in any other part of the

world. Both sides are always ready to resort to violence. The employers have

armies of their own and are able to call upon the Militia and even, in a crisis,

upon the United States Army. What French Syndicalists say about the State

as a capitalist institution is peculiarly true in America. In consequence of the

scandals thus arising, the Federal Government appointed a Commission on

Industrial Relations, whose Report, issued in 1915, reveals a state of affairs

such as it would be difficult to imagine in Great Britain. The report states that

``the greatest disorders and most of the outbreaks of violence in connection

with industrial `disputes arise from the violation of what are considered to be

fundamental rights, and from the perversion or subversion of governmental

institutions'' (p. 146). It mentions, among such perversions, the subservience

of the judiciary to the mili- tary authorities,[33] the fact that during a labor

dispute the life and liberty of every man within the State would seem to be at

the mercy of the Governor (p. 72), and the use of State troops in policing

strikes (p. 298). At Ludlow (Colorado) in 1914 (April 20) a battle of the

militia and the miners took place, in which, as the result of the fire of the

militia, a number of women and children were burned to death.[34] Many

other instances of pitched battles could be given, but enough has been said to

show the peculiar character of labor disputes in the United States. It may, I

fear, be presumed that this character will remain so long as a very large

proportion of labor consists of recent immigrants. When these difficulties

pass away, as they must sooner or later, labor will more and more find its

place in the community, and will tend to feel and inspire less of the bitter

hostility which renders the more extreme forms of class war possible. When

  that time comes, the labor movement in America will probably begin to

take on forms similar to those of Europe.

[33] Although uniformly held that the writ of habeas corpus can only be

suspended by the legislature, in these labor disturbances the executive has in

fact suspended or disregarded the writ. . . . In cases arising from labor

agitations, the judiciary has uniformly upheld the power exercised by the

military, and in no case has there been any protest against the use of such

power or any attempt to curtail it, except in Montana, where the conviction of

a civilian by military commission was annulled'' (``Final Report of the

Commission on Industrial Relations'' (1915) appointed by the United StatesCongress,'' p. 58).

  [34] Literary Digest, May 2 and May 16, 1914.

  Meanwhile, though the forms are different, the aims are very similar, and

industrial unionism, spreading from America, has had a considerable

influence in Great Britain—an influence naturally reinforced by that of

French Syndicalism. It is clear, I think, that the adoption of industrial rather

than craft unionism is absolutely necessary if Trade Unionism is to succeed

in playing that part in altering the economic structure of society which its

advocates claim for it rather than for the political parties. Industrial unionism

organizes men, as craft unionism does not, in accordance with the enemy

whom they have to fight. English unionism is still very far removed from the

industrial form, though certain industries, especially the railway men, have

gone very far in this direction, and it is notable that the railway men are

peculiarly sympathetic to Syndicalism and industrial unionism.

  Pure Syndicalism, however, is not very likely to achieve wide popularity

in  Great  Britain.  Its  spirit  is  too  revolutionary  and  anarchistic  for  our

temperament. It is in the modified form of Guild Socialism that the ideas

derived from the C. G. T. and the I. W. W. are tending to bear fruit.[35] This

movement is as yet in its infancy and has no great hold upon the rank and

file, but it is being ably advocated by a group of young men, and is rapidly

gaining ground among those who will form Labor opinion in years to come.

The power of the State has been so much increased during the war that those

who naturally dislike things as they are, find it more and more difficult to

believe  that  State  omnipotence  can  be  the  road  to  the  millennium.  Guild

Socialists aim at autonomy in industry, with consequent curtailment, but not

abolition, of the power of the State. The system which they advocate is, I

believe, the best hitherto proposed, and the one most likely to secure liberty

without the constant appeals to violence which are to be feared under a purely

Anarchist regime.

  [35]  The  ideas  of  Guild  Socialism  were  first  set  forth  in  ``National

Guilds,'' edited by A. R. Orage (Bell & Sons, 1914), and in Cole's ``World of

Labour'' (Bell & Sons), first published in 1913. Cole's ``Self-Government in

Industry'' (Bell & Sons, 1917) and Rickett & Bechhofer's ``The Meaning of

National Guilds'' (Palmer & Hayward, 1918) should also be read, as well as

various pamphlets published by the National Guilds League. The attitude of

the Syndicalists to Guild Socialism is far from sympathetic. An article in``The Syndicalist'' for February, 1914, speaks of it in the following terms: a

Middle-class of the middle-class, with all the shortcomings (we had almost

said `stupidities') of the middle- classes writ large across it, `Guild Socialism'

stands forth as the latest lucubration of the middle-class mind. It is a `cool

steal' of the leading ideas of Syndicalism and a deliberate perversion of them.

. . . We do protest against the `State' idea . . . in Guild Socialism. Middle-

class people, even when they become Socialists, cannot get rid of the idea

that  the  working-class  is  their  `inferior';  that  the  workers  need  to  be

`educated,'  drilled,  disciplined,  and  generally  nursed  for  a  very  long  time

before they will be able to walk by themselves. The very reverse is actually

the truth. . . . It is just the plain truth when we say that the ordinary wage-

worker, of average intelligence, is better capable of taking care of himself

than the half-educated middle-class man who wants to advise him. He knows

how to make the wheels of the world go round.''

The first pamphlet of the ``National Guilds League'' sets forth their main

principles. In industry each factory is to be free to control its own methods of

production by means of elected managers. The different factories in a given

industry are to be federated into a National Guild which will deal with

marketing and the general interests of the industry as a whole. ``The State

would own the means of production as trustee for the community; the Guilds

would manage them, also as trustees for the community, and would pay to the

State a single tax or rent. Any Guild that chose to set its own interests above

those of the community would be violating its trust, and would have to bow

to the judgment of a tribunal equally representing the whole body of

producers and the whole body of consumers. This Joint Committee would be

the ultimate sovereign body, the ultimate appeal court of industry. It would

fix not only Guild taxation, but also standard prices, and both taxation and

prices would be periodically readjusted by it.'' Each Guild will be entirely

free to apportion what it receives among its members as it chooses, its

members being all those who work in the industry which it covers. ``The

distribution of this collective Guild income among the members seems to be

a matter for each Guild to decide for itself. Whether the Guilds would, sooner

or later, adopt the principle of equal payment for every member, is open to

discussion.'' Guild Socialism accepts from Syndicalism the view that liberty

is not to be secured by making the State the employer: ``The State and the

Municipality as employers have turned out not to differ essentially from theprivate capitalist.'' Guild Socialists regard the State as consisting of the

community in their capacity as consumers, while the Guilds will represent

them in their capacity as producers; thus Parliament and the Guild Congress

will be two co-equal powers representing consumers and producers

respectively. Above both will be the joint Committee of Parliament and the

Guild Congress for deciding matters involving the interests of consumers and

producers alike. The view of the Guild Socialists is that State Socialism takes

account of men only as consumers, while Syndicalism takes account of them

only as producers. ``The problem,'' say the Guild Socialists, ``is to reconcile

the two points of view. That is what advocates of National Guilds set out to

do. The Syndicalist has claimed everything for the industrial organizations of

producers, the Collectivist everything for the territorial or political

organizations of consumers. Both are open to the same criticism; you cannot

reconcile two points of view merely by denying one of them.''[36] But

although Guild Socialism represents an attempt at readjustment between two

equally legitimate points of view, its impulse and force are derived from what

it has taken over from Syndicalism. Like Syndicalism; it desires not primarily

to make work better paid, but to secure this result along with others by

making it in itself more interesting and more democratic in organization.

[36] The above quotations are all from the first pamphlet of the National

Guilds League, ``National Guilds, an Appeal to Trade Unionists.''

  Capitalism has made of work a purely commercial activity, a soulless and a

joyless thing. But substitute the national service of the Guilds for the

profiteering of the few; substitute responsible labor for a saleable commodity;

substitute self-government and decentralization for the bureaucracy and

demoralizing hugeness of the modern State and the modern joint stock

company; and then it may be just once more to speak of a ``joy in labor,'' and

once more to hope that men may be proud of quality and not only of quantity

in their work. There is a cant of the Middle Ages, and a cant of ``joy in

labor,'' but it were better, perhaps, to risk that cant than to reconcile ourselves

forever to the philosophy of Capitalism and of Collectivism, which declares

that work is a necessary evil never to be made pleasant, and that the workers'

only hope is a leisure which shall be longer, richer, and well adorned with

municipal amenities.[37]

[37] ``The Guild Idea,'' No. 2 of the Pamphlets of the National Guilds

League, p. 17.

  Whatever may be thought of the practicability of Syndicalism, there is nodoubt that the ideas which it has put into the world have done a great deal to

revive the labor movement and to recall it to certain things of fundamental

importance which it had been in danger of forgetting. Syndicalists consider

man as producer rather than consumer. They are more concerned to procure

freedom in work than to increase material well-being. They have revived the

quest for liberty, which was growing somewhat dimmed under the regime of

Parliamentary Socialism, and they have reminded men that what our modern

society needs is not a little tinkering here and there, nor the kind of minor

readjustments to which the existing holders of power may readily consent,

but a fundamental reconstruction, a sweeping away of all the sources of

oppression, a liberation of men's constructive energies, and a wholly new way

of conceiving and regulating production and economic relations. This merit is

so great that, in view of it, all minor defects become insignificant, and this

merit Syndicalism will continue to possess even if, as a definite movement, it

should be found to have passed away with the war.

                                         PART II

                      PROBLEMS OF THE FUTURE

                                     CHAPTER IV

                                WORK AND PAY

THE man who seeks to create a better order of society has two resistances

to contend with: one that of Nature, the other that of his fellow-men. Broadly

speaking, it is science that deals with the resistance of Nature, while politics

and social organization are the methods of overcoming the resistance of men.

  The ultimate fact in economics is that Nature only yields commodities as

the result of labor. The necessity of SOME labor for the satisfaction of our

wants  is  not  imposed  by  political  systems  or  by  the  exploitation  of  the

working classes; it is due to physical laws, which the reformer, like everyone

else, must admit and study. Before any optimistic economic project can be

accepted as feasible, we must examine whether the physical conditions of

production impose an unalterable veto, or whether they are capable of being

sufficiently modified by science and organization. Two connected doctrines

must be considered in examining this question: First, Malthus' doctrine of

population; and second, the vaguer, but very prevalent, view that any surplus

above the bare necessaries of life can only be produced if most men work

long hours at monotonous or painful tasks, leaving little leisure for a civilized

existence or rational enjoyment. I do not believe that either of these obstacles

to  optimism  will  survive  a  close  scrutiny.  The  possibility  of  technical

improvement in the methods of production is, I believe, so great that, at any

rate for centuries to come, there will be no inevitable barrier to progress in

the  general  well-being  by  the  simultaneous  increase  of  commodities  and

diminution of hours of labor.

  This subject has been specially studied by Kropotkin, who, whatever may

be  thought  of  his  general  theories  of  politics,  is  remarkably  instructive,

concrete  and  convincing  in  all  that  he  says  about  the  possibilities  of

agriculture. Socialists and Anarchists in the main are products of industrial

life, and few among them have any practical knowledge on the subject of

food  production.  But  Kropotkin  is  an  exception.  His  two  books,  ``The

Conquest of Bread'' and ``Fields, Factories and Workshops,'' are very full of

detailed information, and, even making great allowances for an optimistic

bias, I do not think it can be denied that they demonstrate possibilities in

which few of us would otherwise have believed.

  Malthus contended, in effect, that population always tends to increase upto  the  limit  of  subsistence,  that  the  production  of  food  becomes  more

expensive as its amount is increased, and that therefore, apart from short

exceptional periods when new discoveries produce temporary alleviations,

the  bulk  of  mankind  must  always  be  at  the  lowest  level  consistent  with

survival and reproduction. As applied to the civilized races of the world, this

doctrine is becoming untrue through the rapid decline in the birth-rate; but,

apart from this decline, there are many other reasons why the doctrine cannot

be accepted, at any rate as regards the near future. The century which elapsed

after Malthus wrote, saw a very great increase in the standard of comfort

throughout the wage-earning classes, and, owing to the enormous increase in

the productivity of labor, a far greater rise in the standard of comfort could

have been effected if a more just system of distribution had been introduced.

In former times, when one man's labor produced not very much more than

was needed for one man's subsistence, it was impossible either greatly to

reduce the normal hours of labor, or greatly to increase the proportion of the

population who enjoyed more than the bare necessaries of life. But this state

of  affairs  has  been  overcome  by  modern  methods  of  production.  At  the

present  moment,  not  only  do  many  people  enjoy  a  comfortable  income

derived from rent or interest, but about half the population of most of the

civilized  countries  in  the  world  is  engaged,  not  in  the  production  of

commodities, but in fighting or in manufacturing munitions of war. In a time

of peace the whole of this half might be kept in idleness without making the

other half poorer than they would have been if the war had continued, and if,

instead of being idle, they were productively employed, the whole of what

they  would  produce  would  be  a  divisible  surplus  over  and  above  present

wages. The present productivity of labor in Great Britain would suffice to

produce an income of about 1 pound per day for each family, even without

any  of  those  improvements  in  methods  which  are  obviously  immediately

possible.

  But,  it  will  be  said,  as  population  increases,  the  price  of  food  must

ultimately increase also as the sources of supply in Canada, the Argentine,

Australia and elsewhere are more and more used up. There must come a time,

so pessimists will urge, when food becomes so dear that the ordinary wage-

earner will have little surplus for expenditure upon other things. It may be

admitted that this would be true in some very distant future if the population

were to continue to increase without limit. If the whole surface of the worldwere as densely populated as London is now, it would, no doubt, require

almost the whole labor of the population to produce the necessary food from

the few spaces remaining for agriculture. But there is no reason to suppose

that the population will continue to increase indefinitely, and in any case the

prospect is so remote that it may be ignored in all practical considerations.

  Returning from these dim speculations to the facts set forth by Kropotkin,

we find it proved in his writings that, by methods of intensive cultivation,

which are already in actual operation, the amount of food produced on a

given  area  can  be  increased  far  beyond  anything  that  most  uninformed

persons suppose possible. Speaking of the market-gardeners in Great Britain,

in the neighborhood of Paris, and in other places, he says:—

They have created a totally new agriculture. They smile when we boast

about the rotation system having permitted us to take from the field one crop

every year, or four crops each three years, because their ambition is to have

six and nine crops from the very same plot of land during the twelve months.

They do not understand our talk about good and bad soils, because they make

the soil themselves, and make it in such quantities as to be compelled yearly

to sell some of it; otherwise it would raise up the level of their gardens by

half an inch every year. They aim at cropping, not five or six tons of grass on

the acre, as we do, but from 50 to 100 tons of various vegetables on the same

space; not 5 pound sworth of hay, but 100 pounds worth of vegetables, of the

plainest description, cabbage and carrots.[38]

[38] Kropotkin, ``Fields, Factories and Workshops,'' p. 74.

As regards cattle, he mentions that Mr. Champion at Whitby grows on each

acre the food of two or three head of cattle, whereas under ordinary high

farming it takes two or three acres to keep each head of cattle in Great

Britain. Even more astonishing are the achievements of the Culture

Maraicheres round Paris. It is impossible to summarize these achievements,

but we may note the general conclusion:—

There are now practical Maraichers who venture to maintain that if all the

food, animal and vegetable, necessary for the 3,500,000 inhabitants of the

Departments of Seine and Seine-et-Oise had to be grown on their own

territory (3250 square miles), it could be grown without resorting to any other

methods of culture than those already in use—methods already tested on a

large scale and proved successful.[39]

[39] Ib. p. 81.

It must be remembered that these two departments include the wholepopulation of Paris.

  Kropotkin proceeds to point out methods by which the same result could

be achieved without long hours of labor. Indeed, he contends that the great

bulk  of  agricultural  work  could  be  carried  on  by  people  whose  main

occupations are sedentary, and with only such a number of hours as would

serve  to  keep  them  in  health  and  produce  a  pleasant  diversification.  He

protests against the theory of exces- sive division of labor. What he wants is

INTEGRATION,  ``a  society  where  each  individual  is  a  producer  of  both

manual and intellectual work; where each able- bodied human being is a

worker, and where each worker works both in the field and in the industrial

workshop.''[40]

[40] Kropotkin, ``Field, Factories, and Workshops,'' p. 6.

These views as to production have no essential connection with Kropotkin's

advocacy of Anarchism. They would be equally possible under State

Socialism, and under certain circumstances they might even be carried out in

a capitalistic regime. They are important for our present purpose, not from

any argument which they afford in favor of one economic system as against

another, but from the fact that they remove the veto upon our hopes which

might otherwise result from a doubt as to the productive capacity of labor. I

have dwelt upon agriculture rather than industry, since it is in regard to

agriculture that the difficulties are chiefly supposed to arise. Broadly

speaking, industrial production tends to be cheaper when it is carried on on a

large scale, and therefore there is no reason in industry why an increase in the

demand should lead to an increased cost of supply.

  Passing now from the purely technical and material side of the problem of

production, we come to the human factor, the motives leading men to work,

the possibilities of efficient organization of production, and the connection of

production with distribution. Defenders of the existing system maintain that

efficient work would be impossible without the economic stimulus, and that

if the wage system were abolished men would cease to do enough work to

keep the community in tolerable comfort. Through the alleged necessity of

the economic motive, the problems of production and distribution become

intertwined. The desire for a more just distribution of the world's goods is the

main  inspiration  of  most  Socialism  and  Anarchism.  We  must,  therefore,

consider whether the system of distribution which they propose would be

likely to lead to a diminished production.  There is a fundamental difference between Socialism and Anarchism as

regards  the  question  of  distribution.  Socialism,  at  any  rate  in  most  of  its

forms, would retain payment for work done or for willingness to work, and,

except in the case of persons incapacitated by age or infirmity, would make

willingness to work a condition of subsistence, or at any rate of subsistence

above a certain very low minimum. Anarchism, on the other hand, aims at

granting to everyone, without any conditions whatever, just as much of all

ordinary commodities as he or she may care to consume, while the rarer com-

modities, of which the supply cannot easily be indefinitely increased, would

be  rationed  and  divided  equally  among  the  population.  Thus  Anarchism

would not impose any OBLIGATIONS of work, though Anarchists believe

that the necessary work could be made sufficiently agreeable for the vast

majority of the population to undertake it voluntarily. Socialists, on the other

hand,  would  exact  work.  Some  of  them  would  make  the  incomes  of  all

workers equal, while others would retain higher pay for the work which is

considered more valuable. All these different systems are compatible with the

common ownership of land and capital, though they differ greatly as regards

the kind of society which they would produce.

  Socialism with inequality of income would not differ greatly as regards

the  economic  stimulus  to  work  from  the  society  in  which  we  live.  Such

differences as it would entail would undoubtedly be to the good from our

present point of view. Under the existing system many people enjoy idleness

and affluence through the mere accident of inheriting land or capital. Many

others, through their activities in industry or finance, enjoy an income which

is certainly very far in excess of anything to which their social utility entitles

them. On the other hand, it often happens that inventors and discoverers,

whose work has the very greatest social utility, are robbed of their reward

either by capitalists or by the failure of the public to appreciate their work

until too late. The better paid work is only open to those who have been able

to afford an expensive training, and these men are selected in the main not by

merit but by luck. The wage earner is not paid for his willingness to work, but

only for his utility to the employer. Consequently, he may be plunged into

destitution  by  causes  over  which  he  has  no  control.  Such  destitution  is  a

constant fear, and when it occurs it produces undeserved suffering, and often

deterioration in the social value of the sufferer. These are a few among the

evils of our existing system from the standpoint of production. All these evilswe might expect to see remedied under any system of Socialism.

  There  are  two  questions  which  need  to  be  considered  when  we  are

discussing how far work requires the economic motive. The first question is:

Must society give higher pay for the more skilled or socially more valuable

work, if such work is to be done in sufficient quantities? The second question

is: Could work be made so attractive that enough of it would be done even if

idlers  received  just  as  much  of  the  produce  of  work?  The  first  of  these

questions concerns the division between two schools of Socialists: the more

moderate Socialists sometimes concede that even under Socialism it would

be well to retain unequal pay for different kinds of work, while the more

thoroughgoing Socialists advocate equal incomes for all workers. The second

question,  on  the  other  hand,  forms  a  division  between  Socialists  and

Anarchists; the latter would not deprive a man of commodities if he did not

work, while the former in general would.

  Our second question is so much more fundamental than our first that it

must be discussed at once, and in the course of this discussion what needs to

be said on our first question will find its place naturally.

  Wages or Free Sharing?—``Abolition of the wages system'' is one of the

watchwords common to Anarchists and advanced Socialists. But in its most

natural sense it is a watchword to which only the Anarchists have a right. In

the Anarchist conception of society all the commoner commodities will be

available to everyone without stint, in the kind of way in which water is

available at present.[41] Advo- cates of this system point out that it applies

already to many things which formerly had to be paid for, e.g., roads and

bridges. They point out that it might very easily be extended to trams and

local  trains.  They  proceed  to  argue—as  Kropotkin  does  by  means  of  his

proofs that the soil might be made indefinitely more productive—that all the

commoner kinds of food could be given away to all who demanded them,

since it would be easy to produce them in quantities adequate to any possible

demand. If this system were extended to all the necessaries of life, everyone's

bare livelihood would be secured, quite regardless of the way in which he

might  choose  to  spend  his  time.  As  for  commodities  which  cannot  be

produced in indefinite quantities, such as luxuries and delicacies, they also,

according to the Anarchists, are to be distributed without payment, but on a

system  of  rations,  the  amount  available  being  divided  equally  among  the

population. No doubt, though this is not said, something like a price will haveto be put upon these luxuries, so that a man may be free to choose how he

will take his share: one man will prefer good wine, another the finest Havana

cigars, another pictures or beautiful furniture. Presumably, every man will be

allowed to take such luxuries as are his due in whatever form he prefers, the

relative prices being fixed so as to equalize the demand. In such a world as

this, the economic stimulus to production will have wholly disappeared, and

if work is to continue it must be from other motives.[42]

[41] ``Notwithstanding the egotistic turn given to the public mind by the

merchant-production of our century, the Communist tendency is continually

reasserting itself and trying to make its way into public life. The penny bridge

disappears before the public bridge; and the turnpike road before the free

road. The same spirit pervades thousands of other institutions. Museums, free

libraries, and free public schools; parks and pleasure grounds; paved and

lighted streets, free for everybody's use; water supplied to private dwellings,

with a growing tendency towards disregarding the exact amount of it used by

the individual, tramways and railways which have already begun to introduce

the season ticket or the uniform tax, and will surely go much further on this

line when they are no longer private property: all these are tokens showing in

what direction further progress is to be expected.''—Kropotkin, ``Anarchist

Communism.''

  [42] An able discussion of this question, at of various others, from the

standpoint of reasoned and temperate opposition to Anarchism, will be found

in Alfred Naquet's ``L'Anarchie et le Collectivisme,'' Paris, 1904.

Is such a system possible? First, is it technically possible to provide the

necessaries of life in such large quantities as would be needed if every man

and woman could take as much of them from the public stores as he or she

might desire?

  The idea of purchase and payment is so familiar that the proposal to do

away with it must be thought at first fantastic. Yet I do not believe it is nearly

so fantastic as it seems. Even if we could all have bread for nothing, we

should not want more than a quite limited amount. As things are, the cost of

bread  to  the  rich  is  so  small  a  proportion  of  their  income  as  to  afford

practically no check upon their consumption; yet the amount of bread that

they consume could easily be supplied to the whole population by improved

methods of agriculture (I am not speaking of war-time). The amount of food

that people desire has natural limits, and the waste that would be incurredwould probably not be very great. As the Anarchists point out, people at

present enjoy an unlimited water supply but very few leave the taps running

when  they  are  not  using  them.  And  one  may  assume  that  public  opinion

would be opposed to excessive waste. We may lay it down, I think, that the

principle of unlimited supply could be adopted in regard to all commodities

for  which  the  demand  has  limits  that  fall  short  of  what  can  be  easily

produced.  And  this  would  be  the  case,  if  production  were  efficiently

organized, with the necessaries of life, including not only commodities, but

also  such  things  as  education.  Even  if  all  education  were  free  up  to  the

highest,  young  people,  unless  they  were  radically  transformed  by  the

Anarchist regime, would not want more than a certain amount of it. And the

same applies to plain foods, plain clothes, and the rest of the things that

supply our elementary needs.

  I think we may conclude that there is no technical impossibility in the

Anarchist plan of free sharing.

  But would the necessary work be done if the individual were assured of

the general standard of comfort even though he did no work?

  Most  people  will  answer  this  question  unhesitatingly  in  the  negative.

Those  employers  in  particular  who  are  in  the  habit  of  denouncing  their

employes as a set of lazy, drunken louts, will feel quite certain that no work

could be got out of them except under threat of dismissal and consequent

starvation. But is this as certain as people are inclined to sup- pose at first

sight? If work were to remain what most work is now, no doubt it would be

very hard to induce people to undertake it except from fear of destitution. But

there is no reason why work should remain the dreary drudgery in horrible

conditions that most of it is now.[43] If men had to be tempted to work

instead of driven to it, the obvious interest of the community would be to

make work pleasant. So long as work is not made on the whole pleasant, it

cannot be said that anything like a good state of society has been reached. Is

the painfulness of work unavoidable?

[43] ``Overwork is repulsive to human nature—not work. Overwork for

supplying the few with luxury—not work for the well- being of all. Work,

labor, is a physiological necessity, a necessity of spending accumulated

bodily energy, a necessity which is health and life itself. If so many branches

of useful work are so reluctantly done now, it is merely because they mean

overwork, or they are improperly organized. But we know—old Franklinknew it—that four hours of useful work every day would be more than

sufficient for supplying everybody with the comfort of a moderately well-to-

do middle-class house, if we all gave ourselves to productive work, and if we

did not waste our productive powers as we do waste them now. As to the

childish question, repeated for fifty years: `Who would do disagreeable

work?' frankly I regret that none of our savants has ever been brought to do it,

be it for only one day in his life. If there is still work which is really

disagreeable in itself, it is only because our scientific men have never cared to

consider the means of rendering it less so: they have always known that there

were plenty of starving men who would do it for a few pence a day.''

Kropotkin, ```Anarchist Communism.''

At present, the better paid work, that of the business and professional

classes, is for the most part enjoyable. I do not mean that every separate

moment is agreeable, but that the life of a man who has work of this sort is on

the whole happier than that of a man who enjoys an equal income without

doing any work. A certain amount of effort, and something in the nature of a

continuous career, are necessary to vigorous men if they are to preserve their

mental health and their zest for life. A considerable amount of work is done

without pay. People who take a rosy view of human nature might have

supposed that the duties of a magistrate would be among disagreeable trades,

like cleaning sewers; but a cynic might contend that the pleasures of

vindictiveness and moral superiority are so great that there is no difficulty in

finding well-to-do elderly gentlemen who are willing, without pay, to send

helpless wretches to the torture of prison. And apart from enjoyment of the

work itself, desire for the good opinion of neighbors and for the feeling of

effectiveness is quite sufficient to keep many men active.

  But, it will be said, the sort of work that a man would voluntarily choose

must always be exceptional: the great bulk of necessary work can never be

anything but painful. Who would choose, if an easy life were otherwise open

to him, to be a coal-miner, or a stoker on an Atlantic liner? I think it must be

conceded that much necessary work must always remain disagreeable or at

least  painfully  monotonous,  and  that  special  privileges  will  have  to  be

accorded to those who undertake it, if the Anarchist system is ever to be

made  workable.  It  is  true  that  the  introduction  of  such  special  privileges

would  somewhat  mar  the  rounded  logic  of  Anarchism,  but  it  need  not,  I

think, make any really vital breach in its system. Much of the work that needs

doing could be rendered agreeable, if thought and care were given to thisobject. Even now it is often only long hours that make work irksome. If the

normal hours of work were reduced to, say, four, as they could be by better

organization and more scientific methods, a very great deal of work which is

now felt as a burden would quite cease to be so. If, as Kropotkin suggests,

agricultural  work,  instead  of  being  the  lifelong  drudgery  of  an  ignorant

laborer  living  very  near  the  verge  of  abject  poverty,  were  the  occasional

occupation of men and women normally employed in industry or brain-work;

if, instead of being conducted by ancient traditional methods, without any

possibility of intelligent participation by the wage- earner, it were alive with

the  search  for  new  methods  and  new  inventions,  filled  with  the  spirit  of

freedom, and inviting the mental as well as the physical cooperation of those

who do the work, it might become a joy instead of a weariness, and a source

of health and life to those engaged in it.

  What is true of agriculture is said by Anarchists to be equally true of

industry. They maintain that if the great economic organizations which are

now managed by capitalists, without consideration for the lives of the wage-

earners beyond what Trade Unions are able to exact, were turned gradually

into  self-governing  communities,  in  which  the  producers  could  decide  all

questions of methods, conditions, hours of work, and so forth, there would be

an almost boundless change for the better: grime and noise might be nearly

eliminated, the hideousness of industrial regions might be turned into beauty,

the  interest  in  the  scientific  aspects  of  production  might  become  diffused

among  all  producers  with  any  native  intelligence,  and  something  of  the

artist's joy in creation might inspire the whole of the work. All this, which is

at present utterly remote from the reality, might be produced by economic

self-government.  We  may  concede  that  by  such  means  a  very  large

proportion  of  the  necessary  work  of  the  world  could  ultimately  be  made

sufficiently agreeable to be preferred before idleness even by men whose bare

livelihood would be assured whether they worked or not. As to the residue let

us  admit  that  special  rewards,  whether  in  goods  or  honors  or  privileges,

would have to be given to those who undertook it. But this need not cause

any fundamental objection.

  There would, of course, be a certain proportion of the population who

would  prefer  idleness.  Provided  the  proportion  were  small,  this  need  not

matter. And among those who would be classed as idlers might be included

artists,  writers  of  books,  men  devoted  to  abstract  intellectual  pursuits—inshort, all those whom society despises while they are alive and honors when

they  are  dead.  To  such  men,  the  possibility  of  pursuing  their  own  work

regardless  of  any  public  recognition  of  its  utility  would  be  invaluable.

Whoever  will  observe  how  many  of  our  poets  have  been  men  of  private

means  will  realize  how  much  poetic  capacity  must  have  remained

undeveloped through poverty; for it would be absurd to suppose that the rich

are better endowed by nature with the capacity for poetry. Freedom for such

men, few as they are, must be set against the waste of the mere idlers.

  So far, we have set forth the arguments in favor of the Anarchist plan.

They are, to my mind, sufficient to make it seem possible that the plan might

succeed, but not sufficient to make it so probable that it would be wise to try

it.

  The  question  of  the  feasibility  of  the  Anarchist  proposals  in  regard  to

distribution  is,  like  so  many  other  questions,  a  quantitative  one.  The

Anarchist  proposals  consist  of  two  parts:  (1)  That  all  the  common

commodities  should  be  supplied  ad  lib.  to  all  applicants;  (2)  That  no

obligation  to  work,  or  economic  reward  for  work,  should  be  imposed  on

anyone. These two proposals are not necessarily inseparable, nor does either

entail  the  whole  system  of  Anarchism,  though  without  them  Anarchism

would hardly be possible. As regards the first of these proposals, it can be

carried  out  even  now  with  regard  to  some  commodities,  and  it  could  be

carried out in no very distant future with regard to many more. It is a flexible

plan, since this or that article of consumption could be placed on the free list

or  taken  of  as  circumstances  might  dictate.  Its  advantages  are  many  and

various, and the practice of the world tends to develop in this direction. I

think we may conclude that this part of the Anarchists' system might well be

adopted bit by bit, reaching gradually the full extension that they desire.

  But as regards the second proposal, that there should be no obligation to

work, and no economic reward for work, the matter is much more doubtful.

Anarchists  always  assume  that  if  their  schemes  were  put  into  operation

practically everyone would work; but although there is very much more to be

said for this view than most people would concede at first sight, yet it is

questionable whether there is enough to be said to make it true for practical

purposes.  Perhaps,  in  a  community  where  industry  had  become  habitual

through economic pressure, public opinion might be sufficiently powerful to

compel most men to work;[44] but it is always doubtful how far such a stateof things would be permanent. If public opinion is to be really effective, it

will be necessary to have some method of dividing the community into small

groups, and to allow each group to consume only the equivalent of what it

produces. This will make the economic motive operative upon the group,

which, since we are supposing it small, will feel that its collective share is

appreciably  diminished  by  each  idle  individual.  Such  a  system  might  be

feasible, but it would be contrary to the whole spirit of Anarchism and would

destroy the main lines of its economic system.

[44] ``As to the so-often repeated objection that nobody would labor if he

were not compelled to do so by sheer necessity, we heard enough of it before

the emancipation of slaves in America, as well as before the emancipation of

serfs in Russia; and we have had the opportunity of appreciating it at its just

value. So we shall not try to convince those who can be convinced only by

accomplished facts. As to those who reason, they ought to know that, if it

really was so with some parts of humanity at its lowest stages—and yet, what

do we know about it?—or if it is so with some small communities, or

separate individuals, brought to sheer despair by ill-success in their struggle

against unfavorable conditions, it is not so with the bulk of the civilized

nations. With us, work is a habit, and idleness an artificial growth.''

Kropotkin, ``Anarchist Communism,'' p. 30.

The attitude of orthodox Socialism on this question is quite different from

that of Anarchism.[45] Among the more immediate measures advocated in

the ``Communist Manifesto'' is ``equal liability of all to labor. Establishment

of industrial armies, especially for agriculture.'' The Socialist theory is that, in

general, work alone gives the right to the enjoyment of the produce of work.

To this theory there will, of course, be exceptions: the old and the very

young, the infirm and those whose work is temporarily not required through

no fault of their own. But the fundamental conception of Socialism, in regard

to our present question, is that all who can should be compelled to work,

either by the threat of starvation or by the operation of the criminal law. And,

of course, the only kind of work recognized will be such as commends itself

to the authorities. Writing books against Socialism, or against any theory

embodied in the government of the day, would certainly not be recognized as

work. No more would the painting of pictures in a different style from that of

the Royal Academy, or producing plays unpleasing to the censor. Any new

line of thought would be banned, unless by influence or corruption the

thinker could crawl into the good graces of the pundits. These results are notforeseen by Socialists, because they imagine that the Socialist State will be

governed by men like those who now advocate it. This is, of course, a

delusion. The rulers of the State then will bear as little resemblance to the

pres- ent Socialists as the dignitaries of the Church after the time of

Constantine bore to the Apostles. The men who advocate an unpopular

reform are exceptional in disinterestedness and zeal for the public good; but

those who hold power after the reform has been carried out are likely to

belong, in the main, to the ambitious executive type which has in all ages

possessed itself of the government of nations. And this type has never shown

itself tolerant of opposition or friendly to freedom.

[45] ``While holding this synthetic view on production, the Anarchists

cannot consider, like the Collectivists, that a remuneration which would be

proportionate to the hours of labor spent by each person in the production of

riches may be an ideal, or even an approach to an ideal, society.'' Kropotkin,

``Anarchist Communism,'' p. 20.

It would seem, then, that if the Anarchist plan has its dangers, the Socialist

plan has at least equal dangers. It is true that the evils we have been

foreseeing under Socialism exist at present, but the purpose of Socialists is to

cure the evils of the world as it is; they cannot be content with the argument

that they would make things no worse.

  Anarchism has the advantage as regards liberty,

Socialism as regards the inducements to work. Can

we not find a method of combining these two advantages?

It seems to me that we can.

  We saw that, provided most people work in moderation, and their work is

rendered as productive as science and organization can make it, there is no

good reason why the necessaries of life should not be supplied freely to all.

Our  only  serious  doubt  was  as  to  whether,  in  an  Anarchist  regime,  the

motives for work would be sufficiently powerful to prevent a dan- gerously

large  amount  of  idleness.  But  it  would  be  easy  to  decree  that,  though

necessaries should be free to all, whatever went beyond necessaries should

only be given to those who were willing to work—not, as is usual at present,

only to those in work at any moment, but also to all those who, when they

happened not to be working, were idle through no fault of their own. We find

at  present  that  a  man  who  has  a  small  income  from  investments,  just

sufficient to keep him from actual want, almost always prefers to find somepaid work in order to be able to afford luxuries. So it would be, presumably,

in such a community as we are imagining. At the same time, the man who felt

a vocation for some unrecognized work of art or science or thought would be

free to follow his desire, provided he were willing to ``scorn delights and live

laborious  days.''  And  the  comparatively  small  number  of  men  with  an

invincible horror of work—the sort of men who now become tramps— might

lead  a  harmless  existence,  without  any  grave  danger  of  their  becoming

sufficiently numerous to be a serious burden upon the more industrious. In

this ways the claims of freedom could be combined with the need of some

economic stimulus to work. Such a system, it seems to me, would have a far

greater  chance  of  success  than  either  pure  Anarchism  or  pure  orthodox

Socialism.

  Stated  in  more  familiar  terms,  the  plan  we  are  advocating  amounts

essentially  to  this:  that  a  certain  small  income,  sufficient  for  necessaries,

should be secured to all, whether they work or not, and that a larger income,

as much larger as might be warranted by the total amount of commodities

produced, should be given to those who are willing to engage in some work

which  the  community  recognizes  as  useful.  On  this  basis  we  may  build

further. I do not think it is always necessary to pay more highly work which

is more skilled or regarded as socially more useful, since such work is more

interesting and more respected than ordinary work, and will therefore often

be preferred by those who are able to do it. But we might, for instance, give

an intermediate income to those who are only willing to work half the usual

number of hours, and an income above that of most workers to those who

choose a specially disagreeable trade. Such a system is perfectly compatible

with Socialism, though perhaps hardly with Anarchism. Of its advantages we

shall have more to say at a later stage. For the present I am content to urge

that  it  combines  freedom  with  justice,  and  avoids  those  dangers  to  the

community  which  we  have  found  to  lurk  both  in  the  proposals  of  the

Anarchists and in those of orthodox Socialists.

                                       CHAPTER V

                        GOVERNMENT AND LAW

  GOVERNMENT and Law, in their very essence, consist of restrictions on

freedom, and freedom is the greatest of political goods.[46] A hasty reasoner

might conclude without further ado that Law and government are evils which

must be abolished if freedom is our goal. But this consequence, true or false,

cannot be proved so simply. In this chapter we shall examine the arguments

of Anarchists against law and the State. We shall proceed on the assumption

that freedom is the supreme aim of a good social system; but on this very

basis we shall find the Anarchist contentions very questionable.

[46] I do not say freedom is the greatest of ALL goods: the best things

come from within—they are such things as creative art, and love, and

thought. Such things can be helped or hindered by political conditions, but

not actually produced by them; and freedom is, both in itself and in its

relation to these other goods the best thing that political and economic

conditions can secure.

Respect for the liberty of others is not a natural impulse with most men:

envy and love of power lead ordinary human nature to find pleasure in

interferences with the lives of others. If all men's actions were wholly

unchecked by external authority, we should not obtain a world in which all

men would be free. The strong would oppress the weak, or the majority

would oppress the minority, or the lovers of violence would oppress the more

peaceable people. I fear it cannot be said that these bad impulses are

WHOLLY due to a bad social system, though it must be conceded that the

present competitive organization of society does a great deal to foster the

worst elements in human nature. The love of power is an impulse which,

though innate in very ambitious men, is chiefly promoted as a rule by the

actual experience of power. In a world where none could acquire much

power, the desire to tyrannize would be much less strong than it is at present.

Nevertheless, I cannot think that it would be wholly absent, and those in

whom it would exist would often be men of unusual energy and executive

capacity. Such men, if they are not restrained by the organized will of the

community, may either succeed in establishing a despotism, or, at any rate,

make such a vigorous attempt as can only be defeated through a period of

prolonged disturbance. And apart from the love or political power, there is

the love of power over individuals. If threats and terrorism were not

prevented by law, it can hardly be doubted that cruelty would be rife in therelations of men and women, and of parents and children. It is true that the

habits of a community can make such cruelty rare, but these habits, I fear, are

only to be produced through the prolonged reign of law. Experience of

backwoods communities, mining camps and other such places seems to show

that under new conditions men easily revert to a more barbarous attitude and

practice. It would seem, therefore, that, while human nature remains as it is,

there will be more liberty for all in a community where some acts of tyranny

by individuals are forbidden, than in a community where the law leaves each

individual free to follow his every impulse. But, although the necessity of

some form of government and law must for the present be conceded, it is

important to remember that all law and government is in itself in some degree

an evil, only justifiable when it prevents other and greater evils. Every use of

the power of the State needs, therefore, to be very closely scrutinized, and

every possibility of diminishing its power is to be welcomed provided it does

not lead to a reign of private tyranny.

  The power of the State is partly legal, partly economic: acts of a kind

which the State dislikes can be punished by the criminal law, and individuals

who incur the displeasure of the State may find it hard to earn a livelihood.

  The views of Marx on the State are not very clear. On the one hand he

seems willing,, like the modern State Socialists, to allow great power to the

State, but on the other hand he suggests that when the Socialist revolution has

been  consummated,  the  State,  as  we  know  it,  will  disappear.  Among  the

measures which are advocated in the Communist Manifesto as immediately

desirable, there are several which would very greatly increase the power of

the existing State. For example, ``Centralization of credit in the hands of the

State,  by  means  of  a  national  bank  with  State  capital  and  an  exclusive

monopoly;'' and again, ``Centralization of the means of communication and

transport in the hands of the State.'' But the Manifesto goes on to say:

When, in the course of development, class distinctions have disappeared,

and all production has been concentrated in the hands of a vast association of

the whole nation, the public power will lose its political character. Political

power, properly so called, is merely the organised power of one class for

oppressing another. If the proletariat during its contest with the bourgeoisie is

compelled, by the force of circumstances, to organize itself as a class, if, by

means of a revolution, it makes itself the ruling class, and, as such, sweeps

away by force the old conditions of production, then it will, along with these

conditions, have swept away the conditions for the existence of classantagonisms, and of classes generally, and will thereby have abolished its

own supremacy as a class.

  In  place  of  the  old  bourgeois  society,  with  its  classes  and  class

antagonisms, we shall have an association, in which; the free development of

each is the condition for the free development of all.[47]

[47] Communist Manifesto, p. 22.

This attitude Marx preserved in essentials throughout his life. Accordingly,

it is not to be wondered at that his followers, so far as regards their immediate

aims, have in the main become out-and-out State Socialists. On the other

hand, the Syndicalists, who accept from Marx the doctrine of the class war,

which they regard as what is really vital in his teaching, reject the State with

abhorrence and wish to abolish it wholly, in which respect they are at one

with the Anarchists. The Guild Socialists, though some persons in this

country regard them as extremists, really represent the English love of

compromise. The Syndicalist arguments as to the dangers inherent in the

power of the State have made them dissatisfied with the old State Socialism,

but they are unable to accept the Anarchist view that society can dispense

altogether with a central authority. Accordingly they propose that there

should be two co-equal instruments of Government in a community, the one

geographical, representing the consumers, and essentially the continuation of

the democratic State; the other representing the producers, organized, not

geographically, but in guilds, after the manner of industrial unionism. These

two author- ities will deal with different classes of questions. Guild Socialists

do not regard the industrial authority as forming part of the State, for they

contend that it is the essence of the State to be geographical; but the industrial

authority will resemble the present State in the fact that it will have coercive

powers, and that its decrees will be enforced, when necessary. It is to be

suspected that Syndicalists also, much as they object to the existing State,

would not object to coercion of individuals in an industry by the Trade Union

in that industry. Government within the Trade Union would probably be quite

as strict as State government is now. In saying this we are assuming that the

theoretical Anarchism of Syndicalist leaders would not survive accession to

power, but I am afraid experience shows that this is not a very hazardous

assumption.

  Among all these different views, the one which raises the deepest issue is

the Anarchist contention that all coercion by the community is unnecessary.

Like most of the things that Anarchists say, there is much more to be urged insupport of this view than most people would suppose at first sight. Kropotkin,

who is its ablest exponent, points out how much has been achieved already

by the method of free agreement. He does not wish to abolish government in

the sense of collective decisions: what he does wish to abolish is the system

by which a decision is en- forced upon those who oppose it.[48] The whole

system of representative government and majority rule is to him a bad thing.

[49]  He  points  to  such  instances  as  the  agreements  among  the  different

railway systems of the Continent for the running of through expresses and for

co-operation  generally.  He  points  out  that  in  such  cases  the  different

companies  or  authorities  concerned  each  appoint  a  delegate,  and  that  the

delegates suggest a basis of agreement, which has to be subsequently ratified

by each of the bodies ap- pointing them. The assembly of delegates has no

coercive power whatever, and a majority can do nothing against a recalcitrant

minority. Yet this has not prevented the conclusion of very elaborate systems

of  agreements.  By  such  methods,  so  Anarchists  contend,  the  USEFUL

functions  of  government  can  be  carried  out  without  any  coercion.  They

maintain  that  the  usefulness  of  agreement  is  so  patent  as  to  make  co-

operation certain if once the predatory motives associated with the present

system of private property were removed.

[48] ``On the other hand, the STATE has also been confused with

GOVERNMENT. As there can be no State without government, it has been

sometimes said that it is the absence of government, and not the abolition of

the State, that should be the aim.

  ``It seems to me, however, that State and government represent two ideas

of  a  different  kind.  The  State  idea  implies  quite  another  idea  to  that  of

government.  It  not  only  includes  the  existence  of  a  power  placed  above

society,  but  also  a  territorial  concentration  and  a  concentration  of  many

functions of the life of society in the hands of a few or even of all. It implies

new relations among the members of society.

  ``This  characteristic  distinction,  which  perhaps  escapes  notice  at  first

sight, appears clearly when the origin of the State is studied.'' Kropotkin,

``The State.'' p. 4.

  [49] Representative government has accomplished its historical mission; it

has given a mortal blow to Court-rule; and by its debates it has awakened

public interest in public questions. But, to see in it the government of the

future Socialist society, is to commit a gross error. Each economical phase oflife implies its own political phase; and it is impossible to touch the very

basis  of  the  present  economical  life—private  property—  without  a

corresponding  change  in  the  very  basis  of  the  political  organization.  Life

already shows in which direction the change will be made. Not in increasing

the  powers  of  the  State,  but  in  resorting  to  free  organization  and  free

federation in all those branches which are now considered as attributes of the

State.'' Kropotkin, ``Anarchist Communism,'' pp. 28-29.

  Attractive as this view is, I cannot resist the conclusion that it results from

impatience and represents the attempt to find a short-cut toward the ideal

which all humane people desire.

  Let us begin with the question of private crime.[50] Anarchists maintain

that  the  criminal  is  manufactured  by  bad  social  conditions  and  would

disappear in such a world as they aim at creating.[51] No doubt there is a

great measure of truth in this view. There would be little motive to robbery,

for example, in an Anarchist world, unless it were organized on a large scale

by a body of men bent on upsetting the Anarchist regime. It may also be

conceded  that  impulses  toward  criminal  violence  could  be  very  largely

eliminated by a better education. But all such contentions, it seems to me,

have their limitations. To take an extreme case, we cannot suppose that there

would be no lunatics in an Anarchist community, and some of these lunatics

would, no doubt, be homicidal. Probably no one would argue that they ought

to be left at liberty. But there are no sharp lines in nature; from the homicidal

lunatic to the sane man of violent passions there is a continuous gradation.

Even in the most perfect community there will be men and women, otherwise

sane, who will feel an impulse to commit murder from jealousy. These are

now  usually  restrained  by  the  fear  of  punishment,  but  if  this  fear  were

removed, such murders would probably become much more common, as may

be seen from the present behavior of certain soldiers on leave. Moreover,

certain kinds of conduct arouse public hostility, and would almost inevitably

lead to lynching, if no other recognized method of punishment existed. There

is in most men a certain natural vindictiveness, not always directed against

the worst members of the community. For example, Spinoza was very nearly

murdered  by  the  mob  because  he  was  suspected  of  undue  friendliness  to

France at a time when Holland was at war with that country. Apart from such

cases, there would be the very real danger of an organized attempt to destroy

Anarchism and revive ancient oppressions. Is it to be supposed, for example,that  Napoleon,  if  he  had  been  born  into  such  a  community  as  Kropotkin

advocates, would have acquiesced tamely in a world where his genius could

find no scope? I cannot see what should prevent a combination of ambitious

men  forming  themselves  into  a  private  army,  manufacturing  their  own

munitions, and at last enslaving the defenseless citizens, who had relied upon

the  inherent  attractiveness  of  liberty.  It  would  not  be  consistent  with  the

principles of Anarchism for the community to interfere with the drilling of a

private  army,  no  matter  what  its  objects  might  be  (though,  of  course,  an

opposing  private  army  might  be  formed  by  men  with  different  views).

Indeed, Kropotkin instances the old volunteers in Great Britain as an example

of a movement on Anarchist lines.[52] Even if a predatory army were not

formed from within, it might easily come from a neighboring nation, or from

races on the borderland of civilization. So long as the love of power exists, I

do  not  see  how  it  can  be  prevented  from  finding  an  outlet  in  oppression

except by means of the organized force of the community.

[50] On this subject there is an excellent discussion in the before-mentioned

work of Monsieur Naquet.

  [51] ``As to the third—the chief—objection, which maintains the necessity

of a government for punishing those who break the law of society, there is so

much to say about it that it hardly can be touched incidentally. The more we

study the question, the more we are brought to the conclusion that society

itself is responsible for the anti-social deeds perpetrated in its midst, and that

no punishment, no prisons, and no hangmen can diminish the numbers of

such deeds; nothing short of a reorganization of society itself. Three-quarters

of all the acts which are brought every year before our courts have their

origin, either directly or indirectly, in the present disorganized state of society

with  regard  to  the  production  and  distribution  of  wealth—not  in  the

perversity of human nature. As to the relatively few anti-social deeds which

result from anti-social inclinations of separate individuals, it is not by prisons,

nor even by resorting to the hangmen, that we can diminish their numbers. By

our  prisons,  we  merely  multiply  them  and  render  them  worse.  By  our

detectives, our `price of blood,' our executions, and our jails, we spread in

society such a terrible flow of basest passions and habits, that he who should

realize the effects of these institutions to their full extent, would be frightened

by what society is doing under the pretext of maintaining morality. We must

search for other remedies, and the remedies have been indicated long since.''Kropotkin, ``Anarchist Communism,'' pp. 31-32.

  [52] ``Anarchist Communism,'' p. 27.

The conclusion, which appears to be forced upon us, is that the Anarchist

ideal of a community in which no acts are forbidden by law is not, at any rate

for the present, compatible with the stability of such a world as the

Anarchists desire. In order to obtain and preserve a world resembling as

closely as possible that at which they aim, it will still be necessary that some

acts should be forbidden by law. We may put the chief of these under three

heads:

  1. Theft.

  2. Crimes of violence.

  3. The creation of organizations intended to subvert the Anarchist regime

by force.

  We will briefly recapitulate what has been said already as to the necessity

of these prohibitions.

  1. Theft.—It is true that in an Anarchist world there will be no destitution,

and therefore no thefts motivated by starvation. But such thefts are at present

by  no  means  the  most  considerable  or  the  most  harmful.  The  system  of

rationing, which is to be applied to luxuries, will leave many men with fewer

luxuries than they might desire. It will give opportunities for peculation by

those who are in control of the public stores, and it will leave the possibility

of appropriating such valuable objects of art as would naturally be preserved

in public museums. It may be contended that such forms of theft would be

prevented by public opinion. But public opinion is not greatly operative upon

an individual unless it is the opinion of his own group. A group of men

combined for purposes of theft might readily defy the public opinion of the

majority unless that public opinion made itself effective by the use of force

against them. Probably, in fact, such force would be applied through popular

indignation, but in that case we should revive the evils of the criminal law

with the added evils of uncertainty, haste and passion, which are inseparable

from  the  practice  of  lynching.  If,  as  we  have  suggested,  it  were  found

necessary  to  provide  an  economic  stimulus  to  work  by  allowing  fewer

luxuries to idlers, this would afford a new motive for theft on their part and a

new necessity for some form of criminal law.

  2. Crimes of Violence.—Cruelty to children, crimes of jealousy, rape, and

so  forth,  are  almost  certain  to  occur  in  any  society  to  some  extent.  Theprevention of such acts is essential to the existence of freedom for the weak.

If nothing were done to hinder them, it is to be feared that the customs of a

society would gradually become rougher, and that acts which are now rare

would cease to be so. If Anarchists are right in maintaining that the existence

of such an economic system as they desire would prevent the commission of

crimes of this kind, the laws forbidding them would no longer come into

operation, and would do no harm to liberty. If, on the other hand, the impulse

to such actions persisted, it would be necessary that steps should be taken to

restrain men from indulging it.

  3. The third class of difficulties is much the most serious and involves

much the most drastic interference with liberty. I do not see how a private

army could be tolerated within an Anarchist community, and I do not see

how it could be prevented except by a general prohibition of carrying arms. If

there were no such prohibition, rival parties would organize rival forces, and

civil war would result. Yet, if there is such a prohibition, it cannot well be

carried out without a very considerable interference with individual liberty.

No doubt, after a time, the idea of using violence to achieve a political object

might die down, as the practice of duelling has done. But such changes of

habit and outlook are facilitated by legal prohibition, and would hardly come

about without it. I shall not speak yet of the international aspect of this same

problem, for I propose to deal with that in the next chapter, but it is clear that

the  same  considerations  apply  with  even  greater  force  to  the  relations

between nations.

  If we admit, however reluctantly, that a criminal law is necessary and that

the force of the community must be brought to bear to prevent certain kinds

of actions, a further question arises: How is crime to be treated? What is the

greatest measure of humanity and respect for freedom that is compatible with

the recognition of such a thing as crime? The first thing to recognize is that

the whole conception of guilt or sin should be utterly swept away. At present,

the criminal is visited with the displeasure of the community: the sole method

applied to prevent the occurrence of crime is the infliction of pain upon the

criminal. Everything possible is done to break his spirit and destroy his self-

respect. Even those pleasures which would be most likely to have a civilizing

effect are forbidden to him, merely on the ground that they are pleasures,

while much of the suffering inflicted is of a kind which can only brutalize

and degrade still further. I am not speaking, of course, of those few penalinstitutions which have made a serious study of reforming the criminal. Such

institutions, especially in America, have been proved capable of achieving the

most remarkable results, but they remain everywhere exceptional. The broad

rule is still that the criminal is made to feel the displeasure of society. He

must emerge from such a treatment either defiant and hostile, or submissive

and cringing, with a broken spirit and a loss of self-respect. Neither of these

results is anything but evil. Nor can any good result be achieved by a method

of treatment which embodies reprobation.

  When a man is suffering from an infectious disease he is a danger to the

community, and it is necessary to restrict his liberty of movement. But no one

associates any idea of guilt with such a situation. On the contrary, he is an

object of commiseration to his friends. Such steps as science recommends are

taken to cure him of his disease, and he submits as a rule without reluctance

to the curtailment of liberty involved meanwhile. The same method in spirit

ought to be shown in the treatment of what is called ``crime.'' It is supposed,

of course, that the criminal is actuated by calculations of self-interest, and

that the fear of punishment, by supplying a contrary motive of self-interest

affords the best deterrent, The dog, to gain some private end, Went mad and

bit the man.

  This is the popular view of crime; yet no dog goes mad from choice, and

probably the same is true of the great majority of criminals, certainly in the

case of crimes of passion. Even in cases where self-interest is the motive, the

important thing is to prevent the crime, not to make the criminal suffer. Any

suffering which may be entailed by the process of prevention ought to be

regarded as regrettable, like the pain involved in a surgical operation. The

man who commits a crime from an impulse to violence ought to be subjected

to  a  scientific  psychological  treatment,  designed  to  elicit  more  beneficial

impulses. The man who commits a crime from calculations of self- interest

ought to be made to feel that self-interest itself, when it is fully understood,

can be better served by a life which is useful to the community than by one

which is harmful. For this purpose it is chiefly necessary to widen his outlook

and increase the scope of his desires. At present, when a man suffers from

insufficient love for his fellow-creatures, the method of curing him which is

commonly  adopted  seems  scarcely  designed  to  succeed,  being,  indeed,  in

essentials, the same as his attitude toward them. The object of the prison

administration is to save trouble, not to study the individual case. He is keptin  captivity  in  a  cell  from  which  all  sight  of  the  earth  is  shut  out:  he  is

subjected to harshness by warders, who have too often become brutalized by

their occupation.[53] He is solemnly denounced as an enemy to society. He is

compelled to perform mechanical tasks, chosen for their wearisomeness. He

is  given  no  education  and  no  incentive  to  self-improvement.  Is  it  to  be

wondered at if, at the end of such a course of treatment, his feelings toward

the community are no more friendly than they were at the beginning?

[53] This was written before the author had any personal experience of the

prison system. He personally met with nothing but kindness at the hands of

the prison officials.

Severity of punishment arose through vindictiveness and fear in an age

when many criminals escaped justice altogether, and it was hoped that savage

sentences would outweigh the chance of escape in the mind of the criminal.

At present a very large part of the criminal law is concerned in safeguarding

the rights of property, that is to say—as things are now—the unjust privileges

of the rich. Those whose principles lead them into conflict with government,

like Anarchists, bring a most formidable indictment against the law and the

authorities for the unjust manner in which they support the status quo. Many

of the actions by which men have become rich are far more harmful to the

community than the obscure crimes of poor men, yet they go unpunished

because they do not interfere with the existing order. If the power of the

community is to be brought to bear to prevent certain classes of actions

through the agency of the criminal law, it is as necessary that these actions

should really be those which are harmful to the community, as it is that the

treatment of ``criminals'' should be freed from the conception of guilt and

inspired by the same spirit as is shown in the treatment of disease. But, if

these two conditions were fulfilled, I cannot help thinking that a society

which preserved the existence of law would be preferable to one conducted

on the unadulterated principles of Anarchism.

  So far we have been considering the power which the State derives from

the criminal law. We have every reason to think that this power cannot be

entirely abolished, though it can be exercised in a wholly different spirit,

without  the  vindictiveness  and  the  moral  reprobation  which  now  form  its

essence.

  We come next to the consideration of the economic power of the State and

the  influence  which  it  can  exert  through  its  bureaucracy.  State  Socialistsargue as if there would be no danger to liberty in a State not based upon

capitalism.  This  seems  to  me  an  entire  delusion.  Given  an  official  caste,

however selected, there are bound to be a set of men whose whole instincts

will drive them toward tyranny. Together with the natural love of power, they

will have a rooted conviction (visible now in the higher ranks of the Civil

Service) that they alone know enough to be able to judge what is for the good

of the community. Like all men who administer a system, they will come to

feel the system itself sacrosanct. The only changes they will desire will be

changes in the direction of further regulations as to how the people are to

enjoy the good things kindly granted to them by their benevolent despots.

Whoever  thinks  this  picture  overdrawn  must  have  failed  to  study  the

influence  and  methods  of  Civil  Servants  at  present.  On  every  matter  that

arises, they know far more than the general public about all the DEFINITE

facts involved; the one thing they do not know is ``where the shoe pinches.''

But those who know this are probably not skilled in stating their case, not

able to say off-hand exactly how many shoes are pinching how many feet, or

what is the precise remedy required. The answer prepared for Ministers by

the Civil Service is accepted by the ``respectable'' public as impartial, and is

regarded  as  disposing  of  the  case  of  malcontents  except  on  a  first-class

political question on which elections may be won or lost. That at least is the

way in which things are managed in England. And there is every reason to

fear that under State Socialism the power of officials would be vastly greater

than it is at present.

  Those who accept the orthodox doctrine of democracy contend that, if

ever the power of capital were removed, representative institutions would

suffice  to  undo  the  evils  threatened  by  bureaucracy.  Against  this  view,

Anarchists  and  Syndicalists  have  directed  a  merciless  criticism.  French

Syndicalists especially, living, as they do, in a highly democratized country,

have had bitter experience of the way in which the power of the State can be

employed against a progressive minority. This experience has led them to

abandon  altogether  the  belief  in  the  divine  right  of  majorities.  The

Constitution that they would desire would be one which allowed scope for

vigorous minorities, conscious of their aims and prepared to work for them. It

is  undeniable  that,  to  all  who  care  for  progress,  actual  experience  of

democratic representative Government is very disillusioning. Admitting— as

I  think  we  must—that  it  is  preferable  to  any  PREVIOUS  form  ofGovernment, we must yet acknowledge that much of the criticism directed

against it by Anarchists and Syndicalists is thoroughly justified.

  Such  criticism  would  have  had  more  influence  if  any  clear  idea  of  an

alternative to parliamentary democracy had been generally apprehended. But

it must be confessed that Syndicalists have not presented their case in a way

which is likely to attract the average citizen. Much of what they say amounts

to this: that a minority, consisting of skilled workers in vital industries, can,

by a strike, make the economic life of the whole community impossible, and

can  in  this  way  force  their  will  upon  the  nation.  The  action  aimed  at  is

compared to the seizure of a power station, by which a whole vast system can

be paralyzed. Such a doctrine is an appeal to force, and is naturally met by an

appeal to force on the other side. It is useless for the Syndicalists to protest

that they only desire power in order to promote liberty: the world which they

are seeking to establish does not, as yet, appeal to the effective will of the

community, and cannot be stably inaugurated until it does do so. Persuasion

is a slow process, and may sometimes be accelerated by violent methods; to

this  extent  such  methods  may  be  justified.  But  the  ultimate  goal  of  any

reformer who aims at liberty can only be reached through persuasion. The

attempt to thrust liberty by force upon those who do not desire what we

consider  liberty  must  always  prove  a  failure;  and  Syndicalists,  like  other

reformers, must ultimately rely upon persuasion for success.

  But it would be a mistake to confuse aims with methods: however little we

may  agree  with  the  proposal  to  force  the  millennium  on  a  reluctant

community  by  starvation,  we  may  yet  agree  that  much  of  what  the

Syndicalists desire to achieve is desirable.

  Let  us  dismiss  from  our  minds  such  criticisms  of  parliamentary

government as are bound up with the present system of private property, and

consider only those which would remain true in a collectivist community.

Certain defects seem inherent in the very nature of representative institutions.

There is a sense of self-importance, inseparable from success in a contest for

popular  favor.  There  is  an  all-but  unavoidable  habit  of  hypocrisy,  since

experience shows that the democracy does not detect insincerity in an orator,

and  will,  on  the  other  hand,  be  shocked  by  things  which  even  the  most

sincere men may think necessary. Hence arises a tone of cynicism among

elected representatives, and a feeling that no man can retain his position in

politics without deceit. This is as much the fault of the democracy as of therepresentatives, but it seems unavoidable so long as the main thing that all

bodies of men demand of their champions is flattery. However the blame may

be apportioned, the evil must be recognized as one which is bound to occur in

the existing forms of democracy. Another evil, which is especially noticeable

in large States, is the remoteness of the seat of government from many of the

constituencies—a  remoteness  which  is  psychological  even  more  than

geographical. The legislators live in comfort, protected by thick walls and

innumerable policemen from the voice of the mob; as time goes on they

remember only dimly the passions and promises of their electoral campaign;

they come to feel it an essential part of statesmanship to consider what are

called the interests of the community as a whole, rather than those of some

discontented  group;  but  the  interests  of  the  community  as  a  whole  are

sufficiently vague to be easily seen to coincide with self-interest. All these

causes lead Parliaments to betray the people, consciously or unconsciously;

and it is no wonder if they have produced a certain aloofness from democratic

theory in the more vigorous champions of labor.

  Majority rule, as it exists in large States, is subject to the fatal defect that,

in a very great number of questions, only a fraction of the nation have any

direct  interest  or  knowledge,  yet  the  others  have  an  equal  voice  in  their

settlement. When people have no direct interest in a question they are very

apt  to  be  influenced  by  irrelevant  considerations;  this  is  shown  in  the

extraordinary reluctance to grant autonomy to subordinate nations or groups.

For this reason, it is very dangerous to allow the nation as a whole to decide

on  matters  which  concern  only  a  small  section,  whether  that  section  be

geographical or industrial or defined in any other way. The best cure for this

evil, so far as can be seen at present, lies in allowing self-government to

every important group within a nation in all matters that affect that group

much more than they affect the rest of the community. The government of a

group, chosen by the group, will be far more in touch with its constituents, far

more  conscious  of  their  interests,  than  a  remote  Parliament  nominally

representing  the  whole  country.  The  most  original  idea  in  Syndicalism—

adopted  and  developed  by  the  Guild  Socialists—is  the  idea  of  making

industries self-governing units so far as their internal affairs are concerned.

By this method, extended also to such other groups as have clearly separable

interests, the evils which have shown themselves in representative democracy

can, I believe, be largely overcome.  Guild  Socialists,  as  we  have  seen,  have  another  suggestion,  growing

naturally out of the autonomy of industrial guilds, by which they hope to

limit the power of the State and help to preserve individual liberty. They

propose that, in addition to Parliament, elected (as at present) on a territorial

basis and representing the community as consumers, there shall also be a

``Guild  Congress,''  a  glorified  successor  of  the  present  Trade  Union

Congress, which shall consist of representatives chosen by the Guilds, and

shall represent the community as producers.

  This method of diminishing the excessive power of the State has been

attractively  set  forth  by  Mr.  G.  D.  H.  Cole  in  his  ``Self-Government  in

Industry.''[54] ``Where now,'' he says, ``the State passes a Factory Act, or a

Coal Mines Regulation Act, the Guild Congress of the future will pass such

Acts, and its power of enforcing them will be the same as that of the State''

(p. 98). His ultimate ground for advocating this system is that, in his opinion,

it will tend to preserve individual liberty: ``The fundamental reason for the

preservation, in a democratic Society, of both the industrial and the political

forms of Social organization is, it seems to me, that only by dividing the vast

power now wielded by industrial capitalism can the individual hope to be

free'' (p. 91).

[54] Bell, 1917.

Will the system suggested by Mr. Cole have this result? I think it is clear

that it would, in this respect, be an improvement on the existing system.

Representative government cannot but be improved by any method which

brings the representatives into closer touch with the interests concerned in

their legislation; and this advantage probably would be secured by handing

over questions of production to the Guild Congress. But if, in spite of the

safeguards proposed by the Guild Socialists, the Guild Congress became all-

powerful in such questions, if resistance to its will by a Guild which felt ill-

used became practically hopeless, I fear that the evils now connected with the

omnipotence of the State would soon reappear. Trade Union officials, as soon

as they become part of the governing forces in the country, tend to become

autocratic and conservative; they lose touch with their constituents and

gravitate, by a psychological sympathy, into co-operation with the powers

that be. Their formal installation in authority through the Guilds Congress

would accelerate this process. They would soon tend to combine, in effect if

not obviously, with those who wield authority in Parliament. Apart fromoccasional conflicts, comparable to the rivalry of opposing financiers which

now sometimes disturbs the harmony of the capitalist world, there would, at

most times, be agreement between the dominant personalities in the two

Houses. And such harmony would filch away from the individual the liberty

which he had hoped to secure by the quarrels of his masters.

  There is no method, if we are not mistaken, by which a body representing

the whole community, whether as producers or consumers or both, can alone

be a sufficient guardian of individual liberty. The only way of preserving

sufficient liberty (and even this will be inadequate in the case of very small

minorities) is the organization of citizens with special interests into groups,

determined to preserve autonomy as regards their internal affairs, willing to

resist interference by a strike if necessary, and sufficiently powerful (either in

themselves or through their power of appealing to public sympathy) to be

able  to  resist  the  organized  forces  of  government  successfully  when  their

cause is such as many men think just. If this method is to be successful we

must  have  not  only  suitable  organizations  but  also  a  diffused  respect  for

liberty, and an absence of submissiveness to government both in theory and

practice. Some risk of disorder there must be in such a society, but this risk is

as nothing compared to the danger of stagnation which is inseparable from an

all-powerful central authority.

  We may now sum up our discussion of the powers of Government.

  The State, in spite of what Anarchists urge, seems a necessary institution

for certain purposes. Peace and war, tariffs, regulation of sanitary conditions

and  of  the  sale  of  noxious  drugs,  the  preservation  of  a  just  system  of

distribution:  these,  among  others,  are  functions  which  could  hardly  be

performed in a community in which there was no central government. Take,

for example, the liquor traffic, or the opium traffic in China. If alcohol could

be obtained at cost price without taxation, still more if it could be obtained

for nothing, as Anarchists presumably desire, can we believe that there would

not be a great and disastrous increase of drunkenness? China was brought to

the verge of ruin by opium, and every patriotic Chinaman desired to see the

traffic in opium restricted. In such matters freedom is not a panacea, and

some degree of legal restriction seems imperative for the national health.

  But granting that the State, in some form, must continue, we must also

grant, I think, that its powers ought to be very strictly limited to what is

absolutely necessary. There is no way of limiting its powers except by meansof groups which are jealous of their privileges and determined to preserve

their autonomy, even if this should involve resistance to laws decreed by the

State, when these laws interfere in the internal affairs of a group in ways not

warranted  by  the  public  interest.  The  glorification  of  the  State,  and  the

doctrine that it is every citizen's duty to serve the State, are radically against

progress and against liberty. The State, though at present a source of much

evil, is also a means to certain good things, and will be needed so long as

violent  and  destructive  impulses  remain  common.  But  it  is  MERELY  a

means, and a means which needs to be very carefully and sparingly used if it

is not to do more harm than good. It is not the State, but the community, the

worldwide community of all human beings present and future, that we ought

to serve. And a good community does not spring from the glory of the State,

but from the unfettered development of individuals: from happiness in daily

life, from congenial work giving opportunity for whatever constructiveness

each man or woman may possess, from free personal relations embodying

love and taking away the roots of envy in thwarted capacity from affection,

and  above  all  from  the  joy  of  life  and  its  expression  in  the  spontaneous

creations of art and science. It is these things that make an age or a nation

worthy of existence, and these things are not to be secured by bowing down

before the State. It is the individual in whom all that is good must be realized,

and the free growth of the individual must be the supreme end of a political

system which is to re-fashion the world.

                                    CHAPTER VI

                    INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

THE main objects which should be served by international relations may be

taken to be two: First, the avoidance of wars, and, second, the prevention of

the oppression of weak nations by strong ones. These two objects do not by

any means necessarily lead in the same direction, since one of the easiest

ways of securing the world's peace would be by a combination of the most

powerful States for the exploitation and oppression of the remainder. This

method, however, is not one which the lover of liberty can favor. We must

keep account of both aims and not be content with either alone.

  One of the commonplaces of both Socialism and Anarchism is that all

modern  wars  are  due  to  capitalism,  and  would  cease  if  capitalism  were

abolished. This view, to my mind, is only a half-truth; the half that is true is

important, but the half that is untrue is perhaps equally important when afundamental reconstruction of society is being considered.

  Socialist and Anarchist critics of existing society point, with perfect truth,

to certain capitalistic factors which promote war. The first of these is the

desire of finance to find new fields of investment in undeveloped countries.

Mr. J. A. Hobson, an author who is by no means extreme in his views, has

well  stated  this  point  in  his  book  on  ``The  Evolution  of  Modern

Capitalism.''[55] He says:

[55] Walter Scott Publishing Company, 1906, p. 262.

The economic tap-root, the chief directing motive of all the modern

imperialistic expansion, is the pressure of capitalist industries for markets,

primarily markets for investment, secondarily markets for surplus products of

home industry. Where the concentration of capital has gone furthest, and

where a rigorous protective system prevails, this pressure is necessarily

strongest. Not merely do the trusts and other manufacturing trades that

restrict their output for the home market more urgently require foreign

markets, but they are also more anxious to secure protected markets, and this

can only be achieved by extending the area of political rule. This is the

essential significance of the recent change in American foreign policy as

illustrated by the Spanish War, the Philippine annexation, the Panama policy,

and the new application of the Monroe doctrine to the South American States.

South America is needed as a preferential market for investment of trust

``profits'' and surplus trust products: if in time these states can be brought

within a Zollverein under the suzerainty of the United States, the financial

area of operations receives a notable accession. China as a field of railway

enterprise and general industrial development already begins to loom large in

the eyes of foresighted American business men; the growing trade in

American cotton and other goods in that country will be a subordinate

consideration to the expansion of the area for American investments.

Diplomatic pressure, armed force, and, where desirable, seizure of territory

for political control, will be engineered by the financial magnates who control

the political destiny of America. The strong and expensive American navy

now beginning to be built incidentally serves the purpose of affording

profitable contracts to the shipbuilding and metal industries: its real meaning

and use is to forward the aggressive political policy imposed upon the nation

by the economic needs of the financial capitalists.

  It should be clearly understood that this constant pressure to extend the

area  of  markets  is  not  a  necessary  implication  of  all  forms  of  organizedindustry.  If  competition  was  displaced  by  combinations  of  a  genuinely

cooperative  character  in  which  the  whole  gain  of  improved  economies

passed, either to the workers in wages, or to large bodies of investors in

dividends, the expansion of demand in the home markets would be so great

as to give full employment to the productive powers of concentrated capital,

and  there  would  be  no  self-accumulating  masses  of  profit  expressing

themselves  in  new  credit  and  demanding  external  employment.  It  is  the

``monopoly''  profits  of  trusts  and  combines,  taken  either  in  construction,

financial operation, or industrial working, that form a gathering fund of self-

accumulating  credit  whose  possession  by  the  financial  class  implies  a

contracted  demand  for  commodities  and  a  correspondingly  restricted

employment for capital in American industries. Within certain limits relief

can  be  found  by  stimulation  of  the  export  trade  under  cover  of  a  high

protective tariff which forbids all interference with monopoly of the home

markets. But it is extremely difficult for trusts adapted to the requirements of

a profitable tied market at home to adjust their methods of free competition in

the world markets upon a profitable basis of steady trading. Moreover, such a

mode of expansion is only appropriate to certain manufacturing trusts: the

owners  of  railroad,  financial  and  other  trusts  must  look  always  more  to

foreign investments for their surplus profits. This ever-growing need for fresh

fields of investment for their profits is the great crux of the financial system,

and threatens to dominate the future economics and the politics of the great

Republic.

  The financial economy of American capitalism exhibits in more dramatic

shape a tendency common to the finance of all developed industrial nations.

The large, easy flow of capital from Great Britain, Germany, Austria, France,

etc.,  into  South  African  or  Australian  mines,  into  Egyptian  bonds,  or  the

precarious securities of South American republics, attests the same general

pressure which increases with every development of financial machinery and

the more profitable control of that machinery by the class of professional

financiers

The kind of way in which such conditions tend toward war might have been

illustrated, if Mr. Hobson had been writing at a later date, by various more

recent cases. A higher rate of interest is obtainable on enterprises in an

undeveloped country than in a developed one, provided the risks connected

with an unsettled government can be minimized. To minimize these risks thefinanciers call in the assistance of the military and naval forces of the country

which they are momentarily asserting to be theirs. In order to have the

support of public opinion in this demand they have recourse to the power of

the Press.

  The Press is the second great factor to which critics of capitalism point

when they wish to prove that capitalism is the source of modern war. Since

the running of a big newspaper requires a large capital, the proprietors of

important organs necessarily belong to the capitalist class, and it will be a

rare and exceptional event if they do not sympathize with their own class in

opinion and outlook. They are able to decide what news the great mass of

newspaper readers shall be allowed to have. They can actually falsify the

news, or, without going so far as that, they can carefully select it, giving such

items  as  will  stimulate  the  passions  which  they  desire  to  stimulate,  and

suppressing such items as would provide the antidote. In this way the picture

of the world in the mind of the average newspaper reader is made to be not a

true picture, but in the main that which suits the interests of capitalists. This

is true in many directions, but above all in what con- cerns the relations

between nations. The mass of the population of a country can be led to love

or hate any other country at the will of the newspaper proprietors, which is

often, directly or indirectly, influenced by the will of the great financiers. So

long as enmity between England and Russia was desired, our newspapers

were full of the cruel treatment meted out to Russian political prisoners, the

oppression of Finland and Russian Poland, and other such topics. As soon as

our foreign policy changed, these items disappeared from the more important

newspapers, and we heard instead of the misdeeds of Germany. Most men are

not sufficiently critical to be on their guard against such influences, and until

they are, the power of the Press will remain.

  Besides  these  two  influences  of  capitalism  in  promoting  war,  there  is

another, much less emphasized by the critics of capitalism, but by no means

less important: I mean the pugnacity which tends to be developed in men who

have the habit of command. So long as capitalist society persists, an undue

measure of power will be in the hands of those who have acquired wealth and

influence through a great position in industry or finance. Such men are in the

habit,  in  private  life,  of  finding  their  will  seldom  questioned;  they  are

surrounded  by  obsequious  satellites  and  are  not  infrequently  engaged  in

conflicts  with  Trade  Unions.  Among  their  friends  and  acquaintances  areincluded those who hold high positions in government or administration, and

these men equally are liable to become autocratic through the habit of giving

orders.  It  used  to  be  customary  to  speak  of  the  ``governing  classes,''  but

nominal democracy has caused this phrase to go out of fashion. Nevertheless,

it still retains much truth; there are still in any capitalist community those

who  command  and  those  who  as  a  rule  obey.  The  outlook  of  these  two

classes is very different, though in a modern society there is a continuous

gradation from the extreme of the one to the extreme of the other. The man

who is accustomed to find submission to his will becomes indignant on the

occasions  when  he  finds  opposition.  Instinctively  he  is  convinced  that

opposition is wicked and must be crushed. He is therefore much more willing

than the average citizen to resort to war against his rivals. Accordingly we

find, though, of course, with very notable exceptions, that in the main those

who have most power are most warlike, and those who have least power are

least disposed to hatred of foreign nations. This is one of the evils inseparable

from the concentration of power. It will only be cured by the abolition of

capitalism if the new system is one which allows very much less power to

single individuals. It will not be cured by a system which substitutes the

power of Ministers or officials for the power of capitalists This is one reason,

additional to those mentioned in the preceding chapter, for desiring to see a

diminution in the authority of the State.

  Not only does the concentration of power tend to cause wars, but, equally,

wars and the fear of them bring about the necessity for the concentration of

power.  So  long  as  the  community  is  exposed  to  sudden  dangers,  the

possibility of quick decision is absolutely necessary to self-preservation. The

cumbrous machinery of deliberative decisions by the people is impossible in

a crisis, and therefore so long as crises are likely to occur, it is impossible to

abolish the almost autocratic power of governments. In this case, as in most

others,  each  of  two  correlative  evils  tends  to  perpetuate  the  other.  The

existence of men with the habit of power increases the risk of war, and the

risk of war makes it impossible to establish a system where no man possesses

great power.

  So  far  we  have  been  considering  what  is  true  in  the  contention  that

capitalism causes modern wars. It is time now to look at the other side, and to

ask  ourselves  whether  the  abolition  of  capitalism  would,  by  itself,  be

sufficient to prevent war.  I do not myself believe that this is the case. The outlook of both Socialists

and Anarchists seems to me, in this respect as in some others, to be unduly

divorced from the fundamental instincts of human nature. There were wars

before there was capital- ism, and fighting is habitual among animals. The

power of the Press in promoting war is entirely due to the fact that it is able to

appeal to certain instincts. Man is naturally competitive, acquisitive, and, in a

greater or less degree, pugnacious. When the Press tells him that so-and-so is

his enemy, a whole set of instincts in him responds to the suggestion. It is

natural to most men to suppose that they have enemies and to find a certain

fulfillment of their nature when they embark upon a contest. What a man

believes upon grossly insufficient evidence is an index to his desires—desires

of which he himself is often unconscious. If a man is offered a fact which

goes against his instincts, he will scrutinize it closely, and unless the evidence

is overwhelming, he will refuse to believe it. If, on the other hand, he is

offered something which affords a reason for acting in accordance with his

instincts, he will accept it even on the slenderest evidence. The origin of

myths is explained in this way, and much of what is currently believed in

international affairs is no better than myth. Although capitalism affords in

modern society the channel by which the instinct of pugnacity finds its outlet,

there is reason to fear that, if this channel were closed, some other would be

found, unless education and environment were so changed as enormously to

diminish  the  strength  of  the  competitive  instinct.  If  an  economic

reorganization can effect this it may pro- vide a real safeguard against war,

but if not, it is to be feared that the hopes of universal peace will prove

delusive.

  The abolition of capitalism might, and very likely would, greatly diminish

the incentives to war which are derived from the Press and from the desire of

finance to find new fields for investment in undeveloped countries, but those

which  are  derived  from  the  instinct  of  command  and  the  impatience  of

opposition  might  remain,  though  perhaps  in  a  less  virulent  form  than  at

present. A democracy which has power is almost always more bellicose than

one  which  is  excluded  from  its  due  share  in  the  government.  The

internationalism of Marx is based upon the assumption that the proletariat

everywhere  are  oppressed  by  the  ruling  classes.  The  last  words  of  the

Communist Manifesto embody this idea—

Let the ruling classes tremble at a Communistic revolution. Theproletarians have nothing to lose but their chains. They have a world to win.

Working men of all countries, unite!

So long as the proletarians have nothing to lose but their chains, it is not

likely that their enmity will be directed against other proletarians. If the world

had developed as Marx expected, the kind of internationalism which he

foresaw might have inspired a universal social revolution. Russia, which

devel- oped more nearly than any other country upon the lines of his system,

has had a revolution of the kind which he expected. If the development in

other countries had been similar, it is highly probable that this revolution

would have spread throughout the civilized world. The proletariat of all

countries might have united against the capitalists as their common enemy,

and in the bond of an identical hatred they might for the moment have been

free from hatred toward each other. Even then, this ground of union would

have ceased with their victory, and on the morrow of the social revolution the

old national rivalries might have revived. There is no alchemy by which a

universal harmony can be produced out of hatred. Those who have been

inspired to action by the doctrine of the class war will have acquired the habit

of hatred, and will instinctively seek new enemies when the old ones have

been vanquished.

  But  in  actual  fact  the  psychology  of  the  working  man  in  any  of  the

Western  democracies  is  totally  unlike  that  which  is  assumed  in  the

Communist Manifesto. He does not by any means feel that he has nothing to

lose but his chains, nor indeed is this true. The chains which bind Asia and

Africa in subjection to Europe are partly riveted by him. He is himself part of

a great system of tyranny and exploitation. Universal freedom would remove,

not only his own chains, which are comparatively light, but the far heavier

chains which he has helped to fasten upon the subject races of the world.

  Not only do the working men of a country like England have a share in the

benefit  accruing  from  the  exploitation  of  inferior  races,  but  many  among

them also have their part in the capitalist system. The funds of Trade Unions

and  Friendly  Societies  are  invested  in  ordinary  undertakings,  such  as

railways; many of the better-paid wage-earners have put their savings into

government  securities;  and  almost  all  who  are  politically  active  feel

themselves part of the forces that determine public policy, through the power

of  the  Labor  Party  and  the  greater  unions.  Owing  to  these  causes  their

outlook  on  life  has  become  to  a  considerable  extent  impregnated  withcapitalism  and  as  their  sense  of  power  has  grown,  their  nationalism  has

increased. This must continue to be true of any internationalism which is

based upon hatred of the capitalist and adherence to the doctrine of the class

war.  Something  more  positive  and  constructive  than  this  is  needed  if

governing democracies are not to inherit the vices of governing classes in the

past.

  I do not wish to be thought to deny that capitalism does very much to

promote  wars,  or  that  wars  would  probably  be  less  frequent  and  less

destructive if private property were abolished. On the contrary, I believe that

the abolition of private ownership of land and capital is a necessary step

toward any world in which the nations are to live at peace with one another. I

am only arguing that this step, necessary as it is, will not alone suffice for this

end, but that among the causes of war there are others that go deeper into the

roots  of  human  nature  than  any  that  orthodox  Socialists  are  wont  to

acknowledge.

  Let us take an instance. In Australia and California there is an intense

dislike and fear toward the yellow races. The causes of this are complex; the

chief among them are two, labor competition and instinctive race-hatred. It is

probable  that,  if  race-  hatred  did  not  exist,  the  difficulties  of  labor

competition could be overcome. European immigrants also compete, but they

are not excluded. In a sparsely populated country, industrious cheap labor

could, with a little care, be so utilized as to enrich the existing inhabitants; it

might, for example, be confined to certain kinds of work, by custom if not by

law. But race-hatred opens men's minds to the evils of competition and closes

them  against  the  advantages  of  co-operation;  it  makes  them  regard  with

horror the somewhat unfamiliar vices of the aliens, while our own vices are

viewed  with  mild  toleration.  I  cannot  but  think  that,  if  Australia  were

completely socialized, there would still remain the same popular objection as

at present to any large influx of Chinese or Japanese labor. Yet if Japan also

were to become a Socialist State, the Japanese might well continue to feel the

pressure of population and the desire for an outlet. In such circumstances, all

the passions and interests required to produce a war would exist, in spite of

the  establishment  of  Socialism  in  both  countries.  Ants  are  as  completely

Socialistic as any community can possibly be, yet they put to death any ant

which strays among them by mistake from a neighboring ant-heap. Men do

not differ much from ants, as regards their instincts in this respect, where-ever there is a great divergence of race, as between white men and yellow

men. Of course the instinct of race-hostility can be overcome by suitable

circumstances;  but  in  the  absence  of  such  circumstances  it  remains  a

formidable menace to the world's peace.

  If the peace of the world is ever to become secure, I believe there will

have  to  be,  along  with  other  changes,  a  development  of  the  idea  which

inspires  the  project  of  a  League  of  Nations.  As  time  goes  on,  the

destructiveness of war grows greater and its profits grow less: the rational

argument  against  war  acquires  more  and  more  force  as  the  increasing

productivity  of  labor  makes  it  possible  to  devote  a  greater  and  greater

proportion of the population to the work of mutual slaughter. In quiet times,

or when a great war has just ended, men's moods are amenable to the rational

grounds in favor of peace, and it is possible to inaugurate schemes designed

to make wars less frequent. Probably no civilized nation would embark upon

an aggressive war if it were fairly certain in advance that the aggressor must

be defeated. This could be achieved if most great nations came to regard the

peace of the world as of such importance that they would side against an

aggressor even in a quarrel in which they had no direct interest. It is on this

hope that the League of Nations is based.

  But the League of Nations, like the abolition of private property, will be

by no means sufficient if it is not accompanied or quickly followed by other

reforms. It is clear that such reforms, if they are to be effective, must be

international; the world must move as a whole in these matters, if it is to

move at all. One of the most obvious necessities, if peace is to be secure, is a

measure of disarmament. So long as the present vast armies and navies exist,

no system can prevent the risk of war. But disarmament, if it is to serve its

purpose, must be simultaneous and by mutual agreement among all the Great

Powers. And it is not likely to be successful so long as hatred and suspicion

rule between nations, for each nation will suspect its neighbor of not carrying

out the bargain fairly. A different mental and moral atmosphere from that to

which  we  are  accustomed  in  international  affairs  will  be  necessary  if

agreements between nations are to succeed in averting catastrophes. If once

such an atmosphere existed it might be perpetuated and strengthened by wise

institutions; but it cannot be CREATED by institutions alone. International

co-operation requires mutual good will, and good will, however it has arisen,

is only to be PRESERVED by co-operation. The international future dependsupon the possibility of the initial creation of good will between nations.

  It is in this sort of matter that revolutions are most useful. If the Russian

Revolution had been accompanied by a revolution in Germany, the dramatic

suddenness of the change might have shaken Europe, for the moment, out of

its  habits  of  thought:  the  idea  of  fraternity  might  have  seemed,  in  the

twinkling of an eye, to have entered the world of practical politics; and no

idea is so practical as the idea of the brotherhood of man, if only people can

be startled into believing in it. If once the idea of fraternity between nations

were inaugurated with the faith and vigor belonging to a new revolution, all

the difficulties surrounding it would melt away, for all of them are due to

suspicion and the tyranny of ancient prejudice. Those who (as is common in

the English-speaking world) reject revolution as a method, and praise the

gradual  piecemeal  development  which  (we  are  told)  constitutes  solid

progress, overlook the effect of dramatic events in changing the mood and the

beliefs  of  whole  populations.  A  simultaneous  revolution  in  Germany  and

Russia would no doubt have had such an effect, and would have made the

creation of a new world possible here and now.

  Dis aliter visum: the millennium is not for our time. The great moment has

passed, and for ourselves it is again the distant hope that must inspire us, not

the immediate breathless looking for the deliverance.[56] But we have seen

what might have been, and we know that great possibilities do arise in times

of crisis. In some such sense as this, it may well be true that the Socialist

revolution is the road to universal peace, and that when it has been traversed

all the other conditions for the cessation of wars will grow of themselves out

of the changed mental and moral atmosphere.

[56] This was written in March, 1918, almost the darkest moment of the

war.

There is a certain class of difficulties which surrounds the sober idealist in

all speculations about the not too distant future. These are the cases where the

solution believed by most idealists to be universally applicable is for some

reason impossible, and is, at the same time, objected to for base or interested

motives by all upholders of existing inequalities. The case of Tropical Africa

will illustrate what I mean. It would be difficult seriously to advocate the

immediate introduction of parliamentary government for the natives of this

part of the world, even if it were accompanied by women's suffrage and

proportional representation. So far as I know, no one supposes thepopulations of these regions capable of self- determination, except Mr. Lloyd

George. There can be no doubt that, whatever regime may be introduced in

Europe, African negroes will for a long time to come be governed and

exploited by Europeans. If the European States became Socialistic, and

refused, under a Quixotic impulse, to enrich themselves at the expense of the

defenseless inhabitants of Africa, those inhabitants would not thereby gain;

on the contrary, they would lose, for they would be handed over to the tender

mercies of individual traders, operating with armies of reprobate bravos, and

committing every atrocity to which the civilized barbarian is prone. The

European governments cannot divest themselves of responsibility in regard to

Africa. They must govern there, and the best that can be hoped is that they

should govern with a minimum of cruelty and rapacity. From the point of

view of preserving the peace of the world, the problem is to parcel out the

advantages which white men derive from their position in Africa in such a

way that no nation shall feel a sense of injustice. This problem is

comparatively simple, and might no doubt be solved on the lines of the war

aims of the Inter-Allied Socialists. But it is not this problem which I wish to

discuss. What I wish to consider is, how could a Socialist or an Anarchist

community govern and administer an African region, full of natural wealth,

but inhabited by a quite uncivilized population? Unless great precautions

were taken the white community, under the circumstances, would acquire the

position and the instincts of a slave-owner. It would tend to keep the negroes

down to the bare level of subsistence, while using the produce of their

country to increase the comfort and splendor of the Communist community.

It would do this with that careful unconsciousness which now characterizes

all the worst acts of nations. Administrators would be appointed and would

be expected to keep silence as to their methods. Busybodies who reported

horrors would be disbelieved, and would be said to be actuated by hatred

toward the existing regime and by a perverse love for every country but their

own. No doubt, in the first generous enthusiasm accompanying the

establishment of the new regime at home, there would be every intention of

making the natives happy, but gradually they would be forgotten, and only

the tribute coming from their country would be remembered. I do not say that

all these evils are unavoidable; I say only that they will not be avoided unless

they are foreseen and a deliberate conscious effort is made to prevent their

realization. If the white communities should ever reach the point of wishing

to carry out as far as possible the principles underlying the revolt againstcapitalism, they will have to find a way of establishing an absolute

disinterestedness in their dealings with subject races. It will be necessary to

avoid the faintest suggestion of capitalistic profit in the government of Africa,

and to spend in the countries themselves whatever they would be able to

spend if they were self-governing. Moreover, it must always be remembered

that backwardness in civilization is not necessarily incurable, and that with

time even the populations of Central Africa may become capable of

democratic self-government, provided Europeans bend their energies to this

purpose.

  The  problem  of  Africa  is,  of  course,  a  part  of  the  wider  problems  of

Imperialism, but it is that part in which the application of Socialist principles

is most difficult. In regard to Asia, and more particularly in regard to India

and Persia, the application of principles is clear in theory though difficult in

political practice. The obstacles to self-government which exist in Africa do

not exist in the same measure in Asia. What stands in the way of freedom of

Asiatic populations is not their lack of intelligence, but only their lack of

military prowess, which makes them an easy prey to our lust for dominion.

This  lust  would  probably  be  in  temporary  abeyance  on  the  morrow  of  a

Socialist revolution, and at such a moment a new departure in Asiatic policy

might be taken with permanently beneficial results. I do not mean, of course,

that we should force upon India that form of democratic government which

we have developed for our own needs. I mean rather that we should leave

India to choose its own form of government, its own manner of education and

its own type of civilization. India has an ancient tradition, very different from

that of Western Europe, a tradition highly valued by educated Hindoos, but

not loved by our schools and colleges. The Hindoo Nationalist feels that his

country has a type of culture containing elements of value that are absent, or

much less marked, in the West; he wishes to be free to preserve this, and

desires political freedom for such reasons rather than for those that would

most naturally appeal to an Englishman in the same subject position. The

belief of the European in his own Kultur tends to be fanatical and ruthless,

and for this reason, as much as for any other, the independence of extra-

European civilization is of real importance to the world, for it is not by a dead

uniformity that the world as a whole is most enriched.

  I  have  set  forth  strongly  all  the  major  difficulties  in  the  way  of  the

preservation of the world's peace, not because I believe these difficulties to beinsuperable, but, on the contrary, because I believe that they can be overcome

if they are recognized. A correct diagnosis is necessarily the first step toward

a cure. The existing evils in international relations spring, at bottom, from

psychological causes, from motives forming part of human nature as it is at

present. Among these the chief are competitiveness, love of power, and envy,

using envy in that broad sense in which it includes the instinctive dislike of

any gain to others not accompanied by an at least equal gain to ourselves. The

evils arising from these three causes can be removed by a better education

and a better economic and political system.

    Competitiveness is by no means wholly an evil. When it takes the form of

emulation in the service of the public, or in discovery or the production of

works of art, it may become a very useful stimulus, urging men to profitable

effort beyond what they would otherwise make. It is only harmful when it

aims at the acquisition of goods which are limited in amount, so that what

one man possesses he holds at the expense of another. When competitiveness

takes this form it is necessarily attended by fear, and out of fear cruelty is

almost inevitably developed. But a social system providing for a more just

distribution of material goods might close to the instinct of competitiveness

those channels in which it is harmful, and cause it to flow instead in channels

in which it would become a benefit to mankind. This is one great reason why

the  communal  ownership  of  land  and  capital  would  be  likely  to  have  a

beneficial effect upon human nature, for human nature, as it exists in adult

men  and  women,  is  by  no  means  a  fixed  datum,  but  a  product  of

circumstances, education and opportunity operating upon a highly malleable

native disposition.

  What is true of competitiveness is equally true of love of power. Power, in

the form in which it is now usually sought, is power of command, power of

imposing one's will upon others by force, open or concealed. This form of

power consists, in essence, in thwarting others, for it is only displayed when

others are compelled to do what they do not wish to do. Such power, we

hope,  the  social  system  which  is  to  supersede  capitalist  will  reduce  to  a

minimum by the methods which we outlined in the preceding chapter. These

methods can be applied in international no less than in national affairs. In

international  affairs  the  same  formula  of  federalism  will  apply:  self-

determination for every group in regard to matters which concern it much

more vitally than they concern others, and government by a neutral authorityembracing rival groups in all matters in which conflicting interests of groups

come into play; lout always with the fixed principle that the functions of

government are to be reduced to the bare minimum compatible with justice

and the prevention of private violence. In such a world the present harmful

outlets for the love of power would be closed. But the power which consists

in persuasion, in teaching, in leading men to a new wisdom or the realization

of new possibilities of happiness—this kind of power, which may be wholly

beneficial, would remain untouched, and many vigorous men, who in the

actual world devote their energies to domination, would in such a world find

their  energies  directed  to  the  creation  of  new  goods  rather  than  the

perpetuation of ancient evils.

  Envy, the third of the psychological causes to which we attributed what is

bad  in  the  actual  world,  depends  in  most  natures  upon  that  kind  of

fundamental discontent which springs from a lack of free development, from

thwarted  instinct,  and  from  the  impossibility  of  realizing  an  imagined

happiness. Envy cannot be cured by preaching; preaching, at the best, will

only  alter  its  manifestations  and  lead  it  to  adopt  more  subtle  forms  of

concealment. Except in those rare natures in which generosity dominates in

spite of circumstances, the only cure for envy is freedom and the joy of life.

From  populations  largely  deprived  of  the  simple  instinctive  pleasures  of

leisure  and  love,  sunshine  and  green  fields,  generosity  of  outlook  and

kindliness of dispositions are hardly to be expected. In such populations these

qualities are not likely to be found, even among the fortunate few, for these

few are aware, however dimly, that they are profiting by an injustice, and that

they can only continue to enjoy their good fortune by deliberately ignoring

those  with  whom  it  is  not  shared.  If  generosity  and  kindliness  are  to  be

common, there must be more care than there is at present for the elementary

wants of human nature, and more realization that the diffusion of happiness

among  all  who  are  not  the  victims  of  some  peculiar  misfortune  is  both

possible and imperative. A world full of happiness would not wish to plunge

into  war,  and  would  not  be  filled  with  that  grudging  hostility  which  our

cramped and narrow existence forces upon average human nature. A world

full of happiness is not beyond human power to create; the obstacles imposed

by inanimate nature are not insuperable. The real obstacles lie in the heart of

man, and the cure for these is a firm hope, informed and fortified by thought.

                                     CHAPTER VII

            SCIENCE AND ART UNDER SOCIALISM

  SOCIALISM has been advocated by most of its champions chiefly as a

means of increasing the welfare of the wage earning classes, and more

particularly their material welfare. It has seemed accordingly, to some men

whose aims are not material, as if it has nothing to offer toward the general

advancement of civilization in the way of art and thought. Some of its

advocates, moreover—and among these Marx must be included—have

written, no doubt not deliberately, as if with the Socialist revolution the

millennium would have arrived, and there would be no need of further

progress for the human race. I do not know whether our age is more restless

than that which preceded it, or whether it has merely become more

impregnated with the idea of evolution, but, for whatever reason, we have

grown incapable of believing in a state of static perfection, and we demand,

of any social system, which is to have our approval, that it shall contain

within itself a stimulus and opportunity for progress toward something still

better. The doubts thus raised by Socialist writers make it necessary to

inquire whether Socialism would in fact be hostile to art and science, and

whether it would be likely to produce a stereotyped society in which progress

would become difficult and slow.

  It is not enough that men and women should be made comfortable in a

material sense. Many members of the well-to-do classes at present, in spite of

opportunity, contribute nothing of value to the life of the world, and do not

even succeed in securing for themselves any personal happiness worthy to be

so called. The multiplication of such individuals would be an achievement of

the very minutest value; and if Socialism were merely to bestow upon all the

kind of life and outlook which is now enjoyed by the more apathetic among

the  well-to-do,  it  would  offer  little  that  could  inspire  enthusiasm  in  any

generous spirit.

  ``The true role of collective existence,'' says M. Naquet,[57]'' . . . is to

learn, to discover, to know. Eating, drinking, sleeping, living, in a word, is a

mere  accessory.  In  this  respect,  we  are  not  distinguished  from  the  brute.

Knowledge is the goal. If I were condemned to choose between a humanity

materially happy, glutted after the manner of a flock of sheep in a field, and a

humanity existing in misery, but from which emanated, here and there, some

eternal truth, it is on the latter that my choice would fall.''[57] ``L'Anarchie et le Collectivisme,'' p. 114.

This statement puts the alternative in a very extreme form in which it is

somewhat unreal. It may be said in reply that for those who have had the

leisure and the opportunity to enjoy ``eternal truths'' it is easy to exalt their

importance at the expense of sufferings which fall on others. This is true; but,

if it is taken as disposing of the question, it leaves out of account the

importance of thought for progress. Viewing the life of mankind as a whole,

in the future as well as in the present, there can be no question that a society

in which some men pursue knowledge while others endure great poverty

offers more hope of ultimate good than a society in which all are sunk in

slothful comfort. It is true that poverty is a great evil, but it is not true that

material prosperity is in itself a great good. If it is to have any real value to

society, it must be made a means to the advancement of those higher goods

that belong to the life of the mind. But the life of the mind does not consist of

thought and knowledge alone, nor can it be completely healthy unless it has

some instinctive contact, however deeply buried, with the general life of the

community. Divorced from the social instinct, thought, like art, tends to

become finicky and precious. It is the position of such art and thought as is

imbued with the instinctive sense of service to mankind that we wish to

consider, for it is this alone that makes up the life of the mind in the sense in

which it is a vital part of the life of the community. Will the life of the mind

in this sense be helped or hindered by Socialism? And will there still be a

sufficient spur to progress to prevent a condition of Byzantine immobility?

  In considering this question we are, in a certain sense, passing outside the

atmosphere of democracy. The general good of the community is realized

only in individuals, but it is realized much more fully in some individuals

than in others. Some men have a comprehensive and penetrating intellect,

enabling them to appreciate and remember what has been thought and known

by their predecessors, and to discover new regions in which they enjoy all the

high  delights  of  the  mental  explorer.  Others  have  the  power  of  creating

beauty, giving bodily form to impalpable visions out of which joy comes to

many. Such men are more fortunate than the mass, and also more important

for  the  collective  life.  A  larger  share  of  the  general  sum  of  good  is

concentrated in them than in the ordinary man and woman; but also their

contribution to the general good is greater. They stand out among men and

cannot be wholly fitted into the framework of democratic equality. A socialsystem  which  would  render  them  unproductive  would  stand  condemned,

whatever other merits it might have.

  The first thing to realize—though it is difficult in a commercial age—is

that what is best in creative mental activity cannot be produced by any system

of  monetary  rewards.  Opportunity  and  the  stimulus  of  an  invigorating

spiritual atmosphere are important, but, if they are presented, no financial

inducements  will  be  required,  while  if  they  are  absent,  material

compensations will be of no avail. Recognition, even if it takes the form of

money, can bring a certain pleasure in old age to the man of science who has

battled all his life against academic prejudice, or to the artist who has endured

years of ridicule for not painting in the manner of his predecessors; but it is

not by the remote hope of such pleasures that their work has been inspired.

All the most important work springs from an uncalculating impulse, and is

best promoted, not by rewards after the event, but by circumstances which

keep the impulse alive and afford scope for the activities which it inspires. In

the creation of such circumstances our present system is much at fault. Will

Socialism be better?

  I do not think this question can be answered without specifying the kind of

Socialism that is intended: some forms of Socialism would, I believe, be even

more  destructive  in  this  respect  than  the  present  capitalist  regime,  while

others would be immeasurably better. Three things which a social system can

provide or withhold are helpful to mental creation: first, technical training;

second, liberty to follow the creative impulse; third, at least the possibility of

ultimate appreciation by some public, whether large or small. We may leave

out of our discussion both individual genius and those intangible conditions

which  make  some  ages  great  and  others  sterile  in  art  and  science—not

because these are unimportant, but because they are too little understood to

be  taken  account  of  in  economic  or  political  organization.  The  three

conditions we have mentioned seem to cover most of what can be SEEN to

be useful or harmful from our present point of view, and it is therefore to

them that we shall confine ourselves.

  1. Technical Training.—Technical training at present, whether in science

or art, requires one or other of two conditions. Either a boy must be the son of

well-to-do  parents  who  can  afford  to  keep  him  while  he  acquires  his

education, or he must show so much ability at an early age as to enable him

to subsist on scholarships until he is ready to earn his living. The formercondition is, of course, a mere matter of luck, and could not be preserved in

its present form under any kind of Socialism or Communism. This loss is

emphasized by defenders of the present system, and no doubt it would be, to

same extent, a real loss. But the well-to-do are a small proportion of the

population, and presumably on the average no more talented by nature than

their less fortunate contemporaries. If the advantages which are enjoyed now

by those few among them who are capable of good work in science or art

could be extended, even in a slightly attenuated form, to all who are similarly

gifted, the result would almost infallibly be a gain, and much ability which is

now wasted would be rendered fruitful. But how is this to be effected?

  The system of scholarships obtained by competition, though better than

nothing,  is  objectionable  from  many  points  of  view.  It  introduces  the

competitive spirit into the work of the very young; it makes them regard

knowledge from the standpoint of what is useful in examinations rather than

in the light of its intrinsic interest or importance; it places a premium upon

that sort of ability which is displayed precociously in glib answers to set

questions rather than upon the kind that broods on difficulties and remains for

a time rather dumb. What is perhaps worse than any of these defects is the

tendency to cause overwork in youth, leading to lack of vigor and interest

when manhood has been reached. It can hardly be doubted that by this cause,

at  present,  many  fine  minds  have  their  edge  blunted  and  their  keenness

destroyed.

  State  Socialism  might  easily  universalize  the  system  of  scholarships

obtained by competitive examination, and if it did so it is to he feared that it

would be very harmful. State Socialists at present tend to be enamored of the

systems which is exactly of the kind that every bureaucrat loves: orderly,

neat, giving a stimulus to industrious habits, and involving no waste of a sort

that could be tabulated in statistics or accounts of public expenditure. Such

men will argue that free higher education is expensive to the community, and

only  useful  in  the  case  of  those  who  have  exceptional  abilities;  it  ought,

therefore, they will say, not to be given to all, but only to those who will

become  more  useful  members  of  society  through  receiving  it.  Such

arguments make a great appeal to what are called ``practical'' men, and the

answers to them are of a sort which it is difficult to render widely convincing.

Revolt against the evils of competition is, however, part of the very essence

of the Socialist's protest against the existing order, and on this ground, if onno other, those who favor Socialism may be summoned to look for some

better solution.

  Much the simplest solution, and the only really effective one, is to make

every kind of education free up to the age of twenty-one for all boys and girls

who desire it. The majority will be tired of education before that age, and will

prefer to begin other work sooner; this will lead to a natural selection of those

with strong interests in some pursuit requiring a long training. Among those

selected in this way by their own inclinations, probably almost all tho have

marked abilities of the kind in question will be included. It is true that there

will also be many who have very little ability; the desire to become a painter,

for example, is by no means confined to those who can paint. But this degree

of waste could well be borne by the community; it would be immeasurably

less than that now entailed by the support of the idle rich. Any system which

aims at avoiding this kind of waste must entail the far more serious waste of

rejecting or spoiling some of the best ability in each generation. The system

of free education up to any grade for all who desire it is the only system

which is consistent with the principles of liberty, and the only one which

gives a reasonable hope of affording full scope for talent. This system is

equally compatible with all forms of Socialism and Anarchism. Theoretically,

it is compatible with capitalism, but practically it is so opposite in spirit that it

would hardly be feasible without a complete economic reconstruction. The

fact  that  Socialism  would  facilitate  it  must  be  reckoned  a  very  powerful

argument in favor of change, for the waste of talent at present in the poorer

classes of society must be stupendous.

  2. Liberty to follow the creative impulse.— When a man's training has

been completed, if he is possessed of really great abilities, he will do his best

work if he is completely free to follow his bent, creating what seems good to

him, regardless of the judgment of ``experts.'' At present this is only possible

for two classes of people: those who have private means, and those who can

earn a living by an occupation that does not absorb their whole energies.

Under Socialism, there will be no one with private means, and if there is to be

no  loss  as  regards  art  and  science,  the  opportunity  which  now  comes  by

accident to a few will have to be provided deliberately for a much larger

number. The men who have used private means as an opportunity for creative

work have been few but important: one might mention Milton, Shelley, Keats

and Darwin as examples. Probably none of these would have produced asgood work if they had had to earn their livelihood. If Darwin had been a

university teacher, he would of course have been dismissed from his post by

the influence of the clerics on account of his scandalous theories.

  Nevertheless, the bulk of the creative work of the world is done at present

by  men  who  subsist  by  some  other  occupation.  Science,  and  research

generally, are usually done in their spare time by men who live by teaching.

There is no great objection to this in the case of science, provided the number

of hours devoted to teaching is not excessive. It is partly because science and

teaching are so easily combined that science is vigorous in the present age. In

music, a composer who is also a performer enjoys similar advantages, but

one who is not a performer must starve, unless he is rich or willing to pander

to the public taste. In the fine arts, as a rule, it is not easy in the modern world

either to make a living by really good work or to find a subsidiary profession

which  leaves  enough  leisure  for  creation.  This  is  presumably  one  reason,

though by no means the only one, why art is less flourishing than science.

  The  bureaucratic  State  Socialist  will  have  a  simple  solution  for  these

difficulties. He will appoint a body consisting of the most eminent celebrities

in an art or a science, whose business it shall be to judge the work of young

men, and to issue licenses to those whose productions find favor in their eyes.

A  licensed  artist  shall  be  considered  to  have  performed  his  duty  to  the

community by producing works of art. But of course he will have to prove his

industry  by  never  failing  to  produce  in  reasonable  quantities,  and  his

continued ability by never failing to please his eminent judges—until, in the

fulness of time, he becomes a judge himself. In this way, the authorities will

insure that the artist shall be competent, regular, and obedient to the best

traditions  of  his  art.  Those  who  fail  to  fulfil  these  conditions  will  be

compelled by the withdrawal of their license to seek some less dubious mode

of earning their living. Such will be the ideal of the State Socialist.

  In such a world all that makes life tolerable to the lover of beauty would

perish. Art springs from a wild and anarchic side of human nature; between

the  artist  and  the  bureaucrat  there  must  always  be  a  profound  mutual

antagonism, an age-long battle in which the artist, always outwardly worsted,

wins in the end through the gratitude of mankind for the joy that he puts into

their lives. If the wild side of human nature is to be permanently subjected to

the orderly rules of the benevolent, uncomprehending bureaucrat, the joy of

life will perish out of the earth, and the very impulse to live will graduallywither and die. Better a thousandfold the present world with all its horrors

than such a dead mummy of a world. Better Anarchism, with all its risks,

than a State Socialism that subjects to rule what must be spontaneous and free

if it is to have any value. It is this nightmare that makes artists, and lovers of

beauty generally, so often suspicious of Socialism. But there is nothing in the

essence of Socialism to make art impossible: only certain forms of Socialism

would entail this danger. William Morris was a Socialist, and was a Socialist

very largely because he was an artist. And in this he was not irrational.

  It is impossible for art, or any of the higher creative activities, to flourish

under any system which requires that the artist shall prove his competence to

some body of authorities before he is allowed to follow his impulse. Any

really great artist is almost sure to be thought incompetent by those among

his seniors who would be generally regarded as best qualified to form an

opinion. And the mere fact of having to produce work which will please older

men  is  hostile  to  a  free  spirit  and  to  bold  innovation.  Apart  from  this

difficulty, selection by older men would lead to jealousy and intrigue and

back-biting, producing a poisonous atmosphere of underground competition.

The only effect of such a plan would be to eliminate the few who now slip

through owing to some fortunate accident. It is not by any system, but by

freedom alone, that art can flourish.

  There  are  two  ways  by  which  the  artist  could  secure  freedom  under

Socialism of the right kind. He might undertake regular work outside his art,

doing only a few hours' work a day and receiving proportionately less pay

than those who do a full day's work. He ought, in that case, to be at liberty to

sell his pictures if he could find purchasers. Such a system would have many

advantages. It would leave absolutely every man free to become an artist,

provided he were willing to suffer a certain economic loss. This would not

deter those in whom the impulse was strong and genuine, but would tend to

exclude the dilettante. Many young artists at present endure voluntarily much

greater poverty than need be entailed by only doing half the usual day's work

in a well-organized Socialist community; and some degree of hardship is not

objectionable, as a test of the strength of the creative impulse, and as an offset

to the peculiar joys of the creative life.

  The other possibility[58] would be that the necessaries of life should be

free, as Anarchists desire, to all equally, regardless of whether they work or

not. Under this plan, every man could live without work: there would be whatmight be called a ``vagabond's wage,'' sufficient for existence but not for

luxury. The artist who preferred to have his whole time for art and enjoyment

might live on the ``vagabond's wage''—traveling on foot when the humor

seized him to see foreign countries, enjoying the air and the sun, as free as the

birds,  and  perhaps  scarcely  less  happy.  Such  men  would  bring  color  and

diversity into the life of the community; their outlook would be different

from that of steady, stay-at-home workers, and would keep alive a much-

needed element of light- heartedness which our sober, serious civilization

tends  to  kill.  If  they  became  very  numerous,  they  might  be  too  great  an

economic burden on the workers; but I doubt if there are many with enough

capacity  for  simple  enjoyments  to  choose  poverty  and  free-  dom  in

preference to the comparatively light and pleasant work which will be usual

in those days.

[58] Which we discussed in Chapter IV.

By either of these methods, freedom can be preserved for the artist in a

socialistic commonwealth— far more complete freedom, and far more

widespread, than any that now exists except for the possessors of capital.

  But  there  still  remain  some  not  altogether  easy  problems.  Take,  for

example, the publishing of books. There will not, under Socialism, be private

publishers as at present: under State Socialism, presumably the State will be

the  sole  publisher,  while  under  Syndicalism  or  Guild  Socialism  the

Federation du Livre will have the whole of the trade in its hands. Under these

circumstances, who is to decide what MSS. are to be printed? It is clear that

opportunities exist for an Index more rigorous than that of the Inquisition. If

the State were the sole publisher, it would doubtless refuse books opposed to

State Socialism. If the Federation du Livre were the ultimate arbiter, what

publicity could be obtained for works criticising it? And apart from such

political  difficulties  we  should  have,  as  regards  literature,  that  very

censorship by eminent officials which we agreed to regard as disastrous when

we were considering the fine arts in general. The difficulty is serious, and a

way of meeting it must be found if literature is to remain free.

  Kropotkin,  who  believes  that  manual  and  intellectual  work  should  be

combined, holds that authors themselves should be compositors, bookbinders,

etc. He even seems to suggest that the whole of the manual work involved in

producing books should be done by authors. It may be doubted whether there

are enough authors in the world for this to be possible, and in any case Icannot but think that it would be a waste of time for them to leave the work

they understand in order to do badly work which others could do far better

and more quickly. That, however, does not touch our present point, which is

the question how the MSS. to be printed will be selected. In Kropotkin's plan

there  will  presumably  be  an  Author's  Guild,  with  a  Committee  of

Management,  if  Anarchism  allows  such  things.  This  Committee  of

Management will decide which of the books submitted to it are worthy to be

printed.  Among  these  will  be  included  those  by  the  Committee  and  their

friends, but not those by their enemies. Authors of rejected MSS. will hardly

have the patience to spend their time setting up the works of successful rivals,

and there will have to be an elaborate system of log-rolling if any books are

to be printed at all. It hardly looks as if this plan would conduce to harmony

among  literary  men,  or  would  lead  to  the  publication  of  any  book  of  an

unconventional tendency. Kropotkin's own books, for example, would hardly

have found favor.

  The only way of meeting these difficulties, whether under State Socialism

or Guild Socialism or Anarchism, seems to be by making it possible for an

author to pay for the publication of his book if it is not such as the State or

the Guild is willing to print at its own expense. I am aware that this method is

contrary to the spirit of Socialism, but I do not see what other way there is of

securing freedom. The payment might be made by undertaking to engage for

an assigned period in some work of recognized utility and to hand over such

proportion of the earnings as might be necessary. The work undertaken might

of course be, as Kropotkin suggests, the manual part of the production of

books, but I see no special reason why it should be. It would have to be an

absolute rule that no book should be refused, no matter what the nature of its

contents might be, if payment for publication were offered at the standard

rate.  An  author  who  had  admirers  would  be  able  to  secure  their  help  in

payment. An unknown author might, it is true, have to suffer a considerable

loss  of  comfort  in  order  to  make  his  payment,  but  that  would  give  an

automatic means of eliminating those whose writing was not the result of any

very profound impulse and would be by no means wholly an evil.

  Probably  some  similar  method  would  be  desirable  as  regards  the

publishing and performing of new music.

  What we have been suggesting will, no doubt, be objected to by orthodox

Socialists, since they will find something repugnant to their principles in thewhole idea of a private person paying to have certain work done. But it is a

mistake to be the slave of a system, and every system, if it is applied rigidly,

will  entail  evils  which  could  only  be  avoided  by  some  concession  to  the

exigencies of special cases. On the whole, a wise form of Socialism might

afford infinitely better opportunities for the artist and the man of science than

are  possible  in  a  capitalist  community,  but  only  if  the  form  of  Socialism

adopted is one which is fitted for this end by means of provisions such as we

have been suggesting.

  3.  Possibility  of  Appreciation.—This  condition  is  one  which  is  not

necessary to all who do creative work, but in the sense in which I mean it the

great majority find it very nearly indispensable. I do not mean widespread

public recognition, nor that ignorant, half-sincere respect which is commonly

accorded to artists who have achieved success. Neither of these serves much

purpose. What I mean is rather understanding, and a spontaneous feeling that

things of beauty are important. In a thoroughly commercialized society, an

artist is respected if he makes money, and because he makes money, but there

is no genuine respect for the works of art by which his money has been made.

A millionaire whose fortune has been made in button-hooks or chewing-gum

is regarded with awe, but none of this feeling is bestowed on the articles from

which his wealth is derived. In a society which measures all things by money

the same tends to be true of the artist. If he has become rich he is respected,

though of course less than the millionaire, but his pictures or books or music

are regarded as the chewing-gum or the button- hooks are regarded, merely as

a means to money. In such an atmosphere it is very difficult for the artist to

preserve  his  creative  impulse  pure:  either  he  is  contaminated  by  his

surroundings, or he becomes embittered through lack of appreciation for the

object of his endeavor.

  It is not appreciation of the artist that is necessary so much as appreciation

of  the  art.  It  is  difficult  for  an  artist  to  live  in  an  environment  in  which

everything is judged by its utility, rather than by its intrinsic quality. The

whole side of life of which art is the flower requires something which may be

called disinterestedness, a capacity for direct enjoyment without thought of

tomorrow's problems and difficulties. When people are amused by a joke

they do not need to be persuaded that it will serve some important purpose.

The same kind of direct pleasure is involved in any genuine appreciation of

art. The struggle for life, the serious work of a trade or profession, is apt tomake people too solemn for jokes and too pre-occupied for art. The easing of

the struggle, the diminution in the hours of work, and the lightening of the

burden  of  existence,  which  would  result  from  a  better  economic  system,

could hardly fail to increase the joy of life and the vital energy, available for

sheer delight in the world. And if this were achieved there would inevitably

be more spontaneous pleasure in beautiful things, and more enjoyment of the

work of artists. But none of these good results are to be expected from the

mere removal of poverty: they all require also a diffused sense of freedom,

and the absence of that feeling of oppression by a vast machine which now

weighs down the individual spirit. I do not think State Socialism can give this

sense of freedom, but some other forms of Socialism, which have absorbed

what is true in Anarchist teaching, can give it to a degree of which capitalism

is wholly incapable.

  A general sense of progress and achievement is an immense stimulus to all

forms of creative work. For this reason, a great deal will depend, not only in

material ways, upon the question whether methods of production in industry

and agriculture become stereotyped or continue to change rapidly as they

have done during the last hundred years. Improved methods of production

will be much more obviously than now to the interest of the community at

large, when what every man receives is his due share of the total produce of

labor. But there will probably not be any individuals with the same direct and

intense interest in technical improvements as now belongs to the capitalist in

manufacture.  If  the  natural  conservatism  of  the  workers  is  not  to  prove

stronger than their interest in increasing production, it will be necessary that,

when better methods are introduced by the workers in any industry, part at

least of the benefit should be allowed for a time to be retained by them. If this

is done, it may be presumed that each Guild will be continually seeking for

new processes or inventions, and will value those technical parts of scientific

research  which  are  useful  for  this  purpose.  With  every  improvement,  the

question will arise whether it is to be used to give more leisure or to increase

the dividend of commodities. Where there is so much more leisure than there

is now, there will be many more people with a knowledge of science or an

understanding of art. The artist or scientific investigator will be far less cut

off  than  he  is  at  present  from  the  average  citizen,  and  this  will  almost

inevitably be a stimulus to his creative energy.

  I think we may fairly conclude that, from the point of view of all threerequisites for art and science, namely, training, freedom and appreciation,

State  Socialism  would  largely  fail  to  remove  existing  evils  and  would

introduce new evils of its own; but Guild Socialism, or even Syndicalism, if it

adopted a liberal policy toward those who preferred to work less than the

usual number of hours at recognized occupations, might be immeasurably

preferable to anything that is possible under the rule of capitalism. There are

dangers, but they will all vanish if the importance of liberty is adequately

acknowledged. In this as in nearly everything else, the road to all that is best

is the road of freedom.

                                     CHAPTER VIII

              THE WORLD AS IT COULD BE MADE

IN the daily lives of most men and women, fear plays a greater part than

hope: they are more filled with the thought of the possessions that others may

take from them, than of the joy that they might create in their own lives and

in the lives with which they come in contact.

  It is not so that life should be lived.

  Those whose lives are fruitful to themselves, to their friends, or to the

world are inspired by hope and sustained by joy: they see in imagination the

things  that  might  be  and  the  way  in  which  they  are  to  be  brought  into

existence. In their private relations they are not pre-occupied with anxiety lest

they should lose such affection and respect as they receive: they are engaged

in giving affection and respect freely, and the reward comes of itself without

their seeking. In their work they are not haunted by jealousy of competitors,

but concerned with the actual matter that has to be done. In politics, they do

not  spend  time  and  passion  defending  unjust  privileges  of  their  class  or

nation, but they aim at making the world as a whole happier, less cruel, less

full of conflict between rival greeds, and more full of human beings whose

growth has not been dwarfed and stunted by oppression.

  A  life  lived  in  this  spirit—the  spirit  that  aims  at  creating  rather  than

possessing—has  a  certain  fundamental  happiness,  of  which  it  cannot  be

wholly  robbed  by  adverse  circumstances.  This  is  the  way  of  life

recommended  in  the  Gospels,  and  by  all  the  great  teachers  of  the  world.

Those who have found it are freed from the tyranny of fear, since what they

value most in their lives is not at the mercy of outside power. If all men could

summon up the courage and the vision to live in this way in spite of obstacles

and discouragement, there would be no need for the regeneration of the world

to begin by political and economic reform: all that is needed in the way of

reform would  come automatically, without resistance, owing to the moral

regeneration of individuals. But the teaching of Christ has been nominally

accepted by the world for many centuries, and yet those who follow it are still

persecuted  as  they  were  before  the  time  of  Constantine.  Experience  has

proved that few are able to see through the apparent evils of an outcast's life

to the inner joy that comes of faith and creative hope. If the domination of

fear is to be overcome, it is not enough, as regards the mass of men, to preachcourage and indifference to misfortune: it is necessary to remove the causes

of fear, to make a good life no longer an unsuccessful one in a worldly sense,

and to diminish the harm that can be inflicted upon those who are not wary in

self- defense.

  When we consider the evils in the lives we know of, we find that they may

be roughly divided into three classes. There are, first, those due to physical

nature: among these are death, pain and the difficulty of making the soil yield

a subsistence. These we will call ``physical evils.'' Second, we may put those

that spring from defects in the character or aptitudes of the sufferer: among

these are ignorance, lack of will, and violent passions. These we will call

``evils of character.'' Third come those that depend upon the power of one

individual or group over another: these comprise not only obvious tyranny,

but all interference with free development, whether by force or by excessive

mental influence such as may occur in education. These we will call ``evils of

power.'' A social system may be judged by its bearing upon these three kinds

of evils.

  The distinction between the three kinds cannot be sharply drawn. Purely

physical evil is a limit, which we can never be sure of having reached: we

cannot abolish death, but we can often postpone it by science, and it may

ultimately become possible to secure that the great majority shall live till old

age; we cannot wholly prevent pain, but we can diminish it indefinitely by

securing a healthy life for all; we cannot make the earth yield its fruits in any

abundance without labor, but we can diminish the amount of the labor and

improve its conditions until it ceases to be an evil. Evils of character are often

the result of physical evil in the shape of illness, and still more often the

result of evils of power, since tyranny degrades both those who exercise it

and (as a rule) those who suffer it. Evils of power are intensified by evils of

character in those who have power, and by fear of the physical evil which is

apt to be the lot of those who have no power. For all these reasons, the three

sorts  of  evil  are  intertwined.  Nevertheless,  speaking  broadly,  we  may

distinguish among our misfortunes those which have their proximate cause in

the material world, those which are mainly due to defects in ourselves, and

those which spring from our being subject to the control of others.

  The  main  methods  of  combating  these  evils  are:  for  physical  evils,

science; for evils of character, education (in the widest sense) and a free

outlet for all impulses that do not involve domination; for evils of power, thereform of the political and economic organization of society in such a way as

to reduce to the lowest possible point the interference of one man with the life

of another. We will begin with the third of these kinds of evil, because it is

evils  of  power  specially  that  Socialism  and  Anarchism  have  sought  to

remedy. Their protest against Inequalities of wealth has rested mainly upon

their sense of the evils arising from the power conferred by wealth. This point

has been well stated by Mr. G. D. H. Cole:—

What, I want to ask, is the fundamental evil in our modern Society which

we should set out to abolish?

  There are two possible answers to that question, and I am sure that very

many well-meaning people would make the wrong one. They would answer

POVERTY, when they ought to answer SLAVERY. Face to face every day

with the shameful contrasts of riches and destitution, high dividends and low

wages, and painfully conscious of the futility of trying to adjust the balance

by means of charity, private or public, they would answer unhesitatingly that

they stand for the ABOLITION OF POVERTY.

  Well  and  good!  On  that  issue  every  Socialist  is  with  them.  But  their

answer to my question is none the less wrong.

  Poverty is the symptom: slavery the disease. The extremes of riches and

destitution follow inevitably upon the extremes of license and bondage. The

many are not enslaved because they are poor, they are poor because they are

enslaved. Yet Socialists have all too often fixed their eyes upon the material

misery  of  the  poor  without  realizing  that  it  rests  upon  the  spiritual

degradation of the slave.[59]

[59] ``Self-Government in Industry,'' G. Bell & Sons, 1917, pp. 110-111.

I do not think any reasonable person can doubt that the evils of power in the

present system are vastly greater than is necessary, nor that they might be

immeasurably diminished by a suitable form of Socialism. A few fortunate

people, it is true, are now enabled to live freely on rent or interest, and they

could hardly have more liberty under another system. But the great bulk, not

only of the very poor, but, of all sections of wage-earners and even of the

professional classes, are the slaves of the need for getting money. Almost all

are compelled to work so hard that they have little leisure for enjoyment or

for pursuits outside their regular occupation. Those who are able to retire in

later middle age are bored, because they have not learned how to fill their

time when they are at liberty, and such interests as they once had apart fromwork have dried up. Yet these are the exceptionally fortunate: the majority

have to work hard till old age, with the fear of destitution always before

them, the richer ones dreading that they will be unable to give their children

the education or the medical care that they consider desirable, the poorer ones

often not far removed from starvation. And almost all who work have no

voice in the direction of their work; throughout the hours of labor they are

mere machines carrying out the will of a master. Work is usually done under

disagreeable conditions, involving pain and physical hardship. The only

motive to work is wages: the very idea that work might be a joy, like the

work of the artist, is usually scouted as utterly Utopian.

  But by far the greater part of these evils are wholly unnecessary. If the

civilized portion of mankind could be induced to desire their own happiness

more than another's pain, if they could be induced to work constructively for

improvements  which  they  would  share  with  all  the  world  rather  than

destructively to prevent other classes or nations from stealing a march on

them, the whole system by which the world's work is done might be reformed

root and branch within a generation.

  From the point of view of liberty, what system would be the best? In what

direction should we wish the forces of progress to move?

  From  this  point  of  view,  neglecting  for  the  moment  all  other

considerations, I have no doubt that the best system would be one not far

removed from that advocated by Kropotkin, but rendered more practicable by

the adoption of the main principles of Guild Socialism. Since every point can

be disputed, I will set down without argument the kind of organization of

work that would seem best.

  Education should be compulsory up to the age of 16, or perhaps longer;

after that, it should be continued or not at the option of the pupil, but remain

free (for those who desire it) up to at least the age of 21. When education is

finished no one should be COMPELLED to work, and those who choose not

to work should receive a bare livelihood, and be left completely free; but

probably it would be desirable that there should be a strong public opinion in

favor of work, so that only comparatively few should choose idleness. One

great advantage of making idleness economically possible is that it would

afford  a  powerful  motive  for  making  work  not  disagreeable;  and  no

community where most work is disagreeable can be said to have found a

solution of economic problems. I think it is reasonable to assume that fewwould choose idleness, in view of the fact that even now at least nine out of

ten of those who have (say) 100 pounds a year from investments prefer to

increase their income by paid work.

  Coming now to that great majority who will not choose idleness, I think

we may assume that, with the help of science, and by the elimination of the

vast  amount  of  unproductive  work  involved  in  internal  and  international

competition, the whole community could be kept in comfort by means of four

hours' work a day. It is already being urged by experienced employers that

their employes can actually produce as much in a six-hour day as they can

when they work eight hours. In a world where there is a much higher level of

technical instruction than there is now the same tendency will be accentuated.

People will be taught not only, as at present, one trade, or one small portion

of a trade, but several trades, so that they can vary their occupation according

to the seasons and the fluctuations of demand. Every industry will be self-

governing as regards all its internal affairs, and even separate factories will

decide  for  themselves  all  questions  that  only  concern  those  who  work  in

them. There will not be capitalist management, as at present, but management

by elected representatives, as in politics. Relations between different groups

of producers will be settled by the Guild Congress, matters concerning the

community as the inhabitants of a certain area will continue to be decided by

Parliament, while all disputes between Parliament and the Guild Congress

will  be  decided  by  a  body  composed  of  representatives  of  both  in  equal

numbers.

  Payment will not be made, as at present, only for work actually required

and performed, but for willingness to work. This system is already adopted in

much of the better paid work: a man occupies a certain position, and retains it

even  at  times  when  there  happens  to  be  very  little  to  do.  The  dread  of

unemployment  and  loss  of  livelihood  will  no  longer  haunt  men  like  a

nightmare.  Whether  all  who  are  willing  to  work  will  be  paid  equally,  or

whether  exceptional  skill  will  still  command  exceptional  pay,  is  a  matter

which may be left to each guild to decide for itself. An opera-singer who

received no more pay than a scene-shifter might choose to be a scene-shifter

until the system was changed: if so, higher pay would probably be found

necessary. But if it were freely voted by the Guild, it could hardly constitute a

grievance.

  Whatever  might  be  done  toward  making  work  agreeable,  it  is  to  bepresumed that some trades would always remain unpleasant. Men could be

attracted into these by higher pay or shorter hours, instead of being driven

into them by destitution. The community would then have a strong economic

motive  for  finding  ways  of  diminishing  the  disagreeableness  of  these

exceptional trades.

  There would still have to be money, or something analogous to it, in any

community  such  as  we  are  imagining.  The  Anarchist  plan  of  a  free

distribution of the total produce of work in equal shares does not get rid of

the need for some standard of exchange value, since one man will choose to

take his share in one form and another in another. When the day comes for

distributing luxuries, old ladies will not want their quota of cigars, nor young

men their just proportion of lap-dog; this will make it necessary to know how

many cigars are the equivalent of one lap-dog. Much the simplest way is to

pay  an  income,  as  at  present,  and  allow  relative  values  to  be  adjusted

according to demand. But if actual coin were paid, a man might hoard it and

in time become a capitalist. To prevent this, it would be best to pay notes

available only during a certain period, say one year from the date of issue.

This would enable a man to save up for his annual holiday, but not to save

indefinitely.

  There is a very great deal to be said for the Anarchist plan of allowing

necessaries, and all commodities that can easily be produced in quantities

adequate to any possible demand, to be given away freely to all who ask for

them,  in  any  amounts  they  may  require.  The  question  whether  this  plan

should be adopted is, to my mind, a purely technical one: would it be, in fact,

possible to adopt it without much waste and consequent diversion of labor to

the  production  of  necessaries  when  it  might  be  more  usefully  employed

otherwise? I have not the means of answering this question, but I think it

exceedingly probable that, sooner or later, with the continued improvement in

the  methods  of  production,  this  Anarchist  plan  will  become  feasible;  and

when it does, it certainly ought to be adopted.

  Women in domestic work, whether married or unmarried, will receive pay

as  they  would  if  they  were  in  industry.  This  will  secure  the  complete

economic independence of wives, which is difficult to achieve in any other

way,  since  mothers  of  young  children  ought  not  to  be  expected  to  work

outside the home.

  The expense of children will not fall, as at present, on the parents. Theywill receive, like adults, their share of necessaries, and their education will be

free.[60] There is no longer to be the present competition for scholarships

among the abler children: they will not be imbued with the competitive spirit

from  infancy,  or  forced  to  use  their  brains  to  an  unnatural  degree  with

consequent listlessness and lack of health in later life. Education will be far

more diversified than at present; greater care will be taken to adapt it to the

needs  of  different  types  of  young  people.  There  will  be  more  attempt  to

encourage initiative young pupils, and less desire to fill their minds with a set

of  beliefs  and  mental  habits  regarded  as  desirable  by  the  State,  chiefly

because  they  help  to  preserve  the  status  quo.  For  the  great  majority  of

children  it  will  probably  be  found  desirable  to  have  much  more  outdoor

education in the country. And for older boys and girls whose interests are not

intellectual or artistic, technical education, undertaken in a liberal spirit, is far

more  useful  in  promoting  mental  activity  than  book-learning  which  they

regard  (however  falsely)  as  wholly  useless  except  for  purposes  of

examination. The really useful educa- tion is that which follows the direction

of the child's own instinctive interests, supplying knowledge for which it is

seeking,  not  dry,  detailed  information  wholly  out  of  relation  to  its

spontaneous desires.

[60] Some may fear that the result would be an undue increase of

population, but such fears I believe to be groundless. See above, (Chapter IV,

on ``Work and Pay.'' Also, Chapter vi of ``Principles of Social

Reconstruction'' (George Allen and Unwin, Ltd.).

Government and law will still exist in our community, but both will be

reduced to a minimum. There will still be acts which will be forbidden—for

example, murder. But very nearly the whole of that part of the criminal law

which deals with property will have become obsolete, and many of the

motives which now produce murders will be no longer operative. Those who

nevertheless still do commit crimes will not be blamed or regarded as wicked;

they will be regarded as unfortunate, and kept in some kind of mental

hospital until it is thought that they are no longer a danger. By education and

freedom and the abolition of private capital the number of crimes can be

made exceedingly small. By the method of individual curative treatment it

will generally be possible to secure that a man's first offense shall also be his

last, except in the case of lunatics and the feeble-minded, for whom of course

a more prolonged but not less kindly detention may be necessary.  Government  may  be  regarded  as  consisting  of  two  parts:  the  one,  the

decisions of the community or its recognized organs; the other, the enforcing

of those decisions upon all who resist them. The first part is not objected to

by Anarchists. The second part, in an ordinary civilized State, may remain

entirely in the background: those who have resisted a new law while it was

being debated will, as a rule, submit to it when it is passed, because resistance

is generally useless in a settled and orderly community. But the possibility of

governmental force remains, and indeed is the very reason for the submission

which makes force unnecessary. If, as Anarchists desire, there were no use of

force by government, the majority could still band themselves together and

use force against the minority. The only difference would be that their army

or  their  police  force  would  be  ad  hoc,  instead  of  being  permanent  and

professional. The result of this would be that everyone would have to learn

how  to  fight,  for  fear  a  well-  drilled  minority  should  seize  power  and

establish an old-fashioned oligarchic State. Thus the aim of the Anarchists

seems hardly likely to be achieved by the methods which they advocate.

  The reign of violence in human affairs, whether within a country or in its

external relations, can only be prevented, if we have not been mistaken, by an

authority able to declare all use of force except by itself illegal, and strong

enough to be obviously capable of making all other use of force futile, except

when it could secure the support of public opinion as a defense of freedom or

a resistance to injustice. Such an authority exists within a country: it is the

State. But in international affairs it remains to be created. The difficulties are

stupendous, but they must be overcome if the world is to be saved from

periodical wars, each more destructive than any of its predecessors. Whether,

after this war, a League of Nations will be formed, and will be capable of

performing this task, it is as yet impossible to foretell. However that may be,

some  method  of  preventing  wars  will  have  to  be  established  before  our

Utopia becomes possible. When once men BELIEVE that the world is safe

from war, the whole difficulty will be solved: there will then no longer be any

serious resistance to the disbanding of national armies and navies, and the

substitution  for  them  of  a  small  international  force  for  protection  against

uncivilized  races.  And  when  that  stage  has  been  reached,  peace  will  be

virtually secure.

  The practice of government by majorities, which Anarchists criticise, is in

fact open to most of the objections which they urge against it. Still moreobjectionable is the power of the executive in matters vitally affecting the

happiness of all, such as peace and war. But neither can be dispensed with

suddenly. There are, however, two methods of diminishing the harm done by

them:  (1)  Government  by  majorities  can  be  made  less  oppressive  by

devolution, by placing the decision of questions primarily affecting only a

section of the community in the hands of that section, rather than of a Central

Chamber. In this way, men are no longer forced to submit to decisions made

in a hurry by people mostly ignorant of the matter in hand and not personally

interested. Autonomy for internal affairs should be given, not only to areas,

but  to  all  groups,  such  as  industries  or  Churches,  which  have  important

common interests not shared by the rest of the community. (2) The great

powers  vested  in  the  executive  of  a  modern  State  are  chiefly  due  to  the

frequent need of rapid decisions, especially as regards foreign affairs. If the

danger of war were practically eliminated, more cumbrous but less autocratic

methods would be possible, and the Legislature might recover many of the

powers which the executive has usurped. By these two methods, the intensity

of  the  interference  with  liberty  involved  in  government  can  be  gradually

diminished. Some interference, and even some danger of unwarranted and

despotic interference, is of the essence of government, and must remain so

long as government remains. But until men are less prone to violence than

they are now, a certain degree of governmental force seems the lesser of two

evils. We may hope, however, that if once the danger of war is at an end,

men's violent impulses will gradually grow less, the more so as, in that case,

it will be possible to diminish enormously the individual power which now

makes rulers autocratic and ready for almost any act of tyranny in order to

crush  opposition.  The  development  of  a  world  where  even  governmental

force has become unnecessary (except against lunatics) must be gradual. But

as a gradual process it is perfectly possible; and when it has been completed

we  may  hope  to  see  the  principles  of  Anarchism  embodied  in  the

management of communal affairs.

  How will the economic and political system that we have outlined bear on

the  evils  of  character?  I  believe  the  effect  will  be  quite  extraordinarily

beneficent.

  The process of leading men's thought and imagination away from the use

of force will be greatly accelerated by the abolition of the capitalist system,

provided it is not succeeded by a form of State Socialism in which officialshave enormous power. At present, the capitalist has more control over the

lives of others than any man ought to have; his friends have authority in the

State; his economic power is the pattern for political power. In a world where

all men and women enjoy economic freedom, there will not be the same habit

of command, nor, consequently, the same love of despotism; a gentler type of

character than that now prevalent will gradually grow up. Men are formed by

their  circumstances,  not  born  ready-  made.  The  bad  effect  of  the  present

economic system on character, and the immensely better effect to be expected

from communal ownership, are among the strongest reasons for advocating

the change.

  In  the  world  as  we  have  been  imagining  fit,  economic  fear  and  most

economic hope will be alike removed out of life. No one will be haunted by

the dread of poverty or driven into ruthlessness by the hope of wealth. There

will not be the distinction of social classes which now plays such an immense

part in life. The unsuccessful professional man will not live in terror lest his

children should sink in the scale; the aspiring employe will not be looking

forward to the day when he can become a sweater in his turn. Ambitious

young men will have to dream other daydreams than that of business success

and wealth wrung out of the ruin of competitors and the degradation of labor.

In such a world, most of the nightmares that lurk in the background of men's

minds will no longer exist; on the other hand, ambition and the desire to excel

will  have  to  take  nobler  forms  than  those  that  are  encouraged  by  a

commercial  society.  All  those  activities  that  really  confer  benefits  upon

mankind will be open, not only to the fortunate few, but to all who have

sufficient  ambition  and  native  aptitude.  Science,  labor-saving  inventions,

technical progress of all kinds, may be confidently expected to flourish far

more than at present, since they will be the road to honor, and honor will

have  to  replace  money  among  those  of  the  young  who  desire  to  achieve

success. Whether art will flourish in a Socialistic community depends upon

the form of Social- ism adopted; if the State, or any public authority, (no

matter what), insists upon controlling art, and only licensing those whom it

regards as proficient, the result will be disaster. But if there is real freedom,

allowing every man who so desires to take up an artist's career at the cost of

some sacrifice of comfort, it is likely that the atmosphere of hope, and the

absence of economic compulsion, will lead to a much smaller waste of talent

than is involved in our present system, and to a much less degree of crushingof impulse in the mills of the struggle for life.

  When elementary needs have been satisfied, the serious happiness of most

men depends upon two things: their work, and their human relations. In the

world that we have been picturing, work will be free, not excessive, full of

the interest that belongs to a collective enterprise in which there is rapid

progress, with something of the delight of creation even for the humblest

unit. And in human relations the gain will be just as great as in work. The

only  human  relations  that  have  value  are  those  that  are  rooted  in  mutual

freedom,  where  there  is  no  domination  and  no  slavery,  no  tie  except

affection,  no  economic  or  conventional  necessity  to  preserve  the  external

show  when  the  inner  life  is  dead.  One  of  the  most  horrible  things  about

commercialism  is  the  way  in  which  it  poisons  the  relations  of  men  and

women. The evils of prostitution are generally recognized, but, great as they

are, the effect of economic conditions on marriage seems to me even worse.

There is not infrequently, in marriage, a suggestion of purchase, of acquiring

a  woman  on  condition  of  keeping  her  in  a  certain  standard  of  material

comfort. Often and often, a marriage hardly differs from prostitution except

by being harder to escape from. The whole basis of these evils is economic.

Economic causes make marriage a matter of bargain and contract, in which

affection is quite secondary, and its absence constitutes no recognized reason

for  liberation.  Marriage  should  be  a  free,  spontaneous  meeting  of  mutual

instinct,  filled  with  happiness  not  unmixed  with  a  feeling  akin  to  awe:  it

should involve that degree of respect of each for the other that makes even

the  most  trifling  interference  with  liberty  an  utter  impossibility,  and  a

common life enforced by one against the will of the other an unthinkable

thing of deep horror. It is not so that marriage is conceived by lawyers who

make settlements, or by priests who give the name of ``sacrament'' to an

institution which pretends to find something sanctifiable in the brutal lusts or

drunken cruelties of a legal husband. It is not in a spirit of freedom that

marriage is conceived by most men and women at present: the law makes it

an opportunity for indulgence of the desire to interfere, where each submits to

some loss of his or her own liberty, for the pleasure of curtailing the liberty of

the other. And the atmosphere of private property makes it more difficult than

it otherwise would be for any better ideal to take root.

  It is not so that human relations will be conceived when the evil heritage

of economic slavery has ceased to mold our instincts. Husbands and wives,parents and children, will be only held together by affection: where that has

died,  it  will  be  recognized  that  nothing  worth  preserving  is  left.  Because

affection will be free, men and women will not find in private life an outlet

and stimulus to the love of domineering, but all that is creative in their love

will have the freer scope. Reverence for whatever makes the soul in those

who are loved will be less rare than it is now: nowadays, many men love their

wives in the way in which they love mutton, as something to devour and

destroy.  But  in  the  love  that  goes  with  reverence  there  is  a  joy  of  quite

another order than any to be found by mastery, a joy which satisfies the spirit

and not only the instincts; and satisfaction of instinct and spirit at once is

necessary to a happy life, or indeed to any existence that is to bring out the

best impulses of which a man or woman is capable.

  In the world which we should wish to see, there will be more joy of life

than in the drab tragedy of modern every-day existence. After early youth, as

things are, most men are bowed down by forethought, no longer capable of

light-hearted gaiety, but only of a kind of solemn jollification by the clock at

the appropriate hours. The advice to ``become as little children'' would be

good for many people in many respects, but it goes with another precept,

``take no thought for the morrow,'' which is hard to obey in a competitive

world.  There  is  often  in  men  of  science,  even  when  they  are  quite  old,

something of the simplicity of a child: their absorption in abstract thought has

held them aloof from the world, and respect for their work has led the world

to keep them alive in spite of their innocence. Such men have succeeded in

living as all men ought to be able to live; but as things are, the economic

struggle makes their way of life impossible for the great majority.

  What  are  we  to  say,  lastly,  of  the  effect  of  our  projected  world  upon

physical evil? Will there be less illness than there is at present? Will the

produce of a given amount of labor be greater? Or will population press upon

the  limits  of  subsistence,  as  Malthus  taught  in  order  to  refute  Godwin's

optimism?

  I think the answer to all these questions turns, in the end, upon the degree

of intellectual vigor to be expected in a community which has done away

with the spur of economic competition. Will men in such a world become

lazy and apathetic? Will they cease to think? Will those who do think find

themselves confronted with an even more impenetrable wall of unreflecting

conservatism than that which confronts them at present? These are importantquestions; for it is ultimately to science that mankind must look for their

success in combating physical evils.

  If the other conditions that we have postulated can be realized, it seems

almost  certain  that  there  must  be  less  illness  than  there  is  at  present.

Population will no longer be congested in slums; children will have far more

of fresh air and open country; the hours of work will be only such as are

wholesome, not excessive and exhausting as they are at present.

  As for the progress of science, that depends very largely upon the degree

of intellectual liberty existing in the new society. If all science is organized

and supervised by the State, it will rapidly become stereotyped and dead.

Fundamental advances will not be made, because, until they have been made,

they will seem too doubtful to warrant the expenditure of public money upon

them. Authority will be in the hands of the old, especially of men who have

achieved scientific eminence; such men will be hostile to those among the

young  who  do  not  flatter  them  by  agreeing  with  their  theories.  Under  a

bureaucratic State Socialism it is to be feared that science would soon cease

to be progressive and acquired a medieval respect for authority.

  But  under  a  freer  system,  which  would  enable  all  kinds  of  groups  to

employ  as  many  men  of  science  as  they  chose,  and  would  allow  the

``vagabond's wage'' to those who desired to pursue some study so new as to

be wholly unrecognized, there is every reason to think that science would

flourish as it has never done hitherto.[61] And, if that were the case, I do not

believe that any other obstacle would exist to the physical possibility of our

system.

[61] See the discussion of this question in the preceding chapter.

The question of the number of hours of work necessary to produce general

material comfort is partly technical, partly one of organization. We may

assume that there would no longer be unproductive labor spent on

armaments, national defense, advertisements, costly luxuries for the very

rich, or any of the other futilities incidental to our competitive system. If each

industrial guild secured for a term of years the advantages, or part of the

advantages, of any new invention or methods which it introduced, it is pretty

certain that every encouragement would be given to technical progress. The

life of a discoverer or inventor is in itself agreeable: those who adopt it, as

things are now, are seldom much actuated by economic motives, but rather

by the interest of the work together with the hope of honor; and these motiveswould operate more widely than they do now, since fewer people would be

prevented from obeying them by economic necessities. And there is no doubt

that intellect would work more keenly and creatively in a world where

instinct was less thwarted, where the joy of life was greater, and where

consequently there would be more vitality in men than there is at present.

  There  remains  the  population  question,  which,  ever  since  the  time  of

Malthus, has been the last refuge of those to whom the possibility of a better

world is disagreeable. But this question is now a very different one from what

it  was  a  hundred  years  ago.  The  decline  of  the  birth-rate  in  all  civilized

countries, which is pretty certain to continue, whatever economic system is

adopted, suggests that, especially when the probable effects of the war are

taken into account, the population of Western Europe is not likely to increase

very much beyond its present level, and that of America is likely only to

increase  through  immigration.  Negroes  may  continue  to  increase  in  the

tropics, but are not likely to be a serious menace to the white inhabitants of

temperate regions. There remains, of course, the Yellow Peril; but by the time

that begins to be serious it is quite likely that the birth-rate will also have

begun to decline among the races of Asia If not, there are other means of

dealing with this question; and in any case the whole matter is too conjectural

to be set up seriously as a bar to our hopes. I conclude that, though no certain

forecast is possible, there is not any valid reason for regarding the possible

increase of population as a serious obstacle to Socialism.

  Our discussion has led us to the belief that the communal ownership of

land and capital, which constitutes the characteristic doctrine of Socialism

and Anarchist Communism, is a necessary step toward the removal of the

evils  from  which  the  world  suffers  at  present  and  the  creation  of  such  a

society  as  any  humane  man  must  wish  to  see  realized.  But,  though  a

necessary step, Socialism alone is by no means sufficient. There are various

forms of Socialism: the form in which the State is the employer, and all who

work receive wages from it, involves dangers of tyranny and interference

with progress which would make it, if possible, even worse than the present

regime. On the other hand, Anarchism, which avoids the dangers of State

Socialism, has dangers and difficulties of its own, which make it probable

that, within any reasonable period of time, it could not last long even if it

were established. Nevertheless, it remains an ideal to which we should wish

to approach as nearly as possible, and which, in some distant age, we hopemay  be  reached  completely.  Syndicalism  shares  many  of  the  defects  of

Anarchism, and, like it, would prove unstable, since the need of a central

government would make itself felt almost at once.

  The  system  we  have  advocated  is  a  form  of  Guild  Socialism,  leaning

more, perhaps, towards Anarchism than the official Guildsman would wholly

approve. It is in the matters that politicians usually ignore— science and art,

human relations, and the joy of life —that Anarchism is strongest, and it is

chiefly  for  the  sake  of  these  things  that  we  included  such  more  or  less

Anarchist proposals as the ``vagabond's wage.'' It is by its effects outside

economics and politics, at least as much as by effects inside them, that a

social system should be judged. And if Socialism ever comes, it is only likely

to  prove  beneficent  if  non-  economic  goods  are  valued  and  consciously

pursued.

  The world that we must seek is a world in which the creative spirit is alive,

in which life is an adventure full of joy and hope, based rather upon the

impulse to construct than upon the desire to retain what we possess or to

seize what is possessed by others. It must be a world in which affection has

free play, in which love is purged of the instinct for domination, in which

cruelty  and  envy  have  been  dispelled  by  happiness  and  the  unfettered

development  of  all  the  instincts  that  build  up  life  and  fill  it  with  mental

delights. Such a world is possible; it waits only for men to wish to create it.

  Meantime, the world in which we exist has other aims. But it will pass

away, burned up in the fire of its own hot passions; and from its ashes will

spring a new and younger world, full of fresh hope, with the light of morning

in its eyes.

 
 