          Complete Philosophical Writings of


    Bertrand Russell (Grapevine edition)

 

      Bertrand Russell; Original Thinkers Institute 
 
 
 

                                        Published by

                    GRAPEVINE INDIA PUBLISHERS PVT LTD

                                www.grapevineindia.com

                                      Delhi | Mumbai

                    email: grapevineindiapublishers@gmail.com

                                  Ordering Information:

            Quantity sales: Special discounts are available on quantity

                purchases by corporations, associations, and others.

                        For details, reach out to the publisher.

                      First published by Grapevine India 2023

                              Copyright © Grapevine 2023

                                    All rights reserved                                      Contents

 

  The Problems of Philosophy

  Philosophical Essays

  The Problems of Philosophy

  An Outline of Philosophy

  An Essay on the Foundations of Geometry

  Our Knowledge of the External World as a Field

  Mysticism and Logic and Other Essays

  Principles of Social Reconstruction

  Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy

  The Analysis of Mind

  Proposed Roads to Freedom: Socialism, Anarchism and Syndicalism

 

                       The Problems of Philosophy

                                       Contents

 
 
 

PREFACE


CHAPTER I. APPEARANCE AND REALITY


CHAPTER II. THE EXISTENCE OF MATTER


CHAPTER III. THE NATURE OF MATTER


CHAPTER IV. IDEALISM


CHAPTER V. KNOWLEDGE BY ACQUAINTANCE AND KNOWLEDGE BY


DESCRIPTION


CHAPTER VI. ON INDUCTION


CHAPTER VII. ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF GENERAL PRINCIPLES


CHAPTER VIII. HOW A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE IS POSSIBLE


CHAPTER IX. THE WORLD OF UNIVERSALS


CHAPTER X. ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF UNIVERSALS


CHAPTER XI. ON INTUITIVE KNOWLEDGE


CHAPTER XII. TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD


CHAPTER XIII. KNOWLEDGE, ERROR, AND PROBABLE OPINION


CHAPTER XIV. THE LIMITS OF PHILOSOPHICAL KNOWLEDGECHAPTER XV. THE VALUE OF PHILOSOPHY


 PREFACE

In  the  following  pages  I  have  confined  myself  in  the  main  to  those

problems  of  philosophy  in  regard  to  which  I  thought  it  possible  to  say

something positive and constructive, since merely negative criticism seemed

out of place. For this reason, theory of knowledge occupies a larger space

than metaphysics in the present volume, and some topics much discussed by

philosophers are treated very briefly, if at all.

I  have  derived  valuable  assistance  from  unpublished  writings  of  G.  E.

Moore and J. M. Keynes: from the former, as regards the relations of sense-

data  to  physical  objects,  and  from  the  latter  as  regards  probability  and

induction. I have also profited greatly by the criticisms and suggestions of

Professor Gilbert Murray.

  1912





 CHAPTER I. APPEARANCE AND REALITY

Is there any knowledge in the world which is so certain that no reasonable

man  could  doubt  it?  This  question,  which  at  first  sight  might  not  seem

difficult, is really one of the most difficult that can be asked. When we have

realized the obstacles in the way of a straightforward and confident answer,

we shall be well launched on the study of philosophy—for philosophy is

merely  the  attempt  to  answer  such  ultimate  questions,  not  carelessly  and

dogmatically, as we do in ordinary life and even in the sciences, but critically,

after exploring all that makes such questions puzzling, and after realizing all

the vagueness and confusion that underlie our ordinary ideas.

In daily life, we assume as certain many things which, on a closer scrutiny,

are found to be so full of apparent contradictions that only a great amount of

thought enables us to know what it is that we really may believe. In the

search for certainty, it is natural to begin with our present experiences, and in

some  sense,  no  doubt,  knowledge  is  to  be  derived  from  them.  But  any

statement as to what it is that our immediate experiences make us know is

very likely to be wrong. It seems to me that I am now sitting in a chair, at a

table of a certain shape, on which I see sheets of paper with writing or print.

By turning my head I see out of the window buildings and clouds and the

sun. I believe that the sun is about ninety-three million miles from the earth;

that it is a hot globe many times bigger than the earth; that, owing to the

earth's rotation, it rises every morning, and will continue to do so for an

indefinite time in the future. I believe that, if any other normal person comes

into my room, he will see the same chairs and tables and books and papers as

I see, and that the table which I see is the same as the table which I feel

pressing against my arm. All this seems to be so evident as to be hardly worth

stating, except in answer to a man who doubts whether I know anything. Yet

all  this  may  be  reasonably  doubted,  and  all  of  it  requires  much  careful

discussion before we can be sure that we have stated it in a form that is

wholly true.

To make our difficulties plain, let us concentrate attention on the table. To

the eye it is oblong, brown and shiny, to the touch it is smooth and cool and

hard; when I tap it, it gives out a wooden sound. Any one else who sees and

feels and hears the table will agree with this description, so that it might seem

as if no difficulty would arise; but as soon as we try to be more precise our

troubles begin. Although I believe that the table is 'really' of the same colourall over, the parts that reflect the light look much brighter than the other parts,

and some parts look white because of reflected light. I know that, if I move,

the  parts  that  reflect  the  light  will  be  different,  so  that  the  apparent

distribution  of  colours  on  the  table  will  change.  It  follows  that  if  several

people are looking at the table at the same moment, no two of them will see

exactly  the  same  distribution  of  colours,  because  no  two  can  see  it  from

exactly the same point of view, and any change in the point of view makes

some change in the way the light is reflected.

For most practical purposes these differences are unimportant, but to the

painter they are all-important: the painter has to unlearn the habit of thinking

that things seem to have the colour which common sense says they 'really'

have, and to learn the habit of seeing things as they appear. Here we have

already the beginning of one of the distinctions that cause most trouble in

philosophy—the distinction between 'appearance' and 'reality', between what

things seem to be and what they are. The painter wants to know what things

seem to be, the practical man and the philosopher want to know what they

are; but the philosopher's wish to know this is stronger than the practical

man's, and is more troubled by knowledge as to the difficulties of answering

the question.

To return to the table. It is evident from what we have found, that there is

no colour which pre-eminently appears to be the colour of the table, or even

of any one particular part of the table—it appears to be of different colours

from different points of view, and there is no reason for regarding some of

these as more really its colour than others. And we know that even from a

given point of view the colour will seem different by artificial light, or to a

colour-blind man, or to a man wearing blue spectacles, while in the dark there

will  be  no  colour  at  all,  though  to  touch  and  hearing  the  table  will  be

unchanged. This colour is not something which is inherent in the table, but

something depending upon the table and the spectator and the way the light

falls on the table. When, in ordinary life, we speak of the colour of the table,

we only mean the sort of colour which it will seem to have to a normal

spectator from an ordinary point of view under usual conditions of light. But

the other colours which appear under other conditions have just as good a

right  to  be  considered  real;  and  therefore,  to  avoid  favouritism,  we  are

compelled to deny that, in itself, the table has any one particular colour.

The same thing applies to the texture. With the naked eye one can see the

grain,  but  otherwise  the  table  looks  smooth  and  even.  If  we  looked  at  itthrough a microscope, we should see roughnesses and hills and valleys, and

all sorts of differences that are imperceptible to the naked eye. Which of these

is the 'real' table? We are naturally tempted to say that what we see through

the microscope is more real, but that in turn would be changed by a still more

powerful microscope. If, then, we cannot trust what we see with the naked

eye, why should we trust what we see through a microscope? Thus, again, the

confidence in our senses with which we began deserts us.

The shape of the table is no better. We are all in the habit of judging as to

the 'real' shapes of things, and we do this so unreflectingly that we come to

think we actually see the real shapes. But, in fact, as we all have to learn if we

try to draw, a given thing looks different in shape from every different point

of view. If our table is 'really' rectangular, it will look, from almost all points

of view, as if it had two acute angles and two obtuse angles. If opposite sides

are parallel, they will look as if they converged to a point away from the

spectator; if they are of equal length, they will look as if the nearer side were

longer.  All  these  things  are  not  commonly  noticed  in  looking  at  a  table,

because  experience  has  taught  us  to  construct  the  'real'  shape  from  the

apparent shape, and the 'real' shape is what interests us as practical men. But

the 'real' shape is not what we see; it is something inferred from what we see.

And what we see is constantly changing in shape as we move about the room;

so that here again the senses seem not to give us the truth about the table

itself, but only about the appearance of the table.

  Similar difficulties arise when we consider the sense of touch. It is true that

the table always gives us a sensation of hardness, and we feel that it resists

pressure. But the sensation we obtain depends upon how hard we press the

table and also upon what part of the body we press with; thus the various

sensations due to various pressures or various parts of the body cannot be

supposed to reveal directly any definite property of the table, but at most to

be signs of some property which perhaps causes all the sensations, but is not

actually apparent in any of them. And the same applies still more obviously

to the sounds which can be elicited by rapping the table.

  Thus it becomes evident that the real table, if there is one, is not the same

as what we immediately experience by sight or touch or hearing. The real

table, if there is one, is not immediately known to us at all, but must be an

inference  from  what  is  immediately  known.  Hence,  two  very  difficult

questions at once arise; namely, (1) Is there a real table at all? (2) If so, what

sort of object can it be?It will help us in considering these questions to have a few simple terms of

which the meaning is definite and clear. Let us give the name of 'sense-data'

to the things that are immediately known in sensation: such things as colours,

sounds, smells, hardnesses, roughnesses, and so on. We shall give the name

'sensation'  to  the  experience  of  being  immediately  aware  of  these  things.

Thus, whenever we see a colour, we have a sensation of the colour, but the

colour itself is a sense-datum, not a sensation. The colour is that of which we

are immediately aware, and the awareness itself is the sensation. It is plain

that if we are to know anything about the table, it must be by means of the

sense-data—brown  colour,  oblong  shape,  smoothness,  etc.—which  we

associate  with  the  table;  but,  for  the  reasons  which  have  been  given,  we

cannot say that the table is the sense-data, or even that the sense-data are

directly properties of the table. Thus a problem arises as to the relation of the

sense-data to the real table, supposing there is such a thing.

The real table, if it exists, we will call a 'physical object'. Thus we have to

consider the relation of sense-data to physical objects. The collection of all

physical objects is called 'matter'. Thus our two questions may be re-stated as

follows: (1) Is there any such thing as matter? (2) If so, what is its nature?

The philosopher who first brought prominently forward the reasons for

regarding the immediate objects of our senses as not existing independently

of us was Bishop Berkeley (1685-1753). His Three Dialogues between Hylas

and Philonous, in Opposition to Sceptics and Atheists, undertake to prove

that there is no such thing as matter at all, and that the world consists of

nothing but minds and their ideas. Hylas has hitherto believed in matter, but

he is no match for Philonous, who mercilessly drives him into contradictions

and paradoxes, and makes his own denial of matter seem, in the end, as if it

were almost common sense. The arguments employed are of very different

value: some are important and sound, others are confused or quibbling. But

Berkeley retains the merit of having shown that the existence of matter is

capable of being denied without absurdity, and that if there are any things

that exist independently of us they cannot be the immediate objects of our

sensations.

  There are two different questions involved when we ask whether matter

exists, and it is important to keep them clear. We commonly mean by 'matter'

something  which  is  opposed  to  'mind',  something  which  we  think  of  as

occupying  space  and  as  radically  incapable  of  any  sort  of  thought  or

consciousness. It is chiefly in this sense that Berkeley denies matter; that is tosay, he does not deny that the sense-data which we commonly take as signs

of the existence of the table are really signs of the existence of something

independent of us, but he does deny that this something is non-mental, that it

is neither mind nor ideas entertained by some mind. He admits that there

must be something which continues to exist when we go out of the room or

shut our eyes, and that what we call seeing the table does really give us

reason for believing in something which persists even when we are not seeing

it. But he thinks that this something cannot be radically different in nature

from what we see, and cannot be independent of seeing altogether, though it

must be independent of our seeing. He is thus led to regard the 'real' table as

an idea in the mind of God. Such an idea has the required permanence and

independence of ourselves, without being—as matter would otherwise be—

something quite unknowable, in the sense that we can only infer it, and can

never be directly and immediately aware of it.

  Other philosophers since Berkeley have also held that, although the table

does not depend for its existence upon being seen by me, it does depend upon

being  seen  (or  otherwise  apprehended  in  sensation)  by some  mind—not

necessarily the mind of God, but more often the whole collective mind of the

universe. This they hold, as Berkeley does, chiefly because they think there

can be nothing real—or at any rate nothing known to be real except minds

and their thoughts and feelings. We might state the argument by which they

support their view in some such way as this: 'Whatever can be thought of is

an idea in the mind of the person thinking of it; therefore nothing can be

thought of except ideas in minds; therefore anything else is inconceivable,

and what is inconceivable cannot exist.'

  Such an argument, in my opinion, is fallacious; and of course those who

advance it do not put it so shortly or so crudely. But whether valid or not, the

argument has been very widely advanced in one form or another; and very

many philosophers, perhaps a majority, have held that there is nothing real

except minds and their ideas. Such philosophers are called 'idealists'. When

they come to explaining matter, they either say, like Berkeley, that matter is

really nothing but a collection of ideas, or they say, like Leibniz (1646-1716),

that what appears as matter is really a collection of more or less rudimentary

minds.

But  these  philosophers,  though  they  deny  matter  as  opposed  to  mind,

nevertheless, in another sense, admit matter. It will be remembered that we

asked two questions; namely, (1) Is there a real table at all? (2) If so, whatsort of object can it be? Now both Berkeley and Leibniz admit that there is a

real  table,  but  Berkeley  says  it  is  certain  ideas  in  the  mind  of  God,  and

Leibniz  says  it  is  a  colony  of  souls.  Thus  both  of  them  answer  our  first

question  in  the  affirmative,  and  only  diverge  from  the  views  of  ordinary

mortals  in  their  answer  to  our  second  question.  In  fact,  almost  all

philosophers seem to be agreed that there is a real table: they almost all agree

that, however much our sense-data—colour, shape, smoothness, etc.—may

depend  upon  us,  yet  their  occurrence  is  a  sign  of  something  existing

independently  of  us,  something  differing,  perhaps,  completely  from  our

sense-data, and yet to be regarded as causing those sense-data whenever we

are in a suitable relation to the real table.

Now obviously this point in which the philosophers are agreed—the view

that there is a real table, whatever its nature may be—is vitally important, and

it will be worth while to consider what reasons there are for accepting this

view before we go on to the further question as to the nature of the real table.

Our next chapter, therefore, will be concerned with the reasons for supposing

that there is a real table at all.

Before we go farther it will be well to consider for a moment what it is that

we have discovered so far. It has appeared that, if we take any common

object of the sort that is supposed to be known by the senses, what the senses

immediately tell us is not the truth about the object as it is apart from us, but

only the truth about certain sense-data which, so far as we can see, depend

upon the relations between us and the object. Thus what we directly see and

feel is merely 'appearance', which we believe to be a sign of some 'reality'

behind. But if the reality is not what appears, have we any means of knowing

whether there is any reality at all? And if so, have we any means of finding

out what it is like?

  Such questions are bewildering, and it is difficult to know that even the

strangest hypotheses may not be true. Thus our familiar table, which has

roused but the slightest thoughts in us hitherto, has become a problem full of

surprising possibilities. The one thing we know about it is that it is not what it

seems. Beyond this modest result, so far, we have the most complete liberty

of conjecture. Leibniz tells us it is a community of souls: Berkeley tells us it

is an idea in the mind of God; sober science, scarcely less wonderful, tells us

it is a vast collection of electric charges in violent motion.

  Among these surprising possibilities, doubt suggests that perhaps there is

no table at all. Philosophy, if it cannot answer so many questions as we couldwish, has at least the power of asking questions which increase the interest of

the world, and show the strangeness and wonder lying just below the surface

even in the commonest things of daily life.

  





 CHAPTER II. THE EXISTENCE OF MATTER

In this chapter we have to ask ourselves whether, in any sense at all, there

is such a thing as matter. Is there a table which has a certain intrinsic nature,

and continues to exist when I am not looking, or is the table merely a product

of my imagination, a dream-table in a very prolonged dream? This question is

of  the  greatest  importance.  For  if  we  cannot  be  sure  of  the  independent

existence of objects, we cannot be sure of the independent existence of other

people's bodies, and therefore still less of other people's minds, since we have

no  grounds  for  believing  in  their  minds  except  such  as  are  derived  from

observing  their  bodies.  Thus  if  we  cannot  be  sure  of  the  independent

existence of objects, we shall be left alone in a desert—it may be that the

whole outer world is nothing but a dream, and that we alone exist. This is an

uncomfortable  possibility;  but  although  it  cannot  be  strictly  proved  to  be

false, there is not the slightest reason to suppose that it is true. In this chapter

we have to see why this is the case.

Before we embark upon doubtful matters, let us try to find some more or

less fixed point from which to start. Although we are doubting the physical

existence of the table, we are not doubting the existence of the sense-data

which made us think there was a table; we are not doubting that, while we

look, a certain colour and shape appear to us, and while we press, a certain

sensation of hardness is experienced by us. All this, which is psychological,

we are not calling in question. In fact, whatever else may be doubtful, some

at least of our immediate experiences seem absolutely certain.

  Descartes  (1596-1650),  the  founder  of  modern  philosophy,  invented  a

method which may still be used with profit—the method of systematic doubt.

He determined that he would believe nothing which he did not see quite

clearly and distinctly to be true. Whatever he could bring himself to doubt, he

would doubt, until he saw reason for not doubting it. By applying this method

he gradually became convinced that the only existence of which he could be

quite certain was his own. He imagined a deceitful demon, who presented

unreal things to his senses in a perpetual phantasmagoria; it might be very

improbable that such a demon existed, but still it was possible, and therefore

doubt concerning things perceived by the senses was possible.

But doubt concerning his own existence was not possible, for if he did not

exist, no demon could deceive him. If he doubted, he must exist; if he had

any experiences whatever, he must exist. Thus his own existence was anabsolute certainty to him. 'I think, therefore I am,' he said (Cogito, ergo sum);

and on the basis of this certainty he set to work to build up again the world of

knowledge which his doubt had laid in ruins. By inventing the method of

doubt, and by showing that subjective things are the most certain, Descartes

performed  a  great  service  to  philosophy,  and  one  which  makes  him  still

useful to all students of the subject.

But some care is needed in using Descartes' argument. 'I think, therefore I

am' says rather more than is strictly certain. It might seem as though we were

quite sure of being the same person to-day as we were yesterday, and this is

no doubt true in some sense. But the real Self is as hard to arrive at as the real

table,  and  does  not  seem  to  have  that  absolute,  convincing  certainty  that

belongs to particular experiences. When I look at my table and see a certain

brown  colour,  what  is  quite  certain  at  once  is  not  'I  am  seeing  a  brown

colour', but rather, 'a brown colour is being seen'. This of course involves

something (or somebody) which (or who) sees the brown colour; but it does

not of itself involve that more or less permanent person whom we call 'I'. So

far as immediate certainty goes, it might be that the something which sees the

brown colour is quite momentary, and not the same as the something which

has some different experience the next moment.

  Thus it is our particular thoughts and feelings that have primitive certainty.

And  this  applies  to  dreams  and  hallucinations  as  well  as  to  normal

perceptions:  when  we  dream  or  see  a  ghost,  we  certainly  do  have  the

sensations  we  think  we  have,  but  for  various  reasons  it  is  held  that  no

physical object corresponds to these sensations. Thus the certainty of our

knowledge of our own experiences does not have to be limited in any way to

allow for exceptional cases. Here, therefore, we have, for what it is worth, a

solid basis from which to begin our pursuit of knowledge.

The problem we have to consider is this: Granted that we are certain of our

own  sense-data,  have  we  any  reason  for  regarding  them  as  signs  of  the

existence of something else, which we can call the physical object? When we

have  enumerated  all  the  sense-data  which  we  should  naturally  regard  as

connected with the table, have we said all there is to say about the table, or is

there still something else—something not a sense-datum, something which

persists when we go out of the room? Common sense unhesitatingly answers

that there is. What can be bought and sold and pushed about and have a cloth

laid on it, and so on, cannot be a mere collection of sense-data. If the cloth

completely hides the table, we shall derive no sense-data from the table, andtherefore, if the table were merely sense-data, it would have ceased to exist,

and the cloth would be suspended in empty air, resting, by a miracle, in the

place where the table formerly was. This seems plainly absurd; but whoever

wishes  to  become  a  philosopher  must  learn  not  to  be  frightened  by

absurdities.

One great reason why it is felt that we must secure a physical object in

addition  to  the  sense-data,  is  that  we  want  the  same  object  for  different

people.  When  ten  people  are  sitting  round  a  dinner-table,  it  seems

preposterous to maintain that they are not seeing the same tablecloth, the

same knives and forks and spoons and glasses. But the sense-data are private

to each separate person; what is immediately present to the sight of one is not

immediately present to the sight of another: they all see things from slightly

different points of view, and therefore see them slightly differently. Thus, if

there are to be public neutral objects, which can be in some sense known to

many different people, there must be something over and above the private

and particular sense-data which appear to various people. What reason, then,

have we for believing that there are such public neutral objects?

The first answer that naturally occurs to one is that, although different

people may see the table slightly differently, still they all see more or less

similar things when they look at the table, and the variations in what they see

follow the laws of perspective and reflection of light, so that it is easy to

arrive at a permanent object underlying all the different people's sense-data. I

bought my table from the former occupant of my room; I could not buy his

sense-data,  which  died  when  he  went  away,  but  I  could  and  did  buy  the

confident expectation of more or less similar sense-data. Thus it is the fact

that different people have similar sense-data, and that one person in a given

place at different times has similar sense-data, which makes us suppose that

over  and  above  the  sense-data  there  is  a  permanent  public  object  which

underlies or causes the sense-data of various people at various times.

Now in so far as the above considerations depend upon supposing that

there are other people besides ourselves, they beg the very question at issue.

Other people are represented to me by certain sense-data, such as the sight of

them or the sound of their voices, and if I had no reason to believe that there

were physical objects independent of my sense-data, I should have no reason

to believe that other people exist except as part of my dream. Thus, when we

are trying to show that there must be objects independent of our own sense-

data, we cannot appeal to the testimony of other people, since this testimonyitself consists of sense-data, and does not reveal other people's experiences

unless our own sense-data are signs of things existing independently of us.

We must therefore, if possible, find, in our own purely private experiences,

characteristics which show, or tend to show, that there are in the world things

other than ourselves and our private experiences.

In one sense it must be admitted that we can never prove the existence of

things other than ourselves and our experiences. No logical absurdity results

from the hypothesis that the world consists of myself and my thoughts and

feelings and sensations, and that everything else is mere fancy. In dreams a

very complicated world may seem to be present, and yet on waking we find it

was a delusion; that is to say, we find that the sense-data in the dream do not

appear  to  have  corresponded  with  such  physical  objects  as  we  should

naturally infer from our sense-data. (It is true that, when the physical world is

assumed, it is possible to find physical causes for the sense-data in dreams: a

door banging, for instance, may cause us to dream of a naval engagement.

But although, in this case, there is a physical cause for the sense-data, there is

not a physical object corresponding to the sense-data in the way in which an

actual naval battle would correspond.) There is no logical impossibility in the

supposition that the whole of life is a dream, in which we ourselves create all

the objects that come before us. But although this is not logically impossible,

there is no reason whatever to suppose that it is true; and it is, in fact, a less

simple hypothesis, viewed as a means of accounting for the facts of our own

life,  than  the  common-sense  hypothesis  that  there  really  are  objects

independent of us, whose action on us causes our sensations.

The way in which simplicity comes in from supposing that there really are

physical objects is easily seen. If the cat appears at one moment in one part of

the room, and at another in another part, it is natural to suppose that it has

moved  from  the  one  to  the  other,  passing  over  a  series  of  intermediate

positions. But if it is merely a set of sense-data, it cannot have ever been in

any place where I did not see it; thus we shall have to suppose that it did not

exist at all while I was not looking, but suddenly sprang into being in a new

place. If the cat exists whether I see it or not, we can understand from our

own experience how it gets hungry between one meal and the next; but if it

does not exist when I am not seeing it, it seems odd that appetite should grow

during non-existence as fast as during existence. And if the cat consists only

of sense-data, it cannot be hungry, since no hunger but my own can be a

sense-datum to me. Thus the behaviour of the sense-data which represent thecat to me, though it seems quite natural when regarded as an expression of

hunger, becomes utterly inexplicable when regarded as mere movements and

changes of patches of colour, which are as incapable of hunger as a triangle is

of playing football.

But  the  difficulty  in  the  case  of  the  cat  is  nothing  compared  to  the

difficulty in the case of human beings. When human beings speak—that is,

when  we  hear  certain  noises  which  we  associate  with  ideas,  and

simultaneously see certain motions of lips and expressions of face—it is very

difficult to suppose that what we hear is not the expression of a thought, as

we know it would be if we emitted the same sounds. Of course similar things

happen in dreams, where we are mistaken as to the existence of other people.

But dreams are more or less suggested by what we call waking life, and are

capable of being more or less accounted for on scientific principles if we

assume  that  there  really  is  a  physical  world.  Thus  every  principle  of

simplicity urges us to adopt the natural view, that there really are objects

other  than  ourselves  and  our  sense-data  which  have  an  existence  not

dependent upon our perceiving them.

Of course it is not by argument that we originally come by our belief in an

independent external world. We find this belief ready in ourselves as soon as

we begin to reflect: it is what may be called an instinctive belief. We should

never have been led to question this belief but for the fact that, at any rate in

the  case  of  sight,  it  seems  as  if  the  sense-datum  itself  were  instinctively

believed  to  be  the  independent  object,  whereas  argument  shows  that  the

object cannot be identical with the sense-datum. This discovery, however—

which is not at all paradoxical in the case of taste and smell and sound, and

only slightly so in the case of touch—leaves undiminished our instinctive

belief that there are objects corresponding to our sense-data. Since this belief

does not lead to any difficulties, but on the contrary tends to simplify and

systematize our account of our experiences, there seems no good reason for

rejecting it. We may therefore admit—though with a slight doubt derived

from dreams—that the external world does really exist, and is not wholly

dependent for its existence upon our continuing to perceive it.

The argument which has led us to this conclusion is doubtless less strong

than we could wish, but it is typical of many philosophical arguments, and it

is therefore worth while to consider briefly its general character and validity.

All knowledge, we find, must be built up upon our instinctive beliefs, and if

these are rejected, nothing is left. But among our instinctive beliefs some aremuch  stronger  than  others,  while  many  have,  by  habit  and  association,

become  entangled  with  other  beliefs,  not  really  instinctive,  but  falsely

supposed to be part of what is believed instinctively.

  Philosophy  should  show  us  the  hierarchy  of  our  instinctive  beliefs,

beginning with those we hold most strongly, and presenting each as much

isolated and as free from irrelevant additions as possible. It should take care

to show that, in the form in which they are finally set forth, our instinctive

beliefs do not clash, but form a harmonious system. There can never be any

reason for rejecting one instinctive belief except that it clashes with others;

thus, if they are found to harmonize, the whole system becomes worthy of

acceptance.

It is of course possible that all or any of our beliefs may be mistaken, and

therefore all ought to be held with at least some slight element of doubt. But

we cannot have reason to reject a belief except on the ground of some other

belief. Hence, by organizing our instinctive beliefs and their consequences,

by considering which among them is most possible, if necessary, to modify

or abandon, we can arrive, on the basis of accepting as our sole data what we

instinctively believe, at an orderly systematic organization of our knowledge,

in which, though the possibility of error remains, its likelihood is diminished

by  the  interrelation  of  the  parts  and  by  the  critical  scrutiny  which  has

preceded acquiescence.

This function, at least, philosophy can perform. Most philosophers, rightly

or wrongly, believe that philosophy can do much more than this—that it can

give us knowledge, not otherwise attainable, concerning the universe as a

whole, and concerning the nature of ultimate reality. Whether this be the case

or  not,  the  more  modest  function  we  have  spoken  of  can  certainly  be

performed by philosophy, and certainly suffices, for those who have once

begun to doubt the adequacy of common sense, to justify the arduous and

difficult labours that philosophical problems involve.

  





 CHAPTER III. THE NATURE OF MATTER

In  the  preceding  chapter  we  agreed,  though  without  being  able  to  find

demonstrative reasons, that it is rational to believe that our sense-data—for

example, those which we regard as associated with my table—are really signs

of the existence of something independent of us and our perceptions. That is

to say, over and above the sensations of colour, hardness, noise, and so on,

which make up the appearance of the table to me, I assume that there is

something else, of which these things are appearances. The colour ceases to

exist if I shut my eyes, the sensation of hardness ceases to exist if I remove

my arm from contact with the table, the sound ceases to exist if I cease to rap

the table with my knuckles. But I do not believe that when all these things

cease the table ceases. On the contrary, I believe that it is because the table

exists continuously that all these sense-data will reappear when I open my

eyes, replace my arm, and begin again to rap with my knuckles. The question

we have to consider in this chapter is: What is the nature of this real table,

which persists independently of my perception of it?

To this question physical science gives an answer, somewhat incomplete it

is true, and in part still very hypothetical, but yet deserving of respect so far

as it goes. Physical science, more or less unconsciously, has drifted into the

view that all natural phenomena ought to be reduced to motions. Light and

heat  and  sound  are  all  due  to  wave-motions,  which  travel  from  the  body

emitting them to the person who sees light or feels heat or hears sound. That

which has the wave-motion is either aether or 'gross matter', but in either case

is what the philosopher would call matter. The only properties which science

assigns to it are position in space, and the power of motion according to the

laws of motion. Science does not deny that it may have other properties; but

if so, such other properties are not useful to the man of science, and in no

way assist him in explaining the phenomena.

It  is  sometimes  said  that  'light is  a  form  of  wave-motion',  but  this  is

misleading, for the light which we immediately see, which we know directly

by means of our senses, is not a form of wave-motion, but something quite

different—something  which  we  all  know  if  we  are  not  blind,  though  we

cannot describe it so as to convey our knowledge to a man who is blind. A

wave-motion, on the contrary, could quite well be described to a blind man,

since he can acquire a knowledge of space by the sense of touch; and he can

experience a wave-motion by a sea voyage almost as well as we can. But this,which a blind man can understand, is not what we mean by light: we mean by

light just that which a blind man can never understand, and which we can

never describe to him.

Now  this  something,  which  all  of  us  who  are  not  blind  know,  is  not,

according to science, really to be found in the outer world: it is something

caused by the action of certain waves upon the eyes and nerves and brain of

the person who sees the light. When it is said that light is waves, what is

really meant is that waves are the physical cause of our sensations of light.

But light itself, the thing which seeing people experience and blind people do

not,  is  not  supposed  by  science  to  form  any  part  of  the  world  that  is

independent of us and our senses. And very similar remarks would apply to

other kinds of sensations.

It  is  not  only  colours  and  sounds  and  so  on  that  are  absent  from  the

scientific world of matter, but also space as we get it through sight or touch.

It is essential to science that its matter should be in a space, but the space in

which it is cannot be exactly the space we see or feel. To begin with, space as

we see it is not the same as space as we get it by the sense of touch; it is only

by experience in infancy that we learn how to touch things we see, or how to

get a sight of things which we feel touching us. But the space of science is

neutral as between touch and sight; thus it cannot be either the space of touch

or the space of sight.

  Again,  different  people  see  the  same  object  as  of  different  shapes,

according to their point of view. A circular coin, for example, though we

should always judge it to be circular, will look oval unless we are straight in

front of it. When we judge that it is circular, we are judging that it has a real

shape which is not its apparent shape, but belongs to it intrinsically apart

from its appearance. But this real shape, which is what concerns science,

must be in a real space, not the same as anybody's apparent space. The real

space is public, the apparent space is private to the percipient. In different

people's private spaces the same object seems to have different shapes; thus

the  real  space,  in  which  it  has  its  real  shape,  must  be  different  from  the

private spaces. The space of science, therefore, though connected with the

spaces we see and feel, is not identical with them, and the manner of its

connexion requires investigation.

We  agreed  provisionally  that  physical  objects  cannot  be  quite  like  our

sense-data, but may be regarded as causing our sensations. These physical

objects are in the space of science, which we may call 'physical' space. It isimportant  to  notice  that,  if  our  sensations  are  to  be  caused  by  physical

objects,  there  must  be  a  physical  space  containing  these  objects  and  our

sense-organs  and  nerves  and  brain.  We  get  a  sensation  of  touch  from  an

object when we are in contact with it; that is to say, when some part of our

body occupies a place in physical space quite close to the space occupied by

the object. We see an object (roughly speaking) when no opaque body is

between the object and our eyes in physical space. Similarly, we only hear or

smell or taste an object when we are sufficiently near to it, or when it touches

the tongue, or has some suitable position in physical space relatively to our

body. We cannot begin to state what different sensations we shall derive from

a given object under different circumstances unless we regard the object and

our body as both in one physical space, for it is mainly the relative positions

of the object and our body that determine what sensations we shall derive

from the object.

Now our sense-data are situated in our private spaces, either the space of

sight or the space of touch or such vaguer spaces as other senses may give us.

If, as science and common sense assume, there is one public all-embracing

physical space in which physical objects are, the relative positions of physical

objects  in  physical  space  must  more  or  less  correspond  to  the  relative

positions  of  sense-data  in  our  private  spaces.  There  is  no  difficulty  in

supposing this to be the case. If we see on a road one house nearer to us than

another, our other senses will bear out the view that it is nearer; for example,

it will be reached sooner if we walk along the road. Other people will agree

that the house which looks nearer to us is nearer; the ordnance map will take

the same view; and thus everything points to a spatial relation between the

houses corresponding to the relation between the sense-data which we see

when we look at the houses. Thus we may assume that there is a physical

space in which physical objects have spatial relations corresponding to those

which  the  corresponding  sense-data  have  in  our  private  spaces.  It  is  this

physical space which is dealt with in geometry and assumed in physics and

astronomy.

  Assuming that there is physical space, and that it does thus correspond to

private  spaces,  what  can  we  know  about  it?  We  can  know only  what  is

required in order to secure the correspondence. That is to say, we can know

nothing of what it is like in itself, but we can know the sort of arrangement of

physical objects which results from their spatial relations. We can know, for

example, that the earth and moon and sun are in one straight line during aneclipse, though we cannot know what a physical straight line is in itself, as

we know the look of a straight line in our visual space. Thus we come to

know  much  more  about  the relations  of  distances  in  physical  space  than

about the distances themselves; we may know that one distance is greater

than another, or that it is along the same straight line as the other, but we

cannot  have  that  immediate  acquaintance  with  physical  distances  that  we

have with distances in our private spaces, or with colours or sounds or other

sense-data. We can know all those things about physical space which a man

born blind might know through other people about the space of sight; but the

kind of things which a man born blind could never know about the space of

sight we also cannot know about physical space. We can know the properties

of the relations required to preserve the correspondence with sense-data, but

we cannot know the nature of the terms between which the relations hold.

  With regard to time, our feeling  of  duration  or  of  the  lapse  of  time  is

notoriously an unsafe guide as to the time that has elapsed by the clock.

Times when we are bored or suffering pain pass slowly, times when we are

agreeably occupied pass quickly, and times when we are sleeping pass almost

as if they did not exist. Thus, in so far as time is constituted by duration, there

is the same necessity for distinguishing a public and a private time as there

was in the case of space. But in so far as time consists in an order of before

and after, there is no need to make such a distinction; the time-order which

events seem to have is, so far as we can see, the same as the time-order which

they do have. At any rate no reason can be given for supposing that the two

orders are not the same. The same is usually true of space: if a regiment of

men are marching along a road, the shape of the regiment will look different

from different points of view, but the men will appear arranged in the same

order from all points of view. Hence we regard the order as true also in

physical  space,  whereas  the  shape  is  only  supposed  to  correspond  to  the

physical space so far as is required for the preservation of the order.

In saying that the time-order which events seem to have is the same as the

time-order which they really have, it is necessary to guard against a possible

misunderstanding. It must not be supposed that the various states of different

physical objects have the same time-order as the sense-data which constitute

the perceptions of those objects. Considered as physical objects, the thunder

and lightning are simultaneous; that is to say, the lightning is simultaneous

with the disturbance of the air in the place where the disturbance begins,

namely, where the lightning is. But the sense-datum which we call hearingthe thunder does not take place until the disturbance of the air has travelled as

far as to where we are. Similarly, it takes about eight minutes for the sun's

light to reach us; thus, when we see the sun we are seeing the sun of eight

minutes ago. So far as our sense-data afford evidence as to the physical sun

they  afford  evidence  as  to  the  physical  sun  of  eight  minutes  ago;  if  the

physical sun had ceased to exist within the last eight minutes, that would

make no difference to the sense-data which we call 'seeing the sun'. This

affords a fresh illustration of the necessity of distinguishing between sense-

data and physical objects.

  What we have found as regards space is much the same as what we find in

relation  to  the  correspondence  of  the  sense-data  with  their  physical

counterparts. If one object looks blue and another red, we may reasonably

presume that there is some corresponding difference between the physical

objects;  if  two  objects  both  look  blue,  we  may  presume  a  corresponding

similarity. But we cannot hope to be acquainted directly with the quality in

the physical object which makes it look blue or red. Science tells us that this

quality is a certain sort of wave-motion, and this sounds familiar, because we

think of wave-motions in the space we see. But the wave-motions must really

be in physical space, with which we have no direct acquaintance; thus the real

wave-motions have not that familiarity which we might have supposed them

to have. And what holds for colours is closely similar to what holds for other

sense-data. Thus we find that, although the relations of physical objects have

all sorts of knowable properties, derived from their correspondence with the

relations of sense-data, the physical objects themselves remain unknown in

their intrinsic nature, so far at least as can be discovered by means of the

senses.  The  question  remains  whether  there  is  any  other  method  of

discovering the intrinsic nature of physical objects.

The most natural, though not ultimately the most defensible, hypothesis to

adopt in the first instance, at any rate as regards visual sense-data, would be

that,  though  physical  objects  cannot,  for  the  reasons  we  have  been

considering, be exactly like sense-data, yet they may be more or less like.

According  to  this  view,  physical  objects  will,  for  example,  really  have

colours, and we might, by good luck, see an object as of the colour it really

is. The colour which an object seems to have at any given moment will in

general  be  very  similar,  though  not  quite  the  same,  from  many  different

points of view; we might thus suppose the 'real' colour to be a sort of medium

colour,  intermediate  between  the  various  shades  which  appear  from  thedifferent points of view.

  Such a theory is perhaps not capable of being definitely refuted, but it can

be shown to be groundless. To begin with, it is plain that the colour we see

depends only upon the nature of the light-waves that strike the eye, and is

therefore modified by the medium intervening between us and the object, as

well  as  by  the  manner  in  which  light  is  reflected  from  the  object  in  the

direction of the eye. The intervening air alters colours unless it is perfectly

clear, and any strong reflection will alter them completely. Thus the colour

we see is a result of the ray as it reaches the eye, and not simply a property of

the object from which the ray comes. Hence, also, provided certain waves

reach the eye, we shall see a certain colour, whether the object from which

the waves start has any colour or not. Thus it is quite gratuitous to suppose

that physical objects have colours, and therefore there is no justification for

making such a supposition. Exactly similar arguments will apply to other

sense-data.

It remains to ask whether there are any general philosophical arguments

enabling us to say that, if matter is real, it must be of such and such a nature.

As explained above, very many philosophers, perhaps most, have held that

whatever is real must be in some sense mental, or at any rate that whatever

we  can  know  anything  about  must  be  in  some  sense  mental.  Such

philosophers are called 'idealists'. Idealists tell us that what appears as matter

is really something mental; namely, either (as Leibniz held) more or less

rudimentary minds, or (as Berkeley contended) ideas in the minds which, as

we  should  commonly  say,  'perceive'  the  matter.  Thus  idealists  deny  the

existence of matter as something intrinsically different from mind, though

they do not deny that our sense-data are signs of something which exists

independently of our private sensations. In the following chapter we shall

consider  briefly  the  reasons—in  my  opinion  fallacious—which  idealists

advance in favour of their theory.

  CHAPTER IV. IDEALISM

The word 'idealism' is used by different philosophers in somewhat different

senses. We shall understand by it the doctrine that whatever exists, or at any

rate whatever can be known to exist, must be in some sense mental. This

doctrine, which is very widely held among philosophers, has several forms,

and is advocated on several different grounds. The doctrine is so widely held,

and so interesting in itself, that even the briefest survey of philosophy must

give some account of it.

  Those who are unaccustomed to philosophical speculation may be inclined

to  dismiss  such  a  doctrine  as  obviously  absurd.  There  is  no  doubt  that

common sense regards tables and chairs and the sun and moon and material

objects  generally  as  something  radically  different  from  minds  and  the

contents of minds, and as having an existence which might continue if minds

ceased. We think of matter as having existed long before there were any

minds, and it is hard to think of it as a mere product of mental activity. But

whether true or false, idealism is not to be dismissed as obviously absurd.

We  have  seen  that,  even  if  physical  objects  do  have  an  independent

existence, they must differ very widely from sense-data, and can only have a

correspondence with sense-data, in the same sort of way in which a catalogue

has  a  correspondence  with  the  things  catalogued.  Hence  common  sense

leaves us completely in the dark as to the true intrinsic nature of physical

objects, and if there were good reason to regard them as mental, we could not

legitimately reject this opinion merely because it strikes us as strange. The

truth about physical objects must be strange. It may be unattainable, but if

any philosopher believes that he has attained it, the fact that what he offers as

the truth is strange ought not to be made a ground of objection to his opinion.

The grounds on which idealism is advocated are generally grounds derived

from  the  theory  of  knowledge,  that  is  to  say,  from  a  discussion  of  the

conditions which things must satisfy in order that we may be able to know

them. The first serious attempt to establish idealism on such grounds was that

of Bishop Berkeley. He proved first, by arguments which were largely valid,

that our sense-data cannot be supposed to have an existence independent of

us, but must be, in part at least, 'in' the mind, in the sense that their existence

would not continue if there were no seeing or hearing or touching or smelling

or tasting. So far, his contention was almost certainly valid, even if some of

his arguments were not so. But he went on to argue that sense-data were theonly things of whose existence our perceptions could assure us; and that to be

known is to be 'in' a mind, and therefore to be mental. Hence he concluded

that  nothing  can  ever  be  known  except  what  is  in  some  mind,  and  that

whatever is known without being in my mind must be in some other mind.

In order to understand his argument, it is necessary to understand his use of

the word 'idea'. He gives the name 'idea' to anything which is immediately

known,  as,  for  example,  sense-data  are  known.  Thus  a  particular  colour

which we see is an idea; so is a voice which we hear, and so on. But the term

is not wholly confined to sense-data. There will also be things remembered or

imagined, for with such things also we have immediate acquaintance at the

moment  of  remembering  or  imagining.  All  such  immediate  data  he  calls

'ideas'.

He then proceeds to consider common objects, such as a tree, for instance.

He shows that all we know immediately when we 'perceive' the tree consists

of ideas in his sense of the word, and he argues that there is not the slightest

ground for supposing that there is anything real about the tree except what is

perceived. Its being, he says, consists in being perceived: in the Latin of the

schoolmen its 'esse' is 'percipi'. He fully admits that the tree must continue to

exist even when we shut our eyes or when no human being is near it. But this

continued existence, he says, is due to the fact that God continues to perceive

it; the 'real' tree, which corresponds to what we called the physical object,

consists of ideas in the mind of God, ideas more or less like those we have

when we see the tree, but differing in the fact that they are permanent in

God's  mind  so  long  as  the  tree  continues  to  exist.  All  our  perceptions,

according to him, consist in a partial participation in God's perceptions, and it

is because of this participation that different people see more or less the same

tree. Thus apart from minds and their ideas there is nothing in the world, nor

is  it  possible  that  anything  else  should  ever  be  known,  since  whatever  is

known is necessarily an idea.

  There  are  in  this  argument  a  good  many  fallacies  which  have  been

important in the history of philosophy, and which it will be as well to bring to

light. In the first place, there is a confusion engendered by the use of the word

'idea'. We think of an idea as essentially something in somebody's mind, and

thus when we are told that a tree consists entirely of ideas, it is natural to

suppose that, if so, the tree must be entirely in minds. But the notion of being

'in'  the  mind  is  ambiguous.  We  speak  of  bearing  a  person  in  mind,  not

meaning that the person is in our minds, but that a thought of him is in ourminds. When a man says that some business he had to arrange went clean out

of his mind, he does not mean to imply that the business itself was ever in his

mind, but only that a thought of the business was formerly in his mind, but

afterwards ceased to be in his mind. And so when Berkeley says that the tree

must be in our minds if we can know it, all that he really has a right to say is

that a thought of the tree must be in our minds. To argue that the tree itself

must be in our minds is like arguing that a person whom we bear in mind is

himself in our minds. This confusion may seem too gross to have been really

committed  by  any  competent  philosopher,  but  various  attendant

circumstances rendered it possible. In order to see how it was possible, we

must go more deeply into the question as to the nature of ideas.

Before  taking  up  the  general  question  of  the  nature  of  ideas,  we  must

disentangle two entirely separate questions which arise concerning sense-data

and physical objects. We saw that, for various reasons of detail, Berkeley was

right in treating the sense-data which constitute our perception of the tree as

more or less subjective, in the sense that they depend upon us as much as

upon the tree, and would not exist if the tree were not being perceived. But

this is an entirely different point from the one by which Berkeley seeks to

prove that whatever can be immediately known must be in a mind. For this

purpose arguments of detail as to the dependence of sense-data upon us are

useless. It is necessary to prove, generally, that by being known, things are

shown to be mental. This is what Berkeley believes himself to have done. It

is this question, and not our previous question as to the difference between

sense-data and the physical object, that must now concern us.

  Taking  the  word  'idea'  in  Berkeley's  sense,  there  are  two  quite  distinct

things to be considered whenever an idea is before the mind. There is on the

one hand the thing of which we are aware—say the colour of my table—and

on the other hand the actual awareness itself, the mental act of apprehending

the thing. The mental act is undoubtedly mental, but is there any reason to

suppose that the thing apprehended is in any sense mental? Our previous

arguments concerning the colour did not prove it to be mental; they only

proved that its existence depends upon the relation of our sense organs to the

physical object—in our case, the table. That is to say, they proved that a

certain colour will exist, in a certain light, if a normal eye is placed at a

certain point relatively to the table. They did not prove that the colour is in

the mind of the percipient.

  Berkeley's view, that obviously the colour must be in the mind, seems todepend for its plausibility upon confusing the thing apprehended with the act

of apprehension. Either of these might be called an 'idea'; probably either

would have been called an idea by Berkeley. The act is undoubtedly in the

mind; hence, when we are thinking of the act, we readily assent to the view

that ideas must be in the mind. Then, forgetting that this was only true when

ideas were taken as acts of apprehension, we transfer the proposition that

'ideas  are  in  the  mind'  to  ideas  in  the  other  sense,  i.e.  to  the  things

apprehended  by  our  acts  of  apprehension.  Thus,  by  an  unconscious

equivocation, we arrive at the conclusion that whatever we can apprehend

must  be  in  our  minds.  This  seems  to  be  the  true  analysis  of  Berkeley's

argument, and the ultimate fallacy upon which it rests.

This question of the distinction between act and object in our apprehending

of things is vitally important, since our whole power of acquiring knowledge

is bound up with it. The faculty of being acquainted with things other than

itself  is  the  main  characteristic  of  a  mind.  Acquaintance  with  objects

essentially consists in a relation between the mind and something other than

the mind; it is this that constitutes the mind's power of knowing things. If we

say that the things known must be in the mind, we are either unduly limiting

the mind's power of knowing, or we are uttering a mere tautology. We are

uttering a mere tautology if we mean by 'in the mind' the same as by 'before

the mind', i.e. if we mean merely being apprehended by the mind. But if we

mean this, we shall have to admit that what, in this sense, is in the mind, may

nevertheless be not mental. Thus when we realize the nature of knowledge,

Berkeley's argument is seen to be wrong in substance as well as in form, and

his grounds for supposing that 'ideas'—i.e. the objects apprehended—must be

mental, are found to have no validity whatever. Hence his grounds in favour

of idealism may be dismissed. It remains to see whether there are any other

grounds.

It is often said, as though it were a self-evident truism, that we cannot

know that anything exists which we do not know. It is inferred that whatever

can in any way be relevant to our experience must be at least capable of being

known by us; whence it follows that if matter were essentially something

with which we could not become acquainted, matter would be something

which  we  could  not  know  to  exist,  and  which  could  have  for  us  no

importance whatever. It is generally also implied, for reasons which remain

obscure, that what can have no importance for us cannot be real, and that

therefore  matter,  if  it  is  not  composed  of  minds  or  of  mental  ideas,  isimpossible and a mere chimaera.

To go into this argument fully at our present stage would be impossible,

since  it  raises  points  requiring  a  considerable  preliminary  discussion;  but

certain reasons for rejecting the argument may be noticed at once. To begin at

the end: there is no reason why what cannot have any practical importance

for us should not be real. It is true that, if theoretical importance is included,

everything real is of some importance to us, since, as persons desirous of

knowing the truth about the universe, we have some interest in everything

that the universe contains. But if this sort of interest is included, it is not the

case that matter has no importance for us, provided it exists even if we cannot

know that it exists. We can, obviously, suspect that it may exist, and wonder

whether it does; hence it is connected with our desire for knowledge, and has

the importance of either satisfying or thwarting this desire.

  Again, it is by no means a truism, and is in fact false, that we cannot know

that anything exists which we do not know. The word 'know' is here used in

two  different  senses.  (1)  In  its  first  use  it  is  applicable  to  the  sort  of

knowledge which is opposed to error, the sense in which what we know is

true, the sense which applies to our beliefs and convictions, i.e. to what are

called judgements. In this sense of the word we know that something is the

case. This sort of knowledge may be described as knowledge of truths. (2) In

the second use of the word 'know' above, the word applies to our knowledge

of things, which we may call acquaintance. This is the sense in which we

know sense-data. (The distinction involved is roughly that between savoir

and connaître in French, or between wissen and kennen in German.)

  Thus the statement which seemed like a truism becomes, when re-stated,

the following: 'We can never truly judge that something with which we are

not acquainted exists.' This is by no means a truism, but on the contrary a

palpable falsehood. I have not the honour to be acquainted with the Emperor

of China, but I truly judge that he exists. It may be said, of course, that I

judge this because of other people's acquaintance with him. This, however,

would be an irrelevant retort, since, if the principle were true, I could not

know that any one else is acquainted with him. But further: there is no reason

why I should not know of the existence of something with which nobody is

acquainted. This point is important, and demands elucidation.

If I am acquainted with a thing which exists, my acquaintance gives me the

knowledge that it exists. But it is not true that, conversely, whenever I can

know  that  a  thing  of  a  certain  sort  exists,  I  or  some  one  else  must  beacquainted  with  the  thing.  What  happens,  in  cases  where  I  have  true

judgement  without  acquaintance,  is  that  the  thing  is  known  to  me  by

description, and that, in virtue of some general principle, the existence of a

thing  answering  to  this  description  can  be  inferred  from  the  existence  of

something  with  which  I  am  acquainted.  In  order  to  understand  this  point

fully, it will be well first to deal with the difference between knowledge by

acquaintance  and  knowledge  by  description,  and  then  to  consider  what

knowledge of general principles, if any, has the same kind of certainty as our

knowledge of the existence of our own experiences. These subjects will be

dealt with in the following chapters.

  





 CHAPTER V. KNOWLEDGE BY

ACQUAINTANCE  AND  KNOWLEDGE  BY

DESCRIPTION

In the preceding chapter we saw that there are two sorts of knowledge:

knowledge of things, and knowledge of truths. In this chapter we shall be

concerned exclusively with knowledge of things, of which in turn we shall

have to distinguish two kinds. Knowledge of things, when it is of the kind we

call knowledge by acquaintance, is essentially simpler than any knowledge

of truths, and logically independent of knowledge of truths, though it would

be rash to assume that human beings ever, in fact, have acquaintance with

things without at the same time knowing some truth about them. Knowledge

of things by description, on the contrary, always involves, as we shall find in

the course of the present chapter, some knowledge of truths as its source and

ground. But first of all we must make clear what we mean by 'acquaintance'

and what we mean by 'description'.

We shall say that we have acquaintance with anything of which we are

directly aware, without the intermediary of any process of inference or any

knowledge of truths. Thus in the presence of my table I am acquainted with

the sense-data that make up the appearance of my table—its colour, shape,

hardness, smoothness, etc.; all these are things of which I am immediately

conscious when I am seeing and touching my table. The particular shade of

colour that I am seeing may have many things said about it—I may say that it

is brown, that it is rather dark, and so on. But such statements, though they

make me know truths about the colour, do not make me know the colour

itself any better than I did before so far as concerns knowledge of the colour

itself, as opposed to knowledge of truths about it, I know the colour perfectly

and completely when I see it, and no further knowledge of it itself is even

theoretically possible. Thus the sense-data which make up the appearance of

my  table  are  things  with  which  I  have  acquaintance,  things  immediately

known to me just as they are.

My knowledge of the table as a physical object, on the contrary, is not

direct knowledge. Such as it is, it is obtained through acquaintance with the

sense-data that make up the appearance of the table. We have seen that it is

possible, without absurdity, to doubt whether there is a table at all, whereas it

is not possible to doubt the sense-data. My knowledge of the table is of thekind which we shall call 'knowledge by description'. The table is 'the physical

object which causes such-and-such sense-data'. This describes the table by

means of the sense-data. In order to know anything at all about the table, we

must know truths connecting it with things with which we have acquaintance:

we  must  know  that  'such-and-such  sense-data  are  caused  by  a  physical

object'. There is no state of mind in which we are directly aware of the table;

all our knowledge of the table is really knowledge of truths, and the actual

thing which is the table is not, strictly speaking, known to us at all. We know

a  description,  and  we  know  that  there  is  just  one  object  to  which  this

description applies, though the object itself is not directly known to us. In

such  a  case,  we  say  that  our  knowledge  of  the  object  is  knowledge  by

description.

All our knowledge, both knowledge of things and knowledge of truths,

rests upon acquaintance as its foundation. It is therefore important to consider

what kinds of things there are with which we have acquaintance.

  Sense-data, as we have already seen, are among the things with which we

are acquainted; in fact, they supply the most obvious and striking example of

knowledge  by  acquaintance.  But  if  they  were  the  sole  example,  our

knowledge would be very much more restricted than it is. We should only

know what is now present to our senses: we could not know anything about

the past—not even that there was a past—nor could we know any truths

about our sense-data, for all knowledge of truths, as we shall show, demands

acquaintance with things which are of an essentially different character from

sense-data, the things which are sometimes called 'abstract ideas', but which

we shall call 'universals'. We have therefore to consider acquaintance with

other things besides sense-data if we are to obtain any tolerably adequate

analysis of our knowledge.

The first extension beyond sense-data to be considered is acquaintance by

memory. It is obvious that we often remember what we have seen or heard or

had  otherwise  present  to  our  senses,  and  that  in  such  cases  we  are  still

immediately aware of what we remember, in spite of the fact that it appears

as  past  and  not  as  present.  This  immediate  knowledge  by  memory  is  the

source of all our knowledge concerning the past: without it, there could be no

knowledge of the past by inference, since we should never know that there

was anything past to be inferred.

The next extension to be considered is acquaintance by introspection. We

are not only aware of things, but we are often aware of being aware of them.When I see the sun, I am often aware of my seeing the sun; thus 'my seeing

the sun' is an object with which I have acquaintance. When I desire food, I

may be aware of my desire for food; thus 'my desiring food' is an object with

which I am acquainted. Similarly we may be aware of our feeling pleasure or

pain, and generally of the events which happen in our minds. This kind of

acquaintance, which may be called self-consciousness, is the source of all our

knowledge of mental things. It is obvious that it is only what goes on in our

own minds that can be thus known immediately. What goes on in the minds

of  others  is  known  to  us  through  our  perception  of  their  bodies,  that  is,

through the sense-data in us which are associated with their bodies. But for

our acquaintance with the contents of our own minds, we should be unable to

imagine  the  minds  of  others,  and  therefore  we  could  never  arrive  at  the

knowledge  that  they  have  minds.  It  seems  natural  to  suppose  that  self-

consciousness  is  one  of  the  things  that  distinguish  men  from  animals:

animals, we may suppose, though they have acquaintance with sense-data,

never  become  aware  of  this  acquaintance.  I  do  not  mean  that  they doubt

whether they exist, but that they have never become conscious of the fact that

they have sensations and feelings, nor therefore of the fact that they, the

subjects of their sensations and feelings, exist.

We have spoken of acquaintance with the contents of our minds as self-

consciousness,  but  it  is  not,  of  course,  consciousness  of  our self:  it  is

consciousness of particular thoughts and feelings. The question whether we

are also acquainted with our bare selves, as opposed to particular thoughts

and feelings, is a very difficult one, upon which it would be rash to speak

positively. When we try to look into ourselves we always seem to come upon

some particular thought or feeling, and not upon the 'I' which has the thought

or  feeling.  Nevertheless  there  are  some  reasons  for  thinking  that  we  are

acquainted with the 'I', though the acquaintance is hard to disentangle from

other things. To make clear what sort of reason there is, let us consider for a

moment what our acquaintance with particular thoughts really involves.

  When I am acquainted with 'my seeing the sun', it seems plain that I am

acquainted with two different things in relation to each other. On the one

hand there is the sense-datum which represents the sun to me, on the other

hand there is that which sees this sense-datum. All acquaintance, such as my

acquaintance  with  the  sense-datum  which  represents  the  sun,  seems

obviously a relation between the person acquainted and the object with which

the person is acquainted. When a case of acquaintance is one with which Ican be acquainted (as I am acquainted with my acquaintance with the sense-

datum representing the sun), it is plain that the person acquainted is myself.

Thus, when I am acquainted with my seeing the sun, the whole fact with

which I am acquainted is 'Self-acquainted-with-sense-datum'.

  Further, we know the truth 'I am acquainted with this sense-datum'. It is

hard to see how we could know this truth, or even understand what is meant

by it, unless we were acquainted with something which we call 'I'. It does not

seem  necessary  to  suppose  that  we  are  acquainted  with  a  more  or  less

permanent person, the same to-day as yesterday, but it does seem as though

we must be acquainted with that thing, whatever its nature, which sees the

sun and has acquaintance with sense-data. Thus, in some sense it would seem

we  must  be  acquainted  with  our  Selves  as  opposed  to  our  particular

experiences. But the question is difficult, and complicated arguments can be

adduced on either side. Hence, although acquaintance with ourselves seems

probably to occur, it is not wise to assert that it undoubtedly does occur.

We  may  therefore  sum  up  as  follows  what  has  been  said  concerning

acquaintance with things that exist. We have acquaintance in sensation with

the data of the outer senses, and in introspection with the data of what may be

called the inner sense—thoughts, feelings, desires, etc.; we have acquaintance

in memory with things which have been data either of the outer senses or of

the  inner  sense.  Further,  it  is  probable,  though  not  certain,  that  we  have

acquaintance  with  Self,  as  that  which  is  aware  of  things  or  has  desires

towards things.

In addition to our acquaintance with particular existing things, we also

have acquaintance with what we shall call universals, that is to say, general

ideas, such as whiteness, diversity, brotherhood, and so on. Every complete

sentence must contain at least one word which stands for a universal, since all

verbs have a meaning which is universal. We shall return to universals later

on, in Chapter IX; for the present, it is only necessary to guard against the

supposition  that  whatever  we  can  be  acquainted  with  must  be  something

particular and existent. Awareness of universals is called conceiving, and a

universal of which we are aware is called a concept.

It will be seen that among the objects with which we are acquainted are not

included  physical  objects  (as  opposed  to  sense-data),  nor  other  people's

minds.  These  things  are  known  to  us  by  what  I  call  'knowledge  by

description', which we must now consider.

By a 'description' I mean any phrase of the form 'a so-and-so' or 'the so-and-so'.  A  phrase  of  the  form  'a  so-and-so'  I  shall  call  an  'ambiguous'

description; a phrase of the form 'the so-and-so' (in the singular) I shall call a

'definite' description. Thus 'a man' is an ambiguous description, and 'the man

with  the  iron  mask'  is  a  definite  description.  There  are  various  problems

connected with ambiguous descriptions, but I pass them by, since they do not

directly concern the matter we are discussing, which is the nature of our

knowledge concerning objects in cases where we know that there is an object

answering to a definite description, though we are not acquainted with any

such object. This is a matter which is concerned exclusively with definite

descriptions. I shall therefore, in the sequel, speak simply of 'descriptions'

when I mean 'definite descriptions'. Thus a description will mean any phrase

of the form 'the so-and-so' in the singular.

We shall say that an object is 'known by description' when we know that it

is 'the so-and-so', i.e. when we know that there is one object, and no more,

having a certain property; and it will generally be implied that we do not have

knowledge of the same object by acquaintance. We know that the man with

the iron mask existed, and many propositions are known about him; but we

do not know who he was. We know that the candidate who gets the most

votes will be elected, and in this case we are very likely also acquainted (in

the only sense in which one can be acquainted with some one else) with the

man who is, in fact, the candidate who will get most votes; but we do not

know which of the candidates he is, i.e. we do not know any proposition of

the form 'A is the candidate who will get most votes' where A is one of the

candidates  by  name.  We  shall  say  that  we  have  'merely  descriptive

knowledge'  of  the  so-and-so  when,  although  we  know  that  the  so-and-so

exists, and although we may possibly be acquainted with the object which is,

in fact, the so-and-so, yet we do not know any proposition 'a is the so-and-so',

where a is something with which we are acquainted.

  When we say 'the so-and-so exists', we mean that there is just one object

which is the so-and-so. The proposition 'a is the so-and-so' means that a has

the property so-and-so, and nothing else has. 'Mr. A. is the Unionist candidate

for  this  constituency'  means  'Mr.  A.  is  a  Unionist  candidate  for  this

constituency,  and  no  one  else  is'.  'The  Unionist  candidate  for  this

constituency  exists'  means  'some  one  is  a  Unionist  candidate  for  this

constituency,  and  no  one  else  is'.  Thus,  when  we  are  acquainted  with  an

object which is the so-and-so, we know that the so-and-so exists; but we may

know that the so-and-so exists when we are not acquainted with any objectwhich we know to be the so-and-so, and even when we are not acquainted

with any object which, in fact, is the so-and-so.

  Common words, even proper names, are usually really descriptions. That is

to say, the thought in the mind of a person using a proper name correctly can

generally only be expressed explicitly if we replace the proper name by a

description. Moreover, the description required to express the thought will

vary for different people, or for the same person at different times. The only

thing constant (so long as the name is rightly used) is the object to which the

name applies. But so long as this remains constant, the particular description

involved  usually  makes  no  difference  to  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  the

proposition in which the name appears.

Let  us  take  some  illustrations.  Suppose  some  statement  made  about

Bismarck. Assuming that there is such a thing as direct acquaintance with

oneself, Bismarck himself might have used his name directly to designate the

particular person with whom he was acquainted. In this case, if he made a

judgement about himself, he himself might be a constituent of the judgement.

Here the proper name has the direct use which it always wishes to have, as

simply standing for a certain object, and not for a description of the object.

But if a person who knew Bismarck made a judgement about him, the case is

different.  What  this  person  was  acquainted  with  were  certain  sense-data

which he connected (rightly, we will suppose) with Bismarck's body. His

body, as a physical object, and still more his mind, were only known as the

body and the mind connected with these sense-data. That is, they were known

by  description.  It  is,  of  course,  very  much  a  matter  af  chance  which

characteristics of a man's appearance will come into a friend's mind when he

thinks of him; thus the description actually in the friend's mind is accidental.

The essential point is that he knows that the various descriptions all apply to

the same entity, in spite of not being acquainted with the entity in question.

  When we, who did not know Bismarck, make a judgement about him, the

description in our minds will probably be some more or less vague mass of

historical knowledge—far more, in most cases, than is required to identify

him. But, for the sake of illustration, let us assume that we think of him as

'the first Chancellor of the German Empire'. Here all the words are abstract

except 'German'. The word 'German' will, again, have different meanings for

different people. To some it will recall travels in Germany, to some the look

of Germany on the map, and so on. But if we are to obtain a description

which we know to be applicable, we shall be compelled, at some point, tobring  in  a  reference  to  a  particular  with  which  we  are  acquainted.  Such

reference is involved in any mention of past, present, and future (as opposed

to definite dates), or of here and there, or of what others have told us. Thus it

would seem that, in some way or other, a description known to be applicable

to a particular must involve some reference to a particular with which we are

acquainted, if our knowledge about the thing described is not to be merely

what follows logically from the description. For example, 'the most long-

lived of men' is a description involving only universals, which must apply to

some  man,  but  we  can  make  no  judgements  concerning  this  man  which

involve knowledge about him beyond what the description gives. If, however,

we  say,  'The  first  Chancellor  of  the  German  Empire  was  an  astute

diplomatist', we can only be assured of the truth of our judgement in virtue of

something with which we are acquainted—usually a testimony heard or read.

Apart from the information we convey to others, apart from the fact about the

actual Bismarck, which gives importance to our judgement, the thought we

really  have  contains  the  one  or  more  particulars  involved,  and  otherwise

consists wholly of concepts.

All  names  of  places—London,  England,  Europe,  the  Earth,  the  Solar

System—similarly involve, when used, descriptions which start from some

one or more particulars with which we are acquainted. I suspect that even the

Universe,  as  considered  by  metaphysics,  involves  such  a  connexion  with

particulars. In logic, on the contrary, where we are concerned not merely with

what does exist, but with whatever might or could exist or be, no reference to

actual particulars is involved.

It  would  seem  that,  when  we  make  a  statement  about  something  only

known by description, we often intend to make our statement, not in the form

involving the description, but about the actual thing described. That is to say,

when we say anything about Bismarck, we should like, if we could, to make

the judgement which Bismarck alone can make, namely, the judgement of

which he himself is a constituent. In this we are necessarily defeated, since

the actual Bismarck is unknown to us. But we know that there is an object B,

called Bismarck, and that B was an astute diplomatist. We can thus describe

the  proposition  we  should  like  to  affirm,  namely,  'B  was  an  astute

diplomatist', where B is the object which was Bismarck. If we are describing

Bismarck as 'the first Chancellor of the German Empire', the proposition we

should  like  to  affirm  may  be  described  as  'the  proposition  asserting,

concerning the actual object which was the first Chancellor of the GermanEmpire,  that  this  object  was  an  astute  diplomatist'.  What  enables  us  to

communicate in spite of the varying descriptions we employ is that we know

there is a true proposition concerning the actual Bismarck, and that however

we  may  vary  the  description  (so  long  as  the  description  is  correct)  the

proposition described is still the same. This proposition, which is described

and is known to be true, is what interests us; but we are not acquainted with

the proposition itself, and do not know it, though we know it is true.

It  will  be  seen  that  there  are  various  stages  in  the  removal  from

acquaintance with particulars: there is Bismarck to people who knew him;

Bismarck to those who only know of him through history; the man with the

iron mask; the longest-lived of men. These are progressively further removed

from acquaintance with particulars; the first comes as near to acquaintance as

is possible in regard to another person; in the second, we shall still be said to

know 'who Bismarck was'; in the third, we do not know who was the man

with the iron mask, though we can know many propositions about him which

are not logically deducible from the fact that he wore an iron mask; in the

fourth, finally, we know nothing beyond what is logically deducible from the

definition of the man. There is a similar hierarchy in the region of universals.

Many universals, like many particulars, are only known to us by description.

But here, as in the case of particulars, knowledge concerning what is known

by  description  is  ultimately  reducible  to  knowledge  concerning  what  is

known by acquaintance.

1. The  fundamental  principle  in  the  analysis  of  propositions  containing

      descriptions is this: Every proposition which we can understand must be

    composed wholly of constituents with which we are acquainted.

We shall not at this stage attempt to answer all the objections which may

be urged against this fundamental principle. For the present, we shall merely

point  out  that,  in  some  way  or  other,  it  must  be  possible  to  meet  these

objections, for it is scarcely conceivable that we can make a judgement or

entertain a supposition without knowing what it is that we are judging or

supposing about. We must attach some meaning to the words we use, if we

are to speak significantly and not utter mere noise; and the meaning we attach

to our words must be something with which we are acquainted. Thus when,

for example, we make a statement about Julius Caesar, it is plain that Julius

Caesar himself is not before our minds, since we are not acquainted with him.

We  have  in  mind  some  description  of  Julius  Caesar:  'the  man  who  was

assassinated on the Ides of March', 'the founder of the Roman Empire', or,perhaps,  merely  'the  man  whose  name  was Julius  Caesar'.  (In  this  last

description, Julius Caesar is a noise or shape with which we are acquainted.)

Thus our statement does not mean quite what it seems to mean, but means

something involving, instead of Julius Caesar, some description of him which

is  composed  wholly  of  particulars  and  universals  with  which  we  are

acquainted.

The chief importance of knowledge by description is that it enables us to

pass beyond the limits of our private experience. In spite of the fact that we

can only know truths which are wholly composed of terms which we have

experienced in acquaintance, we can yet have knowledge by description of

things which we have never experienced. In view of the very narrow range of

our immediate experience, this result is vital, and until it is understood, much

of our knowledge must remain mysterious and therefore doubtful.

  





 CHAPTER VI. ON INDUCTION

In  almost  all  our  previous  discussions  we  have  been  concerned  in  the

attempt to get clear as to our data in the way of knowledge of existence. What

things are there in the universe whose existence is known to us owing to our

being  acquainted  with  them?  So  far,  our  answer  has  been  that  we  are

acquainted  with  our  sense-data,  and,  probably,  with  ourselves.  These  we

know to exist. And past sense-data which are remembered are known to have

existed in the past. This knowledge supplies our data.

But if we are to be able to draw inferences from these data—if we are to

know  of  the  existence  of  matter,  of  other  people,  of  the  past  before  our

individual memory begins, or of the future, we must know general principles

of some kind by means of which such inferences can be drawn. It must be

known to us that the existence of some one sort of thing, A, is a sign of the

existence of some other sort of thing, B, either at the same time as A or at

some earlier or later time, as, for example, thunder is a sign of the earlier

existence of lightning. If this were not known to us, we could never extend

our knowledge beyond the sphere of our private experience; and this sphere,

as  we  have  seen,  is  exceedingly  limited.  The  question  we  have  now  to

consider is whether such an extension is possible, and if so, how it is effected.

Let us take as an illustration a matter about which none of us, in fact, feel

the slightest doubt. We are all convinced that the sun will rise to-morrow.

Why? Is this belief a mere blind outcome of past experience, or can it be

justified as a reasonable belief? It is not easy to find a test by which to judge

whether a belief of this kind is reasonable or not, but we can at least ascertain

what sort of general beliefs would suffice, if true, to justify the judgement

that the sun will rise to-morrow, and the many other similar judgements upon

which our actions are based.

It is obvious that if we are asked why we believe that the sun will rise to-

morrow, we shall naturally answer 'Because it always has risen every day'.

We have a firm belief that it will rise in the future, because it has risen in the

past. If we are challenged as to why we believe that it will continue to rise as

heretofore, we may appeal to the laws of motion: the earth, we shall say, is a

freely rotating body, and such bodies do not cease to rotate unless something

interferes from outside, and there is nothing outside to interfere with the earth

between now and to-morrow. Of course it might be doubted whether we are

quite  certain  that  there  is  nothing  outside  to  interfere,  but  this  is  not  theinteresting doubt. The interesting doubt is as to whether the laws of motion

will  remain  in  operation  until  to-morrow.  If  this  doubt  is  raised,  we  find

ourselves in the same position as when the doubt about the sunrise was first

raised.

The only  reason  for  believing  that  the  laws  of  motion  will  remain  in

operation is that they have operated hitherto, so far as our knowledge of the

past enables us to judge. It is true that we have a greater body of evidence

from the past in favour of the laws of motion than we have in favour of the

sunrise, because the sunrise is merely a particular case of fulfilment of the

laws of motion, and there are countless other particular cases. But the real

question is: Do any number of cases of a law being fulfilled in the past afford

evidence that it will be fulfilled in the future? If not, it becomes plain that we

have no ground whatever for expecting the sun to rise to-morrow, or for

expecting the bread we shall eat at our next meal not to poison us, or for any

of the other scarcely conscious expectations that control our daily lives. It is

to be observed that all such expectations are only probable; thus we have not

to seek for a proof that they must be fulfilled, but only for some reason in

favour of the view that they are likely to be fulfilled.

Now  in  dealing  with  this  question  we  must,  to  begin  with,  make  an

important  distinction,  without  which  we  should  soon  become  involved  in

hopeless  confusions.  Experience  has  shown  us  that,  hitherto,  the  frequent

repetition of some uniform succession or coexistence has been a cause of our

expecting the same succession or coexistence on the next occasion. Food that

has a certain appearance generally has a certain taste, and it is a severe shock

to our expectations when the familiar appearance is found to be associated

with an unusual taste. Things which we see become associated, by habit, with

certain  tactile  sensations  which  we  expect  if  we  touch  them;  one  of  the

horrors  of  a  ghost  (in  many  ghost-stories)  is  that  it  fails  to  give  us  any

sensations of touch. Uneducated people who go abroad for the first time are

so surprised as to be incredulous when they find their native language not

understood.

And this kind of association is not confined to men; in animals also it is

very strong. A horse which has been often driven along a certain road resists

the attempt to drive him in a different direction. Domestic animals expect

food when they see the person who usually feeds them. We know that all

these rather crude expectations of uniformity are liable to be misleading. The

man who has fed the chicken every day throughout its life at last wrings itsneck instead, showing that more refined views as to the uniformity of nature

would have been useful to the chicken.

But in spite of the misleadingness of such expectations, they nevertheless

exist. The mere fact that something has happened a certain number of times

causes animals and men to expect that it will happen again. Thus our instincts

certainly cause us to believe that the sun will rise to-morrow, but we may be

in  no  better  a  position  than  the  chicken  which  unexpectedly  has  its  neck

wrung. We have therefore to distinguish the fact that past uniformities cause

expectations  as  to  the  future,  from  the  question  whether  there  is  any

reasonable ground for giving weight to such expectations after the question of

their validity has been raised.

The  problem  we  have  to  discuss  is  whether  there  is  any  reason  for

believing  in  what  is  called  'the  uniformity  of  nature'.  The  belief  in  the

uniformity of nature is the belief that everything that has happened or will

happen is an instance of some general law to which there are no exceptions.

The crude expectations which we have been considering are all subject to

exceptions, and therefore liable to disappoint those who entertain them. But

science  habitually  assumes,  at  least  as  a  working  hypothesis,  that  general

rules which have exceptions can be replaced by general rules which have no

exceptions. 'Unsupported bodies in air fall' is a general rule to which balloons

and  aeroplanes  are  exceptions.  But  the  laws  of  motion  and  the  law  of

gravitation, which account for the fact that most bodies fall, also account for

the fact that balloons and aeroplanes can rise; thus the laws of motion and the

law of gravitation are not subject to these exceptions.

The belief that the sun will rise to-morrow might be falsified if the earth

came suddenly into contact with a large body which destroyed its rotation;

but the laws of motion and the law of gravitation would not be infringed by

such an event. The business of science is to find uniformities, such as the

laws of motion and the law of gravitation, to which, so far as our experience

extends, there are no exceptions. In this search science has been remarkably

successful, and it may be conceded that such uniformities have held hitherto.

This brings us back to the question: Have we any reason, assuming that they

have always held in the past, to suppose that they will hold in the future?

It  has  been  argued  that  we  have  reason  to  know  that  the  future  will

resemble the past, because what was the future has constantly become the

past, and has always been found to resemble the past, so that we really have

experience of the future, namely of times which were formerly future, whichwe may call past futures. But such an argument really begs the very question

at issue. We have experience of past futures, but not of future futures, and the

question is: Will future futures resemble past futures? This question is not to

be answered by an argument which starts from past futures alone. We have

therefore still to seek for some principle which shall enable us to know that

the future will follow the same laws as the past.

The  reference  to  the  future  in  this  question  is  not  essential.  The  same

question arises when we apply the laws that work in our experience to past

things of which we have no experience—as, for example, in geology, or in

theories as to the origin of the Solar System. The question we really have to

ask is: 'When two things have been found to be often associated, and no

instance is known of the one occurring without the other, does the occurrence

of one of the two, in a fresh instance, give any good ground for expecting the

other?' On our answer to this question must depend the validity of the whole

of our expectations as to the future, the whole of the results obtained by

induction, and in fact practically all the beliefs upon which our daily life is

based.

It must be conceded, to begin with, that the fact that two things have been

found  often  together  and  never  apart  does  not,  by  itself,  suffice  to prove

demonstratively that they will be found together in the next case we examine.

The most we can hope is that the oftener things are found together, the more

probable it becomes that they will be found together another time, and that, if

they  have  been  found  together  often  enough,  the  probability  will  amount

almost to certainty. It can never quite reach certainty, because we know that

in spite of frequent repetitions there sometimes is a failure at the last, as in the

case of the chicken whose neck is wrung. Thus probability is all we ought to

seek.

It might be urged, as against the view we are advocating, that we know all

natural phenomena to be subject to the reign of law, and that sometimes, on

the basis of observation, we can see that only one law can possibly fit the

facts of the case. Now to this view there are two answers. The first is that,

even if some law which has no exceptions applies to our case, we can never,

in practice, be sure that we have discovered that law and not one to which

there are exceptions. The second is that the reign of law would seem to be

itself only probable, and that our belief that it will hold in the future, or in

unexamined cases in the past, is itself based upon the very principle we are

examining.The principle we are examining may be called the principle of induction,

and its two parts may be stated as follows:

(a) When a thing of a certain sort A has been found to be associated with a

thing of a certain other sort B, and has never been found dissociated from a

thing of the sort B, the greater the number of cases in which A and B have

been associated, the greater is the probability that they will be associated in a

fresh case in which one of them is known to be present;

(b)  Under  the  same  circumstances,  a  sufficient  number  of  cases  of

association will make the probability of a fresh association nearly a certainty,

and will make it approach certainty without limit.

As  just  stated,  the  principle  applies  only  to  the  verification  of  our

expectation in a single fresh instance. But we want also to know that there is

a probability in favour of the general law that things of the sort A are always

associated with things of the sort B, provided a sufficient number of cases of

association are known, and no cases of failure of association are known. The

probability of the general law is obviously less than the probability of the

particular case, since if the general law is true, the particular case must also

be true, whereas the particular case may be true without the general law being

true.  Nevertheless  the  probability  of  the  general  law  is  increased  by

repetitions, just as the probability of the particular case is. We may therefore

repeat the two parts of our principle as regards the general law, thus:

(a) The greater the number of cases in which a thing of the sort A has been

found associated with a thing of the sort B, the more probable it is (if no

cases of failure of association are known) that A is always associated with B;

b)  Under  the  same  circumstances,  a  sufficient  number  of  cases  of  the

association of A with B will make it nearly certain that A is always associated

with B, and will make this general law approach certainty without limit.

It should be noted that probability is always relative to certain data. In our

case, the data are merely the known cases of coexistence of A and B. There

may be other data, which might be taken into account, which would gravely

alter the probability. For example, a man who had seen a great many white

swans might argue, by our principle, that on the data it was probable that all

swans  were  white,  and  this  might  be  a  perfectly  sound  argument.  The

argument is not disproved by the fact that some swans are black, because a

thing  may  very  well  happen  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  some  data  render  it

improbable. In the case of the swans, a man might know that colour is a very

variable  characteristic  in  many  species  of  animals,  and  that,  therefore,  aninduction as to colour is peculiarly liable to error. But this knowledge would

be a fresh datum, by no means proving that the probability relatively to our

previous data had been wrongly estimated. The fact, therefore, that things

often fail to fulfil our expectations is no evidence that our expectations will

not probably be fulfilled in a given case or a given class of cases. Thus our

inductive principle is at any rate not capable of being disproved by an appeal

to experience.

The inductive principle, however, is equally incapable of being proved by

an appeal to experience. Experience might conceivably confirm the inductive

principle as regards the cases that have been already examined; but as regards

unexamined  cases,  it  is  the  inductive  principle  alone  that  can  justify  any

inference from what has been examined to what has not been examined. All

arguments which, on the basis of experience, argue as to the future or the

unexperienced parts of the past or present, assume the inductive principle;

hence we can never use experience to prove the inductive principle without

begging the question. Thus we must either accept the inductive principle on

the  ground  of  its  intrinsic  evidence,  or  forgo  all  justification  of  our

expectations about the future. If the principle is unsound, we have no reason

to expect the sun to rise to-morrow, to expect bread to be more nourishing

than a stone, or to expect that if we throw ourselves off the roof we shall fall.

When we see what looks like our best friend approaching us, we shall have

no reason to suppose that his body is not inhabited by the mind of our worst

enemy or of some total stranger. All our conduct is based upon associations

which have worked in the past, and which we therefore regard as likely to

work in the future; and this likelihood is dependent for its validity upon the

inductive principle.

The general principles of science, such as the belief in the reign of law, and

the belief that every event must have a cause, are as completely dependent

upon the inductive principle as are the beliefs of daily life All such general

principles are believed because mankind have found innumerable instances of

their truth and no instances of their falsehood. But this affords no evidence

for their truth in the future, unless the inductive principle is assumed.

  Thus all knowledge which, on a basis of experience tells us something

about what is not experienced, is based upon a belief which experience can

neither  confirm  nor  confute,  yet  which,  at  least  in  its  more  concrete

applications, appears to be as firmly rooted in us as many of the facts of

experience. The existence and justification of such beliefs—for the inductiveprinciple, as we shall see, is not the only example—raises some of the most

difficult  and  most  debated  problems  of  philosophy.  We  will,  in  the  next

chapter, consider briefly what may be said to account for such knowledge,

and what is its scope and its degree of certainty.

  CHAPTER  VII.  ON  OUR  KNOWLEDGE  OF

GENERAL PRINCIPLES

We  saw  in  the  preceding  chapter  that  the  principle  of  induction,  while

necessary to the validity of all arguments based on experience, is itself not

capable of being proved by experience, and yet is unhesitatingly believed by

every one, at least in all its concrete applications. In these characteristics the

principle  of  induction  does  not  stand  alone.  There  are  a  number  of  other

principles which cannot be proved or disproved by experience, but are used

in arguments which start from what is experienced.

  Some of these principles have even greater evidence than the principle of

induction, and the knowledge of them has the same degree of certainty as the

knowledge  of  the  existence  of  sense-data.  They  constitute  the  means  of

drawing inferences from what is given in sensation; and if what we infer is to

be true, it is just as necessary that our principles of inference should be true

as it is that our data should be true. The principles of inference are apt to be

overlooked because of their very obviousness—the assumption involved is

assented  to  without  our  realizing  that  it  is  an  assumption.  But  it  is  very

important to realize the use of principles of inference, if a correct theory of

knowledge is to be obtained; for our knowledge of them raises interesting and

difficult questions.

In all our knowledge of general principles, what actually happens is that

first of all we realize some particular application of the principle, and then we

realize that the particularity is irrelevant, and that there is a generality which

may equally truly be affirmed. This is of course familiar in such matters as

teaching arithmetic: 'two and two are four' is first learnt in the case of some

particular pair of couples, and then in some other particular case, and so on,

until at last it becomes possible to see that it is true of any pair of couples.

The  same  thing  happens  with  logical  principles.  Suppose  two  men  are

discussing what day of the month it is. One of them says, 'At least you will

admit that if yesterday was the 15th to-day must be the 16th.' 'Yes', says the

other, 'I admit that.' 'And you know', the first continues, 'that yesterday was

the 15th, because you dined with Jones, and your diary will tell you that was

on the 15th.' 'Yes', says the second; 'therefore to-day is the 16th.'

Now such an argument is not hard to follow; and if it is granted that its

premisses are true in fact, no one will deny that the conclusion must also betrue.  But  it  depends  for  its  truth  upon  an  instance  of  a  general  logical

principle. The logical principle is as follows: 'Suppose it known that if this is

true, then that is true. Suppose it also known that this is true, then it follows

that that is true.' When it is the case that if this is true, that is true, we shall

say that this 'implies' that, and that that 'follows from' this. Thus our principle

states that if this implies that, and this is true, then that is true. In other words,

'anything implied by a true proposition is true', or 'whatever follows from a

true proposition is true'.

This  principle  is  really  involved—at  least,  concrete  instances  of  it  are

involved—in all demonstrations. Whenever one thing which we believe is

used to prove something else, which we consequently believe, this principle

is  relevant.  If  any  one  asks:  'Why  should  I  accept  the  results  of  valid

arguments based on true premisses?' we can only answer by appealing to our

principle. In fact, the truth of the principle is impossible to doubt, and its

obviousness  is  so  great  that  at  first  sight  it  seems  almost  trivial.  Such

principles, however, are not trivial to the philosopher, for they show that we

may have indubitable knowledge which is in no way derived from objects of

sense.

The  above  principle  is  merely  one  of  a  certain  number  of  self-evident

logical principles. Some at least of these principles must be granted before

any argument or proof becomes possible. When some of them have been

granted, others can be proved, though these others, so long as they are simple,

are just as obvious as the principles taken for granted. For no very good

reason, three of these principles have been singled out by tradition under the

name of 'Laws of Thought'.

  They are as follows:

(1) The law of identity: 'Whatever is, is.'

(2) The law of contradiction: 'Nothing can both be and not be.'

(3) The law of excluded middle: 'Everything must either be or not be.'

  These three laws are samples of self-evident logical principles, but are not

really  more  fundamental  or  more  self-evident  than  various  other  similar

principles: for instance, the one we considered just now, which states that

what follows from a true premiss is true. The name 'laws of thought' is also

misleading, for what is important is not the fact that we think in accordance

with these laws, but the fact that things behave in accordance with them; in

other words, the fact that when we think in accordance with them we think

truly. But this is a large question, to which we must return at a later stage.In addition to the logical principles which enable us to prove from a given

premiss that something is certainly true, there are other logical principles

which enable us to prove, from a given premiss, that there is a greater or less

probability that something is true. An example of such principles—perhaps

the most important example is the inductive principle, which we considered

in the preceding chapter.

One of the great historic controversies in philosophy is the controversy

between  the  two  schools  called  respectively  'empiricists'  and  'rationalists'.

The  empiricists—who  are  best  represented  by  the  British  philosophers,

Locke, Berkeley, and Hume—maintained that all our knowledge is derived

from experience; the rationalists—who are represented by the Continental

philosophers of the seventeenth century, especially Descartes and Leibniz—

maintained that, in addition to what we know by experience, there are certain

'innate  ideas'  and  'innate  principles',  which  we  know  independently  of

experience. It has now become possible to decide with some confidence as to

the truth or falsehood of these opposing schools. It must be admitted, for the

reasons already stated, that logical principles are known to us, and cannot be

themselves proved by experience, since all proof presupposes them. In this,

therefore,  which  was  the  most  important  point  of  the  controversy,  the

rationalists were in the right.

On the other hand, even that part of our knowledge which is logically

independent of experience (in the sense that experience cannot prove it) is yet

elicited and caused by experience. It is on occasion of particular experiences

that we become aware of the general laws which their connexions exemplify.

It would certainly be absurd to suppose that there are innate principles in the

sense that babies are born with a knowledge of everything which men know

and which cannot be deduced from what is experienced. For this reason, the

word  'innate'  would  not  now  be  employed  to  describe  our  knowledge  of

logical principles. The phrase 'a priori' is less objectionable, and is more

usual in modern writers. Thus, while admitting that all knowledge is elicited

and caused by experience, we shall nevertheless hold that some knowledge is

a priori, in the sense that the experience which makes us think of it does not

suffice to prove it, but merely so directs our attention that we see its truth

without requiring any proof from experience.

  There is another point of great importance, in which the empiricists were in

the right as against the rationalists. Nothing can be known to exist except by

the help of experience. That is to say, if we wish to prove that something ofwhich  we  have  no  direct  experience  exists,  we  must  have  among  our

premisses  the  existence  of  one  or  more  things  of  which  we  have  direct

experience. Our belief that the Emperor of China exists, for example, rests

upon testimony, and testimony consists, in the last analysis, of sense-data

seen or heard in reading or being spoken to. Rationalists believed that, from

general consideration as to what must be, they could deduce the existence of

this  or  that  in  the  actual  world.  In  this  belief  they  seem  to  have  been

mistaken.  All  the  knowledge  that  we  can  acquire a  priori  concerning

existence seems to be hypothetical: it tells us that if one thing exists, another

must exist, or, more generally, that if one proposition is true, another must be

true. This is exemplified by the principles we have already dealt with, such as

'if this is true, and this implies that, then that is true', or 'if this and that have

been repeatedly found connected, they will probably be connected in the next

instance in which one of them is found'. Thus the scope and power of a priori

principles is strictly limited. All knowledge that something exists must be in

part  dependent  on  experience.  When  anything  is  known  immediately,  its

existence is known by experience alone; when anything is proved to exist,

without being known immediately, both experience and a priori principles

must be required in the proof. Knowledge is called empirical when it rests

wholly  or  partly  upon  experience.  Thus  all  knowledge  which  asserts

existence is empirical, and the only a priori knowledge concerning existence

is hypothetical, giving connexions among things that exist or may exist, but

not giving actual existence.

A priori knowledge is not all of the logical kind we have been hitherto

considering.  Perhaps  the  most  important  example  of  non-logical a  priori

knowledge is knowledge as to ethical value. I am not speaking of judgements

as to what is useful or as to what is virtuous, for such judgements do require

empirical  premisses;  I  am  speaking  of  judgements  as  to  the  intrinsic

desirability of things. If something is useful, it must be useful because it

secures some end; the end must, if we have gone far enough, be valuable on

its own account, and not merely because it is useful for some further end.

Thus all judgements as to what is useful depend upon judgements as to what

has value on its own account.

We  judge,  for  example,  that  happiness  is  more  desirable  than  misery,

knowledge than ignorance, goodwill than hatred, and so on. Such judgements

must, in part at least, be immediate and a priori. Like our previous a priori

judgements, they may be elicited by experience, and indeed they must be; forit  seems  not  possible  to  judge  whether  anything  is  intrinsically  valuable

unless  we  have  experienced  something  of  the  same  kind.  But  it  is  fairly

obvious that they cannot be proved by experience; for the fact that a thing

exists or does not exist cannot prove either that it is good that it should exist

or  that  it  is  bad.  The  pursuit  of  this  subject  belongs  to  ethics,  where  the

impossibility  of  deducing  what  ought  to  be  from  what  is  has  to  be

established.  In  the  present  connexion,  it  is  only  important  to  realize  that

knowledge as to what is intrinsically of value is a priori in the same sense in

which logic is a priori, namely in the sense that the truth of such knowledge

can be neither proved nor disproved by experience.

All pure mathematics is a priori, like logic. This was strenuously denied

by the empirical philosophers, who maintained that experience was as much

the source of our knowledge of arithmetic as of our knowledge of geography.

They maintained that by the repeated experience of seeing two things and

two other things, and finding that altogether they made four things, we were

led by induction to the conclusion that two things and two other things would

always make four things altogether. If, however, this were the source of our

knowledge  that  two  and  two  are  four,  we  should  proceed  differently,  in

persuading  ourselves  of  its  truth,  from  the  way  in  which  we  do  actually

proceed. In fact, a certain number of instances are needed to make us think of

two abstractly, rather than of two coins or two books or two people, or two of

any other specified kind. But as soon as we are able to divest our thoughts of

irrelevant particularity, we become able to see the general principle that two

and two are four; any one instance is seen to be typical, and the examination

of other instances becomes unnecessary.(1)

(1) Cf. A. N. Whitehead, Introduction to Mathematics (Home University

Library).

The same thing is exemplified in geometry. If we want to prove some

property of all triangles, we draw some one triangle and reason about it; but

we can avoid making use of any property which it does not share with all

other triangles, and thus, from our particular case, we obtain a general result.

We do not, in fact, feel our certainty that two and two are four increased by

fresh instances, because, as soon as we have seen the truth of this proposition,

our  certainty  becomes  so  great  as  to  be  incapable  of  growing  greater.

Moreover, we feel some quality of necessity about the proposition 'two and

two  are  four',  which  is  absent  from  even  the  best  attested  empirical

generalizations. Such generalizations always remain mere facts: we feel thatthere might be a world in which they were false, though in the actual world

they happen to be true. In any possible world, on the contrary, we feel that

two and two would be four: this is not a mere fact, but a necessity to which

everything actual and possible must conform.

The  case  may  be  made  clearer  by  considering  a  genuinely-empirical

generalization, such as 'All men are mortal.' It is plain that we believe this

proposition, in the first place, because there is no known instance of men

living beyond a certain age, and in the second place because there seem to be

physiological grounds for thinking that an organism such as a man's body

must sooner or later wear out. Neglecting the second ground, and considering

merely our experience of men's mortality, it is plain that we should not be

content with one quite clearly understood instance of a man dying, whereas,

in  the  case  of  'two  and  two  are  four',  one  instance  does  suffice,  when

carefully considered, to persuade us that the same must happen in any other

instance. Also we can be forced to admit, on reflection, that there may be

some doubt, however slight, as to whether all men are mortal. This may be

made plain by the attempt to imagine two different worlds, in one of which

there are men who are not mortal, while in the other two and two make five.

When Swift invites us to consider the race of Struldbugs who never die, we

are able to acquiesce in imagination. But a world where two and two make

five seems quite on a different level. We feel that such a world, if there were

one, would upset the whole fabric of our knowledge and reduce us to utter

doubt.

The fact is that, in simple mathematical judgements such as 'two and two

are four', and also in many judgements of logic, we can know the general

proposition  without  inferring  it  from  instances,  although  some  instance  is

usually necessary to make clear to us what the general proposition means.

This is why there is real utility in the process of deduction, which goes from

the general to the general, or from the general to the particular, as well as in

the process of induction, which goes from the particular to the particular, or

from the particular to the general. It is an old debate among philosophers

whether deduction ever gives new knowledge. We can now see that in certain

cases, at least, it does do so. If we already know that two and two always

make four, and we know that Brown and Jones are two, and so are Robinson

and Smith, we can deduce that Brown and Jones and Robinson and Smith are

four. This is new knowledge, not contained in our premisses, because the

general proposition, 'two and two are four', never told us there were suchpeople  as  Brown  and  Jones  and  Robinson  and  Smith,  and  the  particular

premisses do not tell us that there were four of them, whereas the particular

proposition deduced does tell us both these things.

But the newness of the knowledge is much less certain if we take the stock

instance of deduction that is always given in books on logic, namely, 'All

men are mortal; Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is mortal.' In this case,

what we really know beyond reasonable doubt is that certain men, A, B, C,

were mortal, since, in fact, they have died. If Socrates is one of these men, it

is foolish to go the roundabout way through 'all men are mortal' to arrive at

the conclusion that probably Socrates is mortal. If Socrates is not one of the

men on whom our induction is based, we shall still do better to argue straight

from our A, B, C, to Socrates, than to go round by the general proposition,

'all men are mortal'. For the probability that Socrates is mortal is greater, on

our  data,  than  the  probability  that  all  men  are  mortal.  (This  is  obvious,

because if all men are mortal, so is Socrates; but if Socrates is mortal, it does

not follow that all men are mortal.) Hence we shall reach the conclusion that

Socrates  is  mortal  with  a  greater  approach  to  certainty  if  we  make  our

argument purely inductive than if we go by way of 'all men are mortal' and

then use deduction.

This illustrates the difference between general propositions known a priori

such as 'two and two are four', and empirical generalizations such as 'all men

are mortal'. In regard to the former, deduction is the right mode of argument,

whereas in regard to the latter, induction is always theoretically preferable,

and warrants a greater confidence in the truth of our conclusion, because all

empirical generalizations are more uncertain than the instances of them.

We have now seen that there are propositions known a priori, and that

among them are the propositions of logic and pure mathematics, as well as

the fundamental propositions of ethics. The question which must next occupy

us is this: How is it possible that there should be such knowledge? And more

particularly, how can there be knowledge of general propositions in cases

where we have not examined all the instances, and indeed never can examine

them all, because their number is infinite? These questions, which were first

brought prominently forward by the German philosopher Kant (1724-1804),

are very difficult, and historically very important.

   CHAPTER VIII. HOW A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE

IS POSSIBLE

  Immanuel  Kant  is  generally  regarded  as  the  greatest  of  the  modern

philosophers. Though he lived through the Seven Years War and the French

Revolution, he never interrupted his teaching of philosophy at Königsberg in

East Prussia. His most distinctive contribution was the invention of what he

called  the  'critical'  philosophy,  which,  assuming  as  a  datum  that  there  is

knowledge  of  various  kinds,  inquired  how  such  knowledge  comes  to  be

possible, and deduced, from the answer to this inquiry, many metaphysical

results as to the nature of the world. Whether these results were valid may

well be doubted. But Kant undoubtedly deserves credit for two things: first,

for having perceived that we have a priori knowledge which is not purely

'analytic',  i.e.  such  that  the  opposite  would  be  self-contradictory,  and

secondly, for having made evident the philosophical importance of the theory

of knowledge.

Before the time of Kant, it was generally held that whatever knowledge

was a priori must be 'analytic'. What this word means will be best illustrated

by examples. If I say, 'A bald man is a man', 'A plane figure is a figure', 'A

bad poet is a poet', I make a purely analytic judgement: the subject spoken

about is given as having at least two properties, of which one is singled out to

be asserted of it. Such propositions as the above are trivial, and would never

be enunciated in real life except by an orator preparing the way for a piece of

sophistry.  They  are  called  'analytic'  because  the  predicate  is  obtained  by

merely analysing the subject. Before the time of Kant it was thought that all

judgements of which we could be certain a priori were of this kind: that in all

of them there was a predicate which was only part of the subject of which it

was  asserted.  If  this  were  so,  we  should  be  involved  in  a  definite

contradiction if we attempted to deny anything that could be known a priori.

'A bald man is not bald' would assert and deny baldness of the same man, and

would therefore contradict itself. Thus according to the philosophers before

Kant, the law of contradiction, which asserts that nothing can at the same

time have and not have a certain property, sufficed to establish the truth of all

a priori knowledge.

  Hume (1711-76), who preceded Kant, accepting the usual view as to what

makes  knowledge a  priori,  discovered  that,  in  many  cases  which  hadpreviously  been  supposed  analytic,  and  notably  in  the  case  of  cause  and

effect, the connexion was really synthetic. Before Hume, rationalists at least

had supposed that the effect could be logically deduced from the cause, if

only we had sufficient knowledge. Hume argued—correctly, as would now

be generally admitted—that this could not be done. Hence he inferred the far

more doubtful proposition that nothing could be known a priori about the

connexion of cause and effect. Kant, who had been educated in the rationalist

tradition, was much perturbed by Hume's scepticism, and endeavoured to find

an answer to it. He perceived that not only the connexion of cause and effect,

but all the propositions of arithmetic and geometry, are 'synthetic', i.e. not

analytic: in all these propositions, no analysis of the subject will reveal the

predicate. His stock instance was the proposition 7 + 5 = 12. He pointed out,

quite truly, that 7 and 5 have to be put together to give 12: the idea of 12 is

not contained in them, nor even in the idea of adding them together. Thus he

was  led  to  the  conclusion  that  all  pure  mathematics,  though a  priori,  is

synthetic; and this conclusion raised a new problem of which he endeavoured

to find the solution.

The question which Kant put at the beginning of his philosophy, namely

'How is pure mathematics possible?' is an interesting and difficult one, to

which every philosophy which is not purely sceptical must find some answer.

The  answer  of  the  pure  empiricists,  that  our  mathematical  knowledge  is

derived by induction from particular instances, we have already seen to be

inadequate, for two reasons: first, that the validity of the inductive principle

itself cannot be proved by induction; secondly, that the general propositions

of mathematics, such as 'two and two always make four', can obviously be

known with certainty by consideration of a single instance, and gain nothing

by enumeration of other cases in which they have been found to be true. Thus

our  knowledge  of  the  general  propositions  of  mathematics  (and  the  same

applies to logic) must be accounted for otherwise than our (merely probable)

knowledge of empirical generalizations such as 'all men are mortal'.

The  problem  arises  through  the  fact  that  such  knowledge  is  general,

whereas  all  experience  is  particular.  It  seems  strange  that  we  should

apparently be able to know some truths in advance about particular things of

which we have as yet no experience; but it cannot easily be doubted that logic

and arithmetic will apply to such things. We do not know who will be the

inhabitants of London a hundred years hence; but we know that any two of

them and any other two of them will make four of them. This apparent powerof anticipating facts about things of which we have no experience is certainly

surprising. Kant's solution of the problem, though not valid in my opinion, is

interesting. It is, however, very difficult, and is differently understood by

different philosophers. We can, therefore, only give the merest outline of it,

and  even  that  will  be  thought  misleading  by  many  exponents  of  Kant's

system.

  What  Kant  maintained  was  that  in  all  our  experience  there  are  two

elements to be distinguished, the one due to the object (i.e. to what we have

called the 'physical object'), the other due to our own nature. We saw, in

discussing matter and sense-data, that the physical object is different from the

associated sense-data, and that the sense-data are to be regarded as resulting

from an interaction between the physical object and ourselves. So far, we are

in agreement with Kant. But what is distinctive of Kant is the way in which

he apportions the shares of ourselves and the physical object respectively. He

considers that the crude material given in sensation—the colour, hardness,

etc.—is due to the object, and that what we supply is the arrangement in

space and time, and all the relations between sense-data which result from

comparison or from considering one as the cause of the other or in any other

way. His chief reason in favour of this view is that we seem to have a priori

knowledge as to space and time and causality and comparison, but not as to

the actual crude material of sensation. We can be sure, he says, that anything

we shall ever experience must show the characteristics affirmed of it in our a

priori knowledge, because these characteristics are due to our own nature,

and therefore nothing can ever come into our experience without acquiring

these characteristics.

The physical object, which he calls the 'thing in itself',(1) he regards as

essentially unknowable; what can be known is the object as we have it in

experience, which he calls the 'phenomenon'. The phenomenon, being a joint

product of us and the thing in itself, is sure to have those characteristics

which  are  due  to  us,  and  is  therefore  sure  to  conform  to  our a  priori

knowledge.  Hence  this  knowledge,  though  true  of  all  actual  and  possible

experience, must not be supposed to apply outside experience. Thus in spite

of the existence of a priori knowledge, we cannot know anything about the

thing in itself or about what is not an actual or possible object of experience.

In  this  way  he  tries  to  reconcile  and  harmonize  the  contentions  of  the

rationalists with the arguments of the empiricists.

(1) Kant's 'thing in itself' is identical in definition with the physical object,namely,  it  is  the  cause  of  sensations.  In  the  properties  deduced  from  the

definition it is not identical, since Kant held (in spite of some inconsistency

as regards cause) that we can know that none of the categories are applicable

to the 'thing in itself'.

  Apart from minor grounds on which Kant's philosophy may be criticized,

there is one main objection which seems fatal to any attempt to deal with the

problem of a priori knowledge by his method. The thing to be accounted for

is our certainty that the facts must always conform to logic and arithmetic. To

say that logic and arithmetic are contributed by us does not account for this.

Our nature is as much a fact of the existing world as anything, and there can

be no certainty that it will remain constant. It might happen, if Kant is right,

that to-morrow our nature would so change as to make two and two become

five. This possibility seems never to have occurred to him, yet it is one which

utterly destroys the certainty and universality which he is anxious to vindicate

for  arithmetical  propositions.  It  is  true  that  this  possibility,  formally,  is

inconsistent with the Kantian view that time itself is a form imposed by the

subject upon phenomena, so that our real Self is not in time and has no to-

morrow. But he will still have to suppose that the time-order of phenomena is

determined by characteristics of what is behind phenomena, and this suffices

for the substance of our argument.

  Reflection, moreover, seems to make it clear that, if there is any truth in

our arithmetical beliefs, they must apply to things equally whether we think

of them or not. Two physical objects and two other physical objects must

make four physical objects, even if physical objects cannot be experienced.

To assert this is certainly within the scope of what we mean when we state

that two and two are four. Its truth is just as indubitable as the truth of the

assertion  that  two  phenomena  and  two  other  phenomena  make  four

phenomena.  Thus  Kant's  solution  unduly  limits  the  scope  of a  priori

propositions, in addition to failing in the attempt at explaining their certainty.

  Apart from the special doctrines advocated by Kant, it is very common

among philosophers to regard what is a priori as in some sense mental, as

concerned rather with the way we must think than with any fact of the outer

world.  We  noted  in  the  preceding  chapter  the  three  principles  commonly

called 'laws of thought'. The view which led to their being so named is a

natural one, but there are strong reasons for thinking that it is erroneous. Let

us take as an illustration the law of contradiction. This is commonly stated in

the form 'Nothing can both be and not be', which is intended to express thefact that nothing can at once have and not have a given quality. Thus, for

example, if a tree is a beech it cannot also be not a beech; if my table is

rectangular it cannot also be not rectangular, and so on.

Now what makes it natural to call this principle a law of thought is that it is

by thought rather than by outward observation that we persuade ourselves of

its necessary truth. When we have seen that a tree is a beech, we do not need

to look again in order to ascertain whether it is also not a beech; thought

alone makes us know that this is impossible. But the conclusion that the law

of  contradiction  is  a  law  of thought  is  nevertheless  erroneous.  What  we

believe, when we believe the law of contradiction, is not that the mind is so

made that it must believe the law of contradiction. This belief is a subsequent

result of psychological reflection, which presupposes the belief in the law of

contradiction. The belief in the law of contradiction is a belief about things,

not only about thoughts. It is not, e.g., the belief that if we think a certain tree

is a beech, we cannot at the same time think that it is not a beech; it is the

belief that if the tree is a beech, it cannot at the same time be not a beech.

Thus the law of contradiction is about things, and not merely about thoughts;

and  although  belief  in  the  law  of  contradiction  is  a  thought,  the  law  of

contradiction itself is not a thought, but a fact concerning the things in the

world. If this, which we believe when we believe the law of contradiction,

were not true of the things in the world, the fact that we were compelled to

think it true would not save the law of contradiction from being false; and this

shows that the law is not a law of thought.

A similar argument applies to any other a priori judgement. When we

judge that two and two are four, we are not making a judgement about our

thoughts, but about all actual or possible couples. The fact that our minds are

so constituted as to believe that two and two are four, though it is true, is

emphatically not what we assert when we assert that two and two are four.

And no fact about the constitution of our minds could make it true that two

and two are four. Thus our a priori knowledge, if it is not erroneous, is not

merely knowledge about the constitution of our minds, but is applicable to

whatever the world may contain, both what is mental and what is non-mental.

The fact seems to be that all our a priori knowledge is concerned with

entities which do not, properly speaking, exist, either in the mental or in the

physical world. These entities are such as can be named by parts of speech

which are not substantives; they are such entities as qualities and relations.

Suppose, for instance, that I am in my room. I exist, and my room exists; butdoes  'in'  exist?  Yet  obviously  the  word  'in'  has  a  meaning;  it  denotes  a

relation which holds between me and my room. This relation is something,

although we cannot say that it exists in the same sense in which I and my

room  exist.  The  relation  'in'  is  something  which  we  can  think  about  and

understand, for, if we could not understand it, we could not understand the

sentence  'I  am  in  my  room'.  Many  philosophers,  following  Kant,  have

maintained that relations are the work of the mind, that things in themselves

have no relations, but that the mind brings them together in one act of thought

and thus produces the relations which it judges them to have.

This view, however, seems open to objections similar to those which we

urged  before  against  Kant.  It  seems  plain  that  it  is  not  thought  which

produces the truth of the proposition 'I am in my room'. It may be true that an

earwig is in my room, even if neither I nor the earwig nor any one else is

aware of this truth; for this truth concerns only the earwig and the room, and

does not depend upon anything else. Thus relations, as we shall see more

fully in the next chapter, must be placed in a world which is neither mental

nor  physical.  This  world  is  of  great  importance  to  philosophy,  and  in

particular to the problems of a priori knowledge. In the next chapter we shall

proceed to develop its nature and its bearing upon the questions with which

we have been dealing.

  





 CHAPTER IX. THE WORLD OF UNIVERSALS

At the end of the preceding chapter we saw that such entities as relations

appear to have a being which is in some way different from that of physical

objects, and also different from that of minds and from that of sense-data. In

the present chapter we have to consider what is the nature of this kind of

being, and also what objects there are that have this kind of being. We will

begin with the latter question.

The problem with which we are now concerned is a very old one, since it

was brought into philosophy by Plato. Plato's 'theory of ideas' is an attempt to

solve this very problem, and in my opinion it is one of the most successful

attempts hitherto made. The theory to be advocated in what follows is largely

Plato's, with merely such modifications as time has shown to be necessary.

The way the problem arose for Plato was more or less as follows. Let us

consider, say, such a notion as justice. If we ask ourselves what justice is, it is

natural to proceed by considering this, that, and the other just act, with a view

to discovering what they have in common. They must all, in some sense,

partake of a common nature, which will be found in whatever is just and in

nothing else. This common nature, in virtue of which they are all just, will be

justice itself, the pure essence the admixture of which with facts of ordinary

life  produces  the  multiplicity  of  just  acts.  Similarly  with  any  other  word

which may be applicable to common facts, such as 'whiteness' for example.

The word will be applicable to a number of particular things because they all

participate in a common nature or essence. This pure essence is what Plato

calls an 'idea' or 'form'. (It must not be supposed that 'ideas', in his sense, exist

in minds, though they may be apprehended by minds.) The 'idea' justice is not

identical  with  anything  that  is  just:  it  is  something  other  than  particular

things, which particular things partake of. Not being particular, it cannot itself

exist in the world of sense. Moreover it is not fleeting or changeable like the

things of sense: it is eternally itself, immutable and indestructible.

  Thus Plato is led to a supra-sensible world, more real than the common

world of sense, the unchangeable world of ideas, which alone gives to the

world of sense whatever pale reflection of reality may belong to it. The truly

real world, for Plato, is the world of ideas; for whatever we may attempt to

say about things in the world of sense, we can only succeed in saying that

they participate in such and such ideas, which, therefore, constitute all their

character. Hence it is easy to pass on into a mysticism. We may hope, in amystic illumination, to see the ideas as we see objects of sense; and we may

imagine that the ideas exist in heaven. These mystical developments are very

natural, but the basis of the theory is in logic, and it is as based in logic that

we have to consider it.

The  word  'idea'  has  acquired,  in  the  course  of  time,  many  associations

which are quite misleading when applied to Plato's 'ideas'. We shall therefore

use the word 'universal' instead of the word 'idea', to describe what Plato

meant. The essence of the sort of entity that Plato meant is that it is opposed

to the particular things that are given in sensation. We speak of whatever is

given in sensation, or is of the same nature as things given in sensation, as a

particular; by opposition to this, a universal will be anything which may be

shared by many particulars, and has those characteristics which, as we saw,

distinguish justice and whiteness from just acts and white things.

  When we examine common words, we find that, broadly speaking, proper

names stand for particulars, while other substantives, adjectives, prepositions,

and  verbs  stand  for  universals.  Pronouns  stand  for  particulars,  but  are

ambiguous: it is only by the context or the circumstances that we know what

particulars they stand for. The word 'now' stands for a particular, namely the

present moment; but like pronouns, it stands for an ambiguous particular,

because the present is always changing.

It will be seen that no sentence can be made up without at least one word

which  denotes  a  universal.  The  nearest  approach  would  be  some  such

statement as 'I like this'. But even here the word 'like' denotes a universal, for

I may like other things, and other people may like things. Thus all truths

involve universals, and all knowledge of truths involves acquaintance with

universals.

Seeing that nearly all the words to be found in the dictionary stand for

universals, it is strange that hardly anybody except students of philosophy

ever realizes that there are such entities as universals. We do not naturally

dwell upon those words in a sentence which do not stand for particulars; and

if  we  are  forced  to  dwell  upon  a  word  which  stands  for  a  universal,  we

naturally think of it as standing for some one of the particulars that come

under the universal. When, for example, we hear the sentence, 'Charles I's

head was cut off', we may naturally enough think of Charles I, of Charles I's

head, and of the operation of cutting off his head, which are all particulars;

but we do not naturally dwell upon what is meant by the word 'head' or the

word 'cut', which is a universal: We feel such words to be incomplete andinsubstantial; they seem to demand a context before anything can be done

with them. Hence we succeed in avoiding all notice of universals as such,

until the study of philosophy forces them upon our attention.

  Even among philosophers, we may say, broadly, that only those universals

which  are  named  by  adjectives  or  substantives  have  been  much  or  often

recognized, while those named by verbs and prepositions have been usually

overlooked. This omission has had a very great effect upon philosophy; it is

hardly  too  much  to  say  that  most  metaphysics,  since  Spinoza,  has  been

largely determined by it. The way this has occurred is, in outline, as follows:

Speaking  generally,  adjectives  and  common  nouns  express  qualities  or

properties of single things, whereas prepositions and verbs tend to express

relations between two or more things. Thus the neglect of prepositions and

verbs led to the belief that every proposition can be regarded as attributing a

property to a single thing, rather than as expressing a relation between two or

more things. Hence it was supposed that, ultimately, there can be no such

entities as relations between things. Hence either there can be only one thing

in the universe, or, if there are many things, they cannot possibly interact in

any  way,  since  any  interaction  would  be  a  relation,  and  relations  are

impossible.

The first of these views, advocated by Spinoza and held in our own day by

Bradley  and  many  other  philosophers,  is  called monism;  the  second,

advocated by Leibniz but not very common nowadays, is called monadism,

because each of the isolated things is called a monad. Both these opposing

philosophies, interesting as they are, result, in my opinion, from an undue

attention to one sort of universals, namely the sort represented by adjectives

and substantives rather than by verbs and prepositions.

As a matter of fact, if any one were anxious to deny altogether that there

are such things as universals, we should find that we cannot strictly prove

that  there  are  such  entities  as qualities,  i.e.  the  universals  represented  by

adjectives  and  substantives,  whereas  we  can  prove  that  there  must  be

relations,  i.e.  the  sort  of  universals  generally  represented  by  verbs  and

prepositions. Let us take in illustration the universal whiteness. If we believe

that there is such a universal, we shall say that things are white because they

have the quality of whiteness. This view, however, was strenuously denied by

Berkeley and Hume, who have been followed in this by later empiricists. The

form  which  their  denial  took  was  to  deny  that  there  are  such  things  as

'abstract ideas '. When we want to think of whiteness, they said, we form animage of some particular white thing, and reason concerning this particular,

taking care not to deduce anything concerning it which we cannot see to be

equally true of any other white thing. As an account of our actual mental

processes, this is no doubt largely true. In geometry, for example, when we

wish to prove something about all triangles, we draw a particular triangle and

reason about it, taking care not to use any characteristic which it does not

share with other triangles. The beginner, in order to avoid error, often finds it

useful to draw several triangles, as unlike each other as possible, in order to

make  sure  that  his  reasoning  is  equally  applicable  to  all  of  them.  But  a

difficulty emerges as soon as we ask ourselves how we know that a thing is

white  or  a  triangle.  If  we  wish  to  avoid  the  universals whiteness  and

triangularity,  we  shall  choose  some  particular  patch  of  white  or  some

particular triangle, and say that anything is white or a triangle if it has the

right sort of resemblance to our chosen particular. But then the resemblance

required will have to be a universal. Since there are many white things, the

resemblance must hold between many pairs of particular white things; and

this is the characteristic of a universal. It will be useless to say that there is a

different resemblance for each pair, for then we shall have to say that these

resemblances resemble each other, and thus at last we shall be forced to admit

resemblance as a universal. The relation of resemblance, therefore, must be a

true universal. And having been forced to admit this universal, we find that it

is no longer worth while to invent difficult and unplausible theories to avoid

the admission of such universals as whiteness and triangularity.

  Berkeley and Hume failed to perceive this refutation of their rejection of

'abstract ideas', because, like their adversaries, they only thought of qualities,

and  altogether  ignored relations  as  universals.  We  have  therefore  here

another respect in which the rationalists appear to have been in the right as

against the empiricists, although, owing to the neglect or denial of relations,

the  deductions  made  by  rationalists  were,  if  anything,  more  apt  to  be

mistaken than those made by empiricists.

  Having now seen that there must be such entities as universals, the next

point to be proved is that their being is not merely mental. By this is meant

that whatever being belongs to them is independent of their being thought of

or  in  any  way  apprehended  by  minds.  We  have  already  touched  on  this

subject at the end of the preceding chapter, but we must now consider more

fully what sort of being it is that belongs to universals.

  Consider such a proposition as 'Edinburgh is north of London'. Here wehave  a  relation  between  two  places,  and  it  seems  plain  that  the  relation

subsists independently of our knowledge of it. When we come to know that

Edinburgh is north of London, we come to know something which has to do

only  with  Edinburgh  and  London:  we  do  not  cause  the  truth  of  the

proposition by coming to know it, on the contrary we merely apprehend a

fact which was there before we knew it. The part of the earth's surface where

Edinburgh stands would be north of the part where London stands, even if

there were no human being to know about north and south, and even if there

were no minds at all in the universe. This is, of course, denied by many

philosophers, either for Berkeley's reasons or for Kant's. But we have already

considered  these  reasons,  and  decided  that  they  are  inadequate.  We  may

therefore now assume it to be true that nothing mental is presupposed in the

fact that Edinburgh is north of London. But this fact involves the relation

'north of', which is a universal; and it would be impossible for the whole fact

to involve nothing mental if the relation 'north of', which is a constituent part

of  the  fact,  did  involve  anything  mental.  Hence  we  must  admit  that  the

relation, like the terms it relates, is not dependent upon thought, but belongs

to the independent world which thought apprehends but does not create.

This conclusion, however, is met by the difficulty that the relation 'north

of' does not seem to exist in the same sense in which Edinburgh and London

exist. If we ask 'Where and when does this relation exist?' the answer must be

'Nowhere and nowhen'. There is no place or time where we can find the

relation 'north of'. It does not exist in Edinburgh any more than in London,

for it relates the two and is neutral as between them. Nor can we say that it

exists at any particular time. Now everything that can be apprehended by the

senses or by introspection exists at some particular time. Hence the relation

'north of' is radically different from such things. It is neither in space nor in

time, neither material nor mental; yet it is something.

It  is  largely  the  very  peculiar  kind  of  being  that  belongs  to  universals

which has led many people to suppose that they are really mental. We can

think of a universal, and our thinking then exists in a perfectly ordinary sense,

like  any  other  mental  act.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  we  are  thinking  of

whiteness. Then in one sense it may be said that whiteness is 'in our mind'.

We have here the same ambiguity as we noted in discussing Berkeley in

Chapter IV. In the strict sense, it is not whiteness that is in our mind, but the

act of thinking of whiteness. The connected ambiguity in the word 'idea',

which we noted at the same time, also causes confusion here. In one sense ofthis  word,  namely  the  sense  in  which  it  denotes  the object  of  an  act  of

thought, whiteness is an 'idea'. Hence, if the ambiguity is not guarded against,

we may come to think that whiteness is an 'idea' in the other sense, i.e. an act

of thought; and thus we come to think that whiteness is mental. But in so

thinking, we rob it of its essential quality of universality. One man's act of

thought is necessarily a different thing from another man's; one man's act of

thought at one time is necessarily a different thing from the same man's act of

thought at another time. Hence, if whiteness were the thought as opposed to

its object, no two different men could think of it, and no one man could think

of it twice. That which many different thoughts of whiteness have in common

is their object, and this object is different from all of them. Thus universals

are not thoughts, though when known they are the objects of thoughts.

We shall find it convenient only to speak of things existing when they are

in time, that is to say, when we can point to some time at which they exist

(not excluding the possibility of their existing at all times). Thus thoughts and

feelings, minds and physical objects exist. But universals do not exist in this

sense; we shall say that they subsist or have being, where 'being' is opposed

to 'existence' as being timeless. The world of universals, therefore, may also

be described as the world of being. The world of being is unchangeable,

rigid,  exact,  delightful  to  the  mathematician,  the  logician,  the  builder  of

metaphysical systems, and all who love perfection more than life. The world

of existence is fleeting, vague, without sharp boundaries, without any clear

plan or arrangement, but it contains all thoughts and feelings, all the data of

sense, and all physical objects, everything that can do either good or harm,

everything  that  makes  any  difference  to  the  value  of  life  and  the  world.

According to our temperaments, we shall prefer the contemplation of the one

or of the other. The one we do not prefer will probably seem to us a pale

shadow of the one we prefer, and hardly worthy to be regarded as in any

sense real. But the truth is that both have the same claim on our impartial

attention, both are real, and both are important to the metaphysician. Indeed

no sooner have we distinguished the two worlds than it becomes necessary to

consider their relations.

But  first  of  all  we  must  examine  our  knowledge  of  universals.  This

consideration will occupy us in the following chapter, where we shall find

that it solves the problem of a priori knowledge, from which we were first

led to consider universals.

  CHAPTER  X.  ON  OUR  KNOWLEDGE  OF

UNIVERSALS

In  regard  to  one  man's  knowledge  at  a  given  time,  universals,  like

particulars, may be divided into those known by acquaintance, those known

only  by  description,  and  those  not  known  either  by  acquaintance  or  by

description.

Let us consider first the knowledge of universals by acquaintance. It is

obvious, to begin with, that we are acquainted with such universals as white,

red,  black,  sweet,  sour,  loud,  hard,  etc.,  i.e.  with  qualities  which  are

exemplified in sense-data. When we see a white patch, we are acquainted, in

the first instance, with the particular patch; but by seeing many white patches,

we easily learn to abstract the whiteness which they all have in common, and

in learning to do this we are learning to be acquainted with whiteness. A

similar process will make us acquainted with any other universal of the same

sort. Universals of this sort may be called 'sensible qualities'. They can be

apprehended with less effort of abstraction than any others, and they seem

less removed from particulars than other universals are.

We come next to relations. The easiest relations to apprehend are those

which hold between the different parts of a single complex sense-datum. For

example, I can see at a glance the whole of the page on which I am writing;

thus the whole page is included in one sense-datum. But I perceive that some

parts of the page are to the left of other parts, and some parts are above other

parts. The process of abstraction in this case seems to proceed somewhat as

follows: I see successively a number of sense-data in which one part is to the

left of another; I perceive, as in the case of different white patches, that all

these sense-data have something in common, and by abstraction I find that

what they have in common is a certain relation between their parts, namely

the relation which I call 'being to the left of'. In this way I become acquainted

with the universal relation.

In like manner I become aware of the relation of before and after in time.

Suppose I hear a chime of bells: when the last bell of the chime sounds, I can

retain the whole chime before my mind, and I can perceive that the earlier

bells came before the later ones. Also in memory I perceive that what I am

remembering came before the present time. From either of these sources I can

abstract the universal relation of before and after, just as I abstracted theuniversal  relation  'being  to  the  left  of'.  Thus  time-relations,  like  space-

relations, are among those with which we are acquainted.

  Another relation with which we become acquainted in much the same way

is resemblance. If I see simultaneously two shades of green, I can see that

they resemble each other; if I also see a shade of red: at the same time, I can

see that the two greens have more resemblance to each other than either has

to the red. In this way I become acquainted with the universal resemblance or

similarity.

  Between universals, as between particulars, there are relations of which we

may be immediately aware. We have just seen that we can perceive that the

resemblance between two shades of green is greater than the resemblance

between a shade of red and a shade of green. Here we are dealing with a

relation, namely 'greater than', between two relations. Our knowledge of such

relations, though it requires more power of abstraction than is required for

perceiving the qualities of sense-data, appears to be equally immediate, and

(at  least  in  some  cases)  equally  indubitable.  Thus  there  is  immediate

knowledge concerning universals as well as concerning sense-data.

  Returning  now  to  the  problem  of a  priori  knowledge,  which  we  left

unsolved when we began the consideration of universals, we find ourselves in

a  position  to  deal  with  it  in  a  much  more  satisfactory  manner  than  was

possible before. Let us revert to the proposition 'two and two are four'. It is

fairly obvious, in view of what has been said, that this proposition states a

relation between the universal 'two' and the universal 'four'. This suggests a

proposition which we shall now endeavour to establish: namely, All a priori

knowledge deals exclusively with the relations of universals. This proposition

is of great importance, and goes a long way towards solving our previous

difficulties concerning a priori knowledge.

The only case in which it might seem, at first sight, as if our proposition

were untrue, is the case in which an a priori proposition states that all of one

class of particulars belong to some other class, or (what comes to the same

thing) that all particulars having some one property also have some other. In

this case it might seem as though we were dealing with the particulars that

have the property rather than with the property. The proposition 'two and two

are four' is really a case in point, for this may be stated in the form 'any two

and  any  other  two  are  four',  or  'any  collection  formed  of  two  twos  is  a

collection of four'. If we can show that such statements as this really deal

only with universals, our proposition may be regarded as proved.One way of discovering what a proposition deals with is to ask ourselves

what words we must understand—in other words, what objects we must be

acquainted with—in order to see what the proposition means. As soon as we

see what the proposition means, even if we do not yet know whether it is true

or false, it is evident that we must have acquaintance with whatever is really

dealt with by the proposition. By applying this test, it appears that many

propositions which might seem to be concerned with particulars are really

concerned only with universals. In the special case of 'two and two are four',

even when we interpret it as meaning 'any collection formed of two twos is a

collection of four', it is plain that we can understand the proposition, i.e. we

can  see  what  it  is  that  it  asserts,  as  soon  as  we  know  what  is  meant  by

'collection' and 'two' and 'four'. It is quite unnecessary to know all the couples

in the world: if it were necessary, obviously we could never understand the

proposition, since the couples are infinitely numerous and therefore cannot all

be  known  to  us.  Thus  although  our  general  statement implies  statements

about particular couples, as soon as we know that there are such particular

couples, yet it does not itself assert or imply that there are such particular

couples,  and  thus  fails  to  make  any  statement  whatever  about  any  actual

particular couple. The statement made is about 'couple', the universal, and not

about this or that couple.

  Thus the statement 'two and two are four' deals exclusively with universals,

and  therefore  may  be  known  by  anybody  who  is  acquainted  with  the

universals concerned and can perceive the relation between them which the

statement asserts. It must be taken as a fact, discovered by reflecting upon our

knowledge, that we have the power of sometimes perceiving such relations

between  universals,  and  therefore  of  sometimes  knowing  general a priori

propositions such as those of arithmetic and logic. The thing that seemed

mysterious,  when  we  formerly  considered  such  knowledge,  was  that  it

seemed to anticipate and control experience. This, however, we can now see

to  have  been  an  error. No  fact  concerning  anything  capable  of  being

experienced can be known independently of experience. We know a priori

that two things and two other things together make four things, but we do not

know a priori that if Brown and Jones are two, and Robinson and Smith are

two, then Brown and Jones and Robinson and Smith are four. The reason is

that this proposition cannot be understood at all unless we know that there are

such people as Brown and Jones and Robinson and Smith, and this we can

only  know  by  experience.  Hence,  although  our  general  proposition  is apriori,  all  its  applications  to  actual  particulars  involve  experience  and

therefore contain an empirical element. In this way what seemed mysterious

in our a priori knowledge is seen to have been based upon an error.

It will serve to make the point clearer if we contrast our genuine a priori

judgement with an empirical generalization, such as 'all men are mortals'.

Here as before, we can understand what the proposition means as soon as we

understand the universals involved, namely man and mortal. It is obviously

unnecessary to have an individual acquaintance with the whole human race in

order to understand what our proposition means. Thus the difference between

an a priori general proposition and an empirical generalization does not come

in the meaning of the proposition; it comes in the nature of the evidence for

it. In the empirical case, the evidence consists in the particular instances. We

believe that all men are mortal because we know that there are innumerable

instances of men dying, and no instances of their living beyond a certain age.

We do not believe it because we see a connexion between the universal man

and the universal mortal. It is true that if physiology can prove, assuming the

general laws that govern living bodies, that no living organism can last for

ever, that gives a connexion between man and mortality which would enable

us to assert our proposition without appealing to the special evidence of men

dying. But that only means that our generalization has been subsumed under

a  wider  generalization,  for  which  the  evidence  is  still  of  the  same  kind,

though more extensive. The progress of science is constantly producing such

subsumptions,  and  therefore  giving  a  constantly  wider  inductive  basis  for

scientific  generalizations.  But  although  this  gives  a  greater degree  of

certainty,  it  does  not  give  a  different kind:  the  ultimate  ground  remains

inductive,  i.e.  derived  from  instances,  and  not  an a  priori  connexion  of

universals such as we have in logic and arithmetic.

Two  opposite  points  are  to  be  observed  concerning a  priori  general

propositions. The first is that, if many particular instances are known, our

general proposition may be arrived at in the first instance by induction, and

the  connexion  of  universals  may  be  only  subsequently  perceived.  For

example, it is known that if we draw perpendiculars to the sides of a triangle

from the opposite angles, all three perpendiculars meet in a point. It would be

quite  possible  to  be  first  led  to  this  proposition  by  actually  drawing

perpendiculars in many cases, and finding that they always met in a point;

this experience might lead us to look for the general proof and find it. Such

cases are common in the experience of every mathematician.The other point is more interesting, and of more philosophical importance.

It is, that we may sometimes know a general proposition in cases where we

do not know a single instance of it. Take such a case as the following: We

know that any two numbers can be multiplied together, and will give a third

called their product. We know that all pairs of integers the product of which

is less than 100 have been actually multiplied together, and the value of the

product  recorded  in  the  multiplication  table.  But  we  also  know  that  the

number  of  integers  is  infinite,  and  that  only  a  finite  number  of  pairs  of

integers ever have been or ever will be thought of by human beings. Hence it

follows that there are pairs of integers which never have been and never will

be thought of by human beings, and that all of them deal with integers the

product  of  which  is  over  100.  Hence  we  arrive  at  the  proposition:  'All

products of two integers, which never have been and never will be thought of

by any human being, are over 100.' Here is a general proposition of which the

truth is undeniable, and yet, from the very nature of the case, we can never

give an instance; because any two numbers we may think of are excluded by

the terms of the proposition.

This possibility, of knowledge of general propositions of which no instance

can be given, is often denied, because it is not perceived that the knowledge

of such propositions only requires a knowledge of the relations of universals,

and  does  not  require  any  knowledge  of  instances  of  the  universals  in

question. Yet the knowledge of such general propositions is quite vital to a

great deal of what is generally admitted to be known. For example, we saw,

in  our  early  chapters,  that  knowledge  of  physical  objects,  as  opposed  to

sense-data, is only obtained by an inference, and that they are not things with

which we are acquainted. Hence we can never know any proposition of the

form 'this is a physical object', where 'this' is something immediately known.

It follows that all our knowledge concerning physical objects is such that no

actual instance can be given. We can give instances of the associated sense-

data, but we cannot give instances of the actual physical objects. Hence our

knowledge as to physical objects depends throughout upon this possibility of

general knowledge where no instance can be given. And the same applies to

our knowledge of other people's minds, or of any other class of things of

which no instance is known to us by acquaintance.

We may now take a survey of the sources of our knowledge, as they have

appeared  in  the  course  of  our  analysis.  We  have  first  to  distinguish

knowledge of things and knowledge of truths. In each there are two kinds,one  immediate  and  one  derivative.  Our  immediate  knowledge  of  things,

which we called acquaintance, consists of two sorts, according as the things

known  are  particulars  or  universals.  Among  particulars,  we  have

acquaintance  with  sense-data  and  (probably)  with  ourselves.  Among

universals, there seems to be no principle by which we can decide which can

be known by acquaintance, but it is clear that among those that can be so

known  are  sensible  qualities,  relations  of  space  and  time,  similarity,  and

certain abstract logical universals. Our derivative knowledge of things, which

we call knowledge by description, always involves both acquaintance with

something and knowledge of truths. Our immediate knowledge of truths may

be called intuitive knowledge, and the truths so known may be called self-

evident truths. Among such truths are included those which merely state what

is given in sense, and also certain abstract logical and arithmetical principles,

and (though with less certainty) some ethical propositions. Our derivative

knowledge of truths consists of everything that we can deduce from self-

evident truths by the use of self-evident principles of deduction.

If the above account is correct, all our knowledge of truths depends upon

our  intuitive  knowledge.  It  therefore  becomes  important  to  consider  the

nature and scope of intuitive knowledge, in much the same way as, at an

earlier  stage,  we  considered  the  nature  and  scope  of  knowledge  by

acquaintance. But knowledge of truths raises a further problem, which does

not arise in regard to knowledge of things, namely the problem of error.

Some  of  our  beliefs  turn  out  to  be  erroneous,  and  therefore  it  becomes

necessary to consider how, if at all, we can distinguish knowledge from error.

This problem does not arise with regard to knowledge by acquaintance, for,

whatever  may  be  the  object  of  acquaintance,  even  in  dreams  and

hallucinations, there is no error involved so long as we do not go beyond the

immediate object: error can only arise when we regard the immediate object,

i.e. the sense-datum, as the mark of some physical object. Thus the problems

connected with knowledge of truths are more difficult than those connected

with  knowledge  of  things.  As  the  first  of  the  problems  connected  with

knowledge of truths, let us examine the nature and scope of our intuitive

judgements.

   CHAPTER XI. ON INTUITIVE KNOWLEDGE

  There is a common impression that everything that we believe ought to be

capable of proof, or at least of being shown to be highly probable. It is felt by

many that a belief for which no reason can be given is an unreasonable belief.

In  the  main,  this  view  is  just.  Almost  all  our  common  beliefs  are  either

inferred,  or  capable  of  being  inferred,  from  other  beliefs  which  may  be

regarded  as  giving  the  reason  for  them.  As  a  rule,  the  reason  has  been

forgotten, or has even never been consciously present to our minds. Few of us

ever ask ourselves, for example, what reason there is to suppose the food we

are  just  going  to  eat  will  not  turn  out  to  be  poison.  Yet  we  feel,  when

challenged, that a perfectly good reason could be found, even if we are not

ready with it at the moment. And in this belief we are usually justified.

But let us imagine some insistent Socrates, who, whatever reason we give

him, continues to demand a reason for the reason. We must sooner or later,

and probably before very long, be driven to a point where we cannot find any

further reason, and where it becomes almost certain that no further reason is

even theoretically discoverable. Starting with the common beliefs of daily

life,  we  can  be  driven  back  from  point  to  point,  until  we  come  to  some

general  principle,  or  some  instance  of  a  general  principle,  which  seems

luminously evident, and is not itself capable of being deduced from anything

more evident. In most questions of daily life, such as whether our food is

likely to be nourishing and not poisonous, we shall be driven back to the

inductive principle, which we discussed in Chapter VI. But beyond that, there

seems to be no further regress. The principle itself is constantly used in our

reasoning, sometimes consciously, sometimes unconsciously; but there is no

reasoning which, starting from some simpler self-evident principle, leads us

to the principle of induction as its conclusion. And the same holds for other

logical  principles.  Their  truth  is  evident  to  us,  and  we  employ  them  in

constructing demonstrations; but they themselves, or at least some of them,

are incapable of demonstration.

  Self-evidence, however, is not confined to those among general principles

which are incapable of proof. When a certain number of logical principles

have been admitted, the rest can be deduced from them; but the propositions

deduced are often just as self-evident as those that were assumed without

proof. All arithmetic, moreover, can be deduced from the general principles

of logic, yet the simple propositions of arithmetic, such as 'two and two arefour', are just as self-evident as the principles of logic.

It would seem, also, though this is more disputable, that there are some

self-evident ethical principles, such as 'we ought to pursue what is good'.

It should be observed that, in all cases of general principles, particular

instances,  dealing  with  familiar  things,  are  more  evident  than  the  general

principle. For example, the law of contradiction states that nothing can both

have  a  certain  property  and  not  have  it.  This  is  evident  as  soon  as  it  is

understood, but it is not so evident as that a particular rose which we see

cannot be both red and not red. (It is of course possible that parts of the rose

may be red and parts not red, or that the rose may be of a shade of pink which

we hardly know whether to call red or not; but in the former case it is plain

that the rose as a whole is not red, while in the latter case the answer is

theoretically definite as soon as we have decided on a precise definition of

'red'.) It is usually through particular instances that we come to be able to see

the  general  principle.  Only  those  who  are  practised  in  dealing  with

abstractions  can  readily  grasp  a  general  principle  without  the  help  of

instances.

In addition to general principles, the other kind of self-evident truths are

those immediately derived from sensation. We will call such truths 'truths of

perception', and the judgements expressing them we will call 'judgements of

perception'. But here a certain amount of care is required in getting at the

precise nature of the truths that are self-evident. The actual sense-data are

neither true nor false. A particular patch of colour which I see, for example,

simply exists: it is not the sort of thing that is true or false. It is true that there

is such a patch, true that it has a certain shape and degree of brightness, true

that  it  is  surrounded  by  certain  other  colours.  But  the  patch  itself,  like

everything else in the world of sense, is of a radically different kind from the

things that are true or false, and therefore cannot properly be said to be true.

Thus whatever self-evident truths may be obtained from our senses must be

different from the sense-data from which they are obtained.

It would seem that there are two kinds of self-evident truths of perception,

though perhaps in the last analysis the two kinds may coalesce. First, there is

the kind which simply asserts the existence of the sense-datum, without in

any way analysing it. We see a patch of red, and we judge 'there is such-and-

such a patch of red', or more strictly 'there is that'; this is one kind of intuitive

judgement of perception. The other kind arises when the object of sense is

complex, and we subject it to some degree of analysis. If, for instance, we seea round patch of red, we may judge 'that patch of red is round'. This is again a

judgement of perception, but it differs from our previous kind. In our present

kind we have a single sense-datum which has both colour and shape: the

colour is red and the shape is round. Our judgement analyses the datum into

colour and shape, and then recombines them by stating that the red colour is

round in shape. Another example of this kind of judgement is 'this is to the

right of that', where 'this' and 'that' are seen simultaneously. In this kind of

judgement the sense-datum contains constituents which have some relation to

each  other,  and  the  judgement  asserts  that  these  constituents  have  this

relation.

  Another class of intuitive judgements, analogous to those of sense and yet

quite distinct from them, are judgements of memory. There is some danger of

confusion as to the nature of memory, owing to the fact that memory of an

object is apt to be accompanied by an image of the object, and yet the image

cannot be what constitutes memory. This is easily seen by merely noticing

that the image is in the present, whereas what is remembered is known to be

in the past. Moreover, we are certainly able to some extent to compare our

image with the object remembered, so that we often know, within somewhat

wide limits, how far our image is accurate; but this would be impossible,

unless the object, as opposed to the image, were in some way before the

mind. Thus the essence of memory is not constituted by the image, but by

having immediately before the mind an object which is recognized as past.

But for the fact of memory in this sense, we should not know that there ever

was a past at all, nor should we be able to understand the word 'past', any

more than a man born blind can understand the word 'light'. Thus there must

be intuitive judgements of memory, and it is upon them, ultimately, that all

our knowledge of the past depends.

The  case  of  memory,  however,  raises  a  difficulty,  for  it  is  notoriously

fallacious,  and  thus  throws  doubt  on  the  trustworthiness  of  intuitive

judgements in general. This difficulty is no light one. But let us first narrow

its  scope  as  far  as  possible.  Broadly  speaking,  memory  is  trustworthy  in

proportion to the vividness of the experience and to its nearness in time. If the

house next door was struck by lightning half a minute ago, my memory of

what I saw and heard will be so reliable that it would be preposterous to

doubt whether there had been a flash at all. And the same applies to less vivid

experiences, so long as they are recent. I am absolutely certain that half a

minute ago I was sitting in the same chair in which I am sitting now. Goingbackward over the day, I find things of which I am quite certain, other things

of which I am almost certain, other things of which I can become certain by

thought and by calling up attendant circumstances, and some things of which

I am by no means certain. I am quite certain that I ate my breakfast this

morning, but if I were as indifferent to my breakfast as a philosopher should

be, I should be doubtful. As to the conversation at breakfast, I can recall some

of it easily, some with an effort, some only with a large element of doubt, and

some not at all. Thus there is a continual gradation in the degree of self-

evidence  of  what  I  remember,  and  a  corresponding  gradation  in  the

trustworthiness of my memory.

  Thus the first answer to the difficulty of fallacious memory is to say that

memory  has  degrees  of  self-evidence,  and  that  these  correspond  to  the

degrees of its trustworthiness, reaching a limit of perfect self-evidence and

perfect trustworthiness in our memory of events which are recent and vivid.

It  would  seem,  however,  that  there  are  cases  of  very  firm  belief  in  a

memory which is wholly false. It is probable that, in these cases, what is

really remembered, in the sense of being immediately before the mind, is

something other than what is falsely believed in, though something generally

associated with it. George IV is said to have at last believed that he was at the

battle of Waterloo, because he had so often said that he was. In this case,

what was immediately remembered was his repeated assertion; the belief in

what he was asserting (if it existed) would be produced by association with

the  remembered  assertion,  and  would  therefore  not  be  a  genuine  case  of

memory. It would seem that cases of fallacious memory can probably all be

dealt with in this way, i.e. they can be shown to be not cases of memory in

the strict sense at all.

One  important  point  about  self-evidence  is  made  clear  by  the  case  of

memory, and that is, that self-evidence has degrees: it is not a quality which

is simply present or absent, but a quality which may be more or less present,

in  gradations  ranging  from  absolute  certainty  down  to  an  almost

imperceptible faintness. Truths of perception and some of the principles of

logic  have  the  very  highest  degree  of  self-evidence;  truths  of  immediate

memory have an almost equally high degree. The inductive principle has less

self-evidence than some of the other principles of logic, such as 'what follows

from a true premiss must be true'. Memories have a diminishing self-evidence

as they become remoter and fainter; the truths of logic and mathematics have

(broadly  speaking)  less  self-evidence  as  they  become  more  complicated.Judgements of intrinsic ethical or aesthetic value are apt to have some self-

evidence, but not much.

  Degrees of self-evidence are important in the theory of knowledge, since,

if  propositions  may  (as  seems  likely)  have  some  degree  of  self-evidence

without being true, it will not be necessary to abandon all connexion between

self-evidence and truth, but merely to say that, where there is a conflict, the

more  self-evident  proposition  is  to  be  retained  and  the  less  self-evident

rejected.

It seems, however, highly probable that two different notions are combined

in 'self-evidence' as above explained; that one of them, which corresponds to

the highest degree of self-evidence, is really an infallible guarantee of truth,

while the other, which corresponds to all the other degrees, does not give an

infallible guarantee, but only a greater or less presumption. This, however, is

only a suggestion, which we cannot as yet develop further. After we have

dealt with the nature of truth, we shall return to the subject of self-evidence,

in connexion with the distinction between knowledge and error.

  





 CHAPTER XII. TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD

Our knowledge of truths, unlike our knowledge of things, has an opposite,

namely error. So far as things are concerned, we may know them or not

know them, but there is no positive state of mind which can be described as

erroneous knowledge of things, so long, at any rate, as we confine ourselves

to knowledge by acquaintance. Whatever we are acquainted with must be

something; we may draw wrong inferences from our acquaintance, but the

acquaintance itself cannot be deceptive. Thus there is no dualism as regards

acquaintance. But as regards knowledge of truths, there is a dualism. We may

believe what is false as well as what is true. We know that on very many

subjects  different  people  hold  different  and  incompatible  opinions:  hence

some beliefs must be erroneous. Since erroneous beliefs are often held just as

strongly as true beliefs, it becomes a difficult question how they are to be

distinguished from true beliefs. How are we to know, in a given case, that our

belief is not erroneous? This is a question of the very greatest difficulty, to

which no completely satisfactory answer is possible. There is, however, a

preliminary question which is rather less difficult, and that is: What do we

mean by truth and falsehood? It is this preliminary question which is to be

considered in this chapter. In this chapter we are not asking how we can

know whether a belief is true or false: we are asking what is meant by the

question whether a belief is true or false. It is to be hoped that a clear answer

to this question may help us to obtain an answer to the question what beliefs

are  true,  but  for  the  present  we  ask  only  'What  is  truth?'  and  'What  is

falsehood?' not 'What beliefs are true?' and 'What beliefs are false?' It is very

important  to  keep  these  different  questions  entirely  separate,  since  any

confusion between them is sure to produce an answer which is not really

applicable to either.

  There are three points to observe in the attempt to discover the nature of

truth, three requisites which any theory must fulfil.

(1) Our theory of truth must be such as to admit of its opposite, falsehood.

A good many philosophers have failed adequately to satisfy this condition:

they have constructed theories according to which all our thinking ought to

have been true, and have then had the greatest difficulty in finding a place for

falsehood. In this respect our theory of belief must differ from our theory of

acquaintance, since in the case of acquaintance it was not necessary to take

account of any opposite.(2) It seems fairly evident that if there were no beliefs there could be no

falsehood, and no truth either, in the sense in which truth is correlative to

falsehood. If we imagine a world of mere matter, there would be no room for

falsehood in such a world, and although it would contain what may be called

'facts', it would not contain any truths, in the sense in which truths are things

of the same kind as falsehoods. In fact, truth and falsehood are properties of

beliefs and statements: hence a world of mere matter, since it would contain

no beliefs or statements, would also contain no truth or falsehood.

(3) But, as against what we have just said, it is to be observed that the truth

or falsehood of a belief always depends upon something which lies outside

the belief itself. If I believe that Charles I died on the scaffold, I believe truly,

not because of any intrinsic quality of my belief, which could be discovered

by merely examining the belief, but because of an historical event which

happened two and a half centuries ago. If I believe that Charles I died in his

bed,  I  believe  falsely:  no  degree  of  vividness  in  my  belief,  or  of  care  in

arriving at it, prevents it from being false, again because of what happened

long  ago,  and  not  because  of  any  intrinsic  property  of  my  belief.  Hence,

although  truth  and  falsehood  are  properties  of  beliefs,  they  are  properties

dependent  upon  the  relations  of  the  beliefs  to  other  things,  not  upon  any

internal quality of the beliefs.

The third of the above requisites leads us to adopt the view—which has on

the whole been commonest among philosophers—that truth consists in some

form of correspondence between belief and fact. It is, however, by no means

an easy matter to discover a form of correspondence to which there are no

irrefutable objections. By this partly—and partly by the feeling that, if truth

consists  in  a  correspondence  of  thought  with  something  outside  thought,

thought can never know when truth has been attained—many philosophers

have been led to try to find some definition of truth which shall not consist in

relation to something wholly outside belief. The most important attempt at a

definition of this sort is the theory that truth consists in coherence. It is said

that the mark of falsehood is failure to cohere in the body of our beliefs, and

that it is the essence of a truth to form part of the completely rounded system

which is The Truth.

  There  is,  however,  a  great  difficulty  in  this  view,  or  rather  two  great

difficulties.  The  first  is  that  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  only one

coherent  body  of  beliefs  is  possible.  It  may  be  that,  with  sufficient

imagination, a novelist might invent a past for the world that would perfectlyfit on to what we know, and yet be quite different from the real past. In more

scientific matters, it is certain that there are often two or more hypotheses

which account for all the known facts on some subject, and although, in such

cases, men of science endeavour to find facts which will rule out all the

hypotheses except one, there is no reason why they should always succeed.

In philosophy, again, it seems not uncommon for two rival hypotheses to

be both able to account for all the facts. Thus, for example, it is possible that

life is one long dream, and that the outer world has only that degree of reality

that the objects of dreams have; but although such a view does not seem

inconsistent with known facts, there is no reason to prefer it to the common-

sense view, according to which other people and things do really exist. Thus

coherence as the definition of truth fails because there is no proof that there

can be only one coherent system.

The other objection to this definition of truth is that it assumes the meaning

of 'coherence' known, whereas, in fact, 'coherence' presupposes the truth of

the laws of logic. Two propositions are coherent when both may be true, and

are incoherent when one at least must be false. Now in order to know whether

two propositions can both be true, we must know such truths as the law of

contradiction. For example, the two propositions, 'this tree is a beech' and

'this tree is not a beech', are not coherent, because of the law of contradiction.

But if the law of contradiction itself were subjected to the test of coherence,

we should find that, if we choose to suppose it false, nothing will any longer

be incoherent with anything else. Thus the laws of logic supply the skeleton

or framework within which the test of coherence applies, and they themselves

cannot be established by this test.

For the above two reasons, coherence cannot be accepted as giving the

meaning of truth, though it is often a most important test of truth after a

certain amount of truth has become known.

  Hence we are driven back to correspondence with fact as constituting the

nature of truth. It remains to define precisely what we mean by 'fact', and

what is the nature of the correspondence which must subsist between belief

and fact, in order that belief may be true.

In accordance with our three requisites, we have to seek a theory of truth

which (1) allows truth to have an opposite, namely falsehood, (2) makes truth

a property of beliefs, but (3) makes it a property wholly dependent upon the

relation of the beliefs to outside things.

The  necessity  of  allowing  for  falsehood  makes  it  impossible  to  regardbelief as a relation of the mind to a single object, which could be said to be

what  is  believed.  If  belief  were  so  regarded,  we  should  find  that,  like

acquaintance, it would not admit of the opposition of truth and falsehood, but

would have to be always true. This may be made clear by examples. Othello

believes falsely that Desdemona loves Cassio. We cannot say that this belief

consists in a relation to a single object, 'Desdemona's love for Cassio', for if

there were such an object, the belief would be true. There is in fact no such

object,  and  therefore  Othello  cannot  have  any  relation  to  such  an  object.

Hence his belief cannot possibly consist in a relation to this object.

It might be said that his belief is a relation to a different object, namely

'that Desdemona loves Cassio'; but it is almost as difficult to suppose that

there is such an object as this, when Desdemona does not love Cassio, as it

was to suppose that there is 'Desdemona's love for Cassio'. Hence it will be

better  to  seek  for  a  theory  of  belief  which  does  not  make  it  consist  in  a

relation of the mind to a single object.

It is common to think of relations as though they always held between two

terms, but in fact this is not always the case. Some relations demand three

terms, some four, and so on. Take, for instance, the relation 'between'. So

long as only two terms come in, the relation 'between' is impossible: three

terms  are  the  smallest  number  that  render  it  possible.  York  is  between

London and Edinburgh; but if London and Edinburgh were the only places in

the world, there could be nothing which was between one place and another.

Similarly jealousy requires three people: there can be no such relation that

does not involve three at least. Such a proposition as 'A wishes B to promote

C's marriage with D' involves a relation of four terms; that is to say, A and B

and  C  and  D  all  come  in,  and  the  relation  involved  cannot  be  expressed

otherwise than in a form involving all four. Instances might be multiplied

indefinitely, but enough has been said to show that there are relations which

require more than two terms before they can occur.

The relation involved in judging or believing must, if falsehood is to be

duly allowed for, be taken to be a relation between several terms, not between

two. When Othello believes that Desdemona loves Cassio, he must not have

before  his  mind  a  single  object,  'Desdemona's  love  for  Cassio',  or  'that

Desdemona  loves  Cassio  ',  for  that  would  require  that  there  should  be

objective falsehoods, which subsist independently of any minds; and this,

though not logically refutable, is a theory to be avoided if possible. Thus it is

easier to account for falsehood if we take judgement to be a relation in whichthe mind and the various objects concerned all occur severally; that is to say,

Desdemona and loving and Cassio must all be terms in the relation which

subsists when Othello believes that Desdemona loves Cassio. This relation,

therefore, is a relation of four terms, since Othello also is one of the terms of

the relation. When we say that it is a relation of four terms, we do not mean

that Othello has a certain relation to Desdemona, and has the same relation to

loving  and  also  to  Cassio.  This  may  be  true  of  some  other  relation  than

believing; but believing, plainly, is not a relation which Othello has to each

of the three terms concerned, but to all of them together: there is only one

example of the relation of believing involved, but this one example knits

together four terms. Thus the actual occurrence, at the moment when Othello

is  entertaining  his  belief,  is  that  the  relation  called  'believing'  is  knitting

together into one complex whole the four terms Othello, Desdemona, loving,

and Cassio. What is called belief or judgement is nothing but this relation of

believing or judging, which relates a mind to several things other than itself.

An act of belief or of judgement is the occurrence between certain terms at

some particular time, of the relation of believing or judging.

We are now in a position to understand what it is that distinguishes a true

judgement  from  a  false  one.  For  this  purpose  we  will  adopt  certain

definitions. In every act of judgement there is a mind which judges, and there

are terms concerning which it judges. We will call the mind the subject in the

judgement, and the remaining terms the objects. Thus, when Othello judges

that Desdemona loves Cassio, Othello is the subject, while the objects are

Desdemona and loving and Cassio. The subject and the objects together are

called the constituents of the judgement. It will be observed that the relation

of  judging  has  what  is  called  a  'sense'  or  'direction'.  We  may  say,

metaphorically,  that  it  puts  its  objects  in  a  certain order,  which  we  may

indicate by means of the order of the words in the sentence. (In an inflected

language,  the  same  thing  will  be  indicated  by  inflections,  e.g.  by  the

difference  between  nominative  and  accusative.)  Othello's  judgement  that

Cassio loves Desdemona differs from his judgement that Desdemona loves

Cassio, in spite of the fact that it consists of the same constituents, because

the relation of judging places the constituents in a different order in the two

cases.  Similarly,  if  Cassio  judges  that  Desdemona  loves  Othello,  the

constituents of the judgement are still the same, but their order is different.

This property of having a 'sense' or 'direction' is one which the relation of

judging shares with all other relations. The 'sense' of relations is the ultimatesource of order and series and a host of mathematical concepts; but we need

not concern ourselves further with this aspect.

We spoke of the relation called 'judging' or 'believing' as knitting together

into one complex whole the subject and the objects. In this respect, judging is

exactly like every other relation. Whenever a relation holds between two or

more  terms,  it  unites  the  terms  into  a  complex  whole.  If  Othello  loves

Desdemona, there is such a complex whole as 'Othello's love for Desdemona'.

The terms united by the relation may be themselves complex, or may be

simple, but the whole which results from their being united must be complex.

Wherever there is a relation which relates certain terms, there is a complex

object formed of the union of those terms; and conversely, wherever there is

a complex object, there is a relation which relates its constituents. When an

act of believing occurs, there is a complex, in which 'believing' is the uniting

relation, and subject and objects are arranged in a certain order by the 'sense'

of the relation of believing. Among the objects, as we saw in considering

'Othello believes that Desdemona loves Cassio', one must be a relation—in

this instance, the relation 'loving'. But this relation, as it occurs in the act of

believing, is not the relation which creates the unity of the complex whole

consisting of the subject and the objects. The relation 'loving', as it occurs in

the act of believing, is one of the objects—it is a brick in the structure, not the

cement. The cement is the relation 'believing'. When the belief is true, there is

another complex unity, in which the relation which was one of the objects of

the belief relates the other objects. Thus, e.g., if Othello believes truly that

Desdemona loves Cassio, then there is a complex unity, 'Desdemona's love

for Cassio', which is composed exclusively of the objects of the belief, in the

same order as they had in the belief, with the relation which was one of the

objects occurring now as the cement that binds together the other objects of

the belief. On the other hand, when a belief is false, there is no such complex

unity composed only of the objects of the belief. If Othello believes falsely

that  Desdemona  loves  Cassio,  then  there  is  no  such  complex  unity  as

'Desdemona's love for Cassio'.

  Thus a belief is true when it corresponds to a certain associated complex,

and false when it does not. Assuming, for the sake of definiteness, that the

objects of the belief are two terms and a relation, the terms being put in a

certain order by the 'sense' of the believing, then if the two terms in that order

are united by the relation into a complex, the belief is true; if not, it is false.

This constitutes the definition of truth and falsehood that we were in searchof. Judging or believing is a certain complex unity of which a mind is a

constituent; if the remaining constituents, taken in the order which they have

in the belief, form a complex unity, then the belief is true; if not, it is false.

  Thus although truth and falsehood are properties of beliefs, yet they are in

a  sense  extrinsic  properties,  for  the  condition  of  the  truth  of  a  belief  is

something not involving beliefs, or (in general) any mind at all, but only the

objects of the belief. A mind, which believes, believes truly when there is a

corresponding complex not involving the mind, but only its objects. This

correspondence ensures truth, and its absence entails falsehood. Hence we

account simultaneously for the two facts that beliefs (a) depend on minds for

their existence, (b) do not depend on minds for their truth.

We may restate our theory as follows: If we take such a belief as 'Othello

believes that Desdemona loves Cassio', we will call Desdemona and Cassio

the object-terms, and loving the object-relation. If there is a complex unity

'Desdemona's love for Cassio', consisting of the object-terms related by the

object-relation in the same order as they have in the belief, then this complex

unity is called the fact corresponding to the belief. Thus a belief is true when

there is a corresponding fact, and is false when there is no corresponding fact.

It will be seen that minds do not create truth or falsehood. They create

beliefs, but when once the beliefs are created, the mind cannot make them

true or false, except in the special case where they concern future things

which are within the power of the person believing, such as catching trains.

What  makes  a  belief  true  is  a fact,  and  this  fact  does  not  (except  in

exceptional cases) in any way involve the mind of the person who has the

belief.

  Having now decided what we mean by truth and falsehood, we have next

to consider what ways there are of knowing whether this or that belief is true

or false. This consideration will occupy the next chapter.

  CHAPTER  XIII.  KNOWLEDGE,  ERROR,  AND

PROBABLE OPINION

The  question  as  to  what  we  mean  by  truth  and  falsehood,  which  we

considered in the preceding chapter, is of much less interest than the question

as to how we can know what is true and what is false. This question will

occupy us in the present chapter. There can be no doubt that some of our

beliefs are erroneous; thus we are led to inquire what certainty we can ever

have that such and such a belief is not erroneous. In other words, can we ever

know anything at all, or do we merely sometimes by good luck believe what

is true? Before we can attack this question, we must, however, first decide

what we mean by 'knowing', and this question is not so easy as might be

supposed.

At first sight we might imagine that knowledge could be defined as 'true

belief'.  When  what  we  believe  is  true,  it  might  be  supposed  that  we  had

achieved a knowledge of what we believe. But this would not accord with the

way in which the word is commonly used. To take a very trivial instance: If a

man believes that the late Prime Minister's last name began with a B, he

believes what is true, since the late Prime Minister was Sir Henry Campbell

Bannerman. But if he believes that Mr. Balfour was the late Prime Minister,

he will still believe that the late Prime Minister's last name began with a B,

yet this belief, though true, would not be thought to constitute knowledge. If

a newspaper, by an intelligent anticipation, announces the result of a battle

before  any  telegram  giving  the  result  has  been  received,  it  may  by  good

fortune announce what afterwards turns out to be the right result, and it may

produce belief in some of its less experienced readers. But in spite of the truth

of their belief, they cannot be said to have knowledge. Thus it is clear that a

true belief is not knowledge when it is deduced from a false belief.

In  like  manner,  a  true  belief  cannot  be  called  knowledge  when  it  is

deduced by a fallacious process of reasoning, even if the premisses from

which it is deduced are true. If I know that all Greeks are men and that

Socrates was a man, and I infer that Socrates was a Greek, I cannot be said to

know that Socrates was a Greek, because, although my premisses and my

conclusion are true, the conclusion does not follow from the premisses.

But are we to say that nothing is knowledge except what is validly deduced

from true premisses? Obviously we cannot say this. Such a definition is atonce too wide and too narrow. In the first place, it is too wide, because it is

not enough that our premisses should be true, they must also be known. The

man who believes that Mr. Balfour was the late Prime Minister may proceed

to draw valid deductions from the true premiss that the late Prime Minister's

name began with a B, but he cannot be said to know the conclusions reached

by these deductions. Thus we shall have to amend our definition by saying

that  knowledge  is  what  is  validly  deduced  from known  premisses.  This,

however, is a circular definition: it assumes that we already know what is

meant  by  'known  premisses'.  It  can,  therefore,  at  best  define  one  sort  of

knowledge, the sort we call derivative, as opposed to intuitive knowledge.

We  may  say:  'Derivative  knowledge  is  what  is  validly  deduced  from

premisses known intuitively'. In this statement there is no formal defect, but it

leaves the definition of intuitive knowledge still to seek.

  Leaving on one side, for the moment, the question of intuitive knowledge,

let us consider the above suggested definition of derivative knowledge. The

chief objection to it is that it unduly limits knowledge. It constantly happens

that people entertain a true belief, which has grown up in them because of

some piece of intuitive knowledge from which it is capable of being validly

inferred, but from which it has not, as a matter of fact, been inferred by any

logical process.

Take,  for  example,  the  beliefs  produced  by  reading.  If  the  newspapers

announce the death of the King, we are fairly well justified in believing that

the King is dead, since this is the sort of announcement which would not be

made if it were false. And we are quite amply justified in believing that the

newspaper asserts that the King is dead. But here the intuitive knowledge

upon which our belief is based is knowledge of the existence of sense-data

derived  from  looking  at  the  print  which  gives  the  news.  This  knowledge

scarcely rises into consciousness, except in a person who cannot read easily.

A child may be aware of the shapes of the letters, and pass gradually and

painfully  to  a  realization  of  their  meaning.  But  anybody  accustomed  to

reading passes at once to what the letters mean, and is not aware, except on

reflection,  that  he  has  derived  this  knowledge  from  the  sense-data  called

seeing the printed letters. Thus although a valid inference from the-letters to

their meaning is possible, and could be performed by the reader, it is not in

fact performed, since he does not in fact perform any operation which can be

called logical inference. Yet it would be absurd to say that the reader does not

know that the newspaper announces the King's death.We must, therefore, admit as derivative knowledge whatever is the result

of intuitive knowledge even if by mere association, provided there is a valid

logical connexion, and the person in question could become aware of this

connexion  by  reflection.  There  are  in  fact  many  ways,  besides  logical

inference, by which we pass from one belief to another: the passage from the

print  to  its  meaning  illustrates  these  ways.  These  ways  may  be  called

'psychological inference'. We shall, then, admit such psychological inference

as  a  means  of  obtaining  derivative  knowledge,  provided  there  is  a

discoverable  logical  inference  which  runs  parallel  to  the  psychological

inference. This renders our definition of derivative knowledge less precise

than we could wish, since the word 'discoverable' is vague: it does not tell us

how much reflection may be needed in order to make the discovery. But in

fact 'knowledge' is not a precise conception: it merges into 'probable opinion',

as we shall see more fully in the course of the present chapter. A very precise

definition, therefore, should not be sought, since any such definition must be

more or less misleading.

The chief difficulty in regard to knowledge, however, does not arise over

derivative  knowledge,  but  over  intuitive  knowledge.  So  long  as  we  are

dealing with derivative knowledge, we have the test of intuitive knowledge to

fall back upon. But in regard to intuitive beliefs, it is by no means easy to

discover any criterion by which to distinguish some as true and others as

erroneous. In this question it is scarcely possible to reach any very precise

result: all our knowledge of truths is infected with some degree of doubt, and

a theory which ignored this fact would be plainly wrong. Something may be

done, however, to mitigate the difficulties of the question.

Our theory of truth, to begin with, supplies the possibility of distinguishing

certain truths as self-evident in a sense which ensures infallibility. When a

belief is true, we said, there is a corresponding fact, in which the several

objects of the belief form a single complex. The belief is said to constitute

knowledge  of  this  fact,  provided  it  fulfils  those  further  somewhat  vague

conditions which we have been considering in the present chapter. But in

regard to any fact, besides the knowledge constituted by belief, we may also

have the kind of knowledge constituted by perception (taking this word in its

widest possible sense). For example, if you know the hour of the sunset, you

can at that hour know the fact that the sun is setting: this is knowledge of the

fact by way of knowledge of truths; but you can also, if the weather is fine,

look to the west and actually see the setting sun: you then know the same factby the way of knowledge of things.

  Thus in regard to any complex fact, there are, theoretically, two ways in

which it may be known: (1) by means of a judgement, in which its several

parts are judged to be related as they are in fact related; (2) by means of

acquaintance with the complex fact itself, which may (in a large sense) be

called perception, though it is by no means confined to objects of the senses.

Now it will be observed that the second way of knowing a complex fact, the

way of acquaintance, is only possible when there really is such a fact, while

the first way, like all judgement, is liable to error. The second way gives us

the complex whole, and is therefore only possible when its parts do actually

have that relation which makes them combine to form such a complex. The

first way, on the contrary, gives us the parts and the relation severally, and

demands only the reality of the parts and the relation: the relation may not

relate those parts in that way, and yet the judgement may occur.

It will be remembered that at the end of Chapter XI we suggested that there

might be two kinds of self-evidence, one giving an absolute guarantee of

truth,  the  other  only  a  partial  guarantee.  These  two  kinds  can  now  be

distinguished.

We may say that a truth is self-evident, in the first and most absolute sense,

when we have acquaintance with the fact which corresponds to the truth.

When Othello believes that Desdemona loves Cassio, the corresponding fact,

if his belief were true, would be 'Desdemona's love for Cassio'. This would be

a fact with which no one could have acquaintance except Desdemona; hence

in  the  sense  of  self-evidence  that  we  are  considering,  the  truth  that

Desdemona loves Cassio (if it were a truth) could only be self-evident to

Desdemona. All mental facts, and all facts concerning sense-data, have this

same privacy: there is only one person to whom they can be self-evident in

our present sense, since there is only one person who can be acquainted with

the  mental  things  or  the  sense-data  concerned.  Thus  no  fact  about  any

particular existing thing can be self-evident to more than one person. On the

other hand, facts about universals do not have this privacy. Many minds may

be acquainted with the same universals; hence a relation between universals

may be known by acquaintance to many different people. In all cases where

we know by acquaintance a complex fact consisting of certain terms in a

certain relation, we say that the truth that these terms are so related has the

first or absolute kind of self-evidence, and in these cases the judgement that

the terms are so related must be true. Thus this sort of self-evidence is anabsolute guarantee of truth.

But although this sort of self-evidence is an absolute guarantee of truth, it

does  not  enable  us  to  be absolutely  certain,  in  the  case  of  any  given

judgement, that the judgement in question is true. Suppose we first perceive

the sun shining, which is a complex fact, and thence proceed to make the

judgement  'the  sun  is  shining'.  In  passing  from  the  perception  to  the

judgement, it is necessary to analyse the given complex fact: we have to

separate out 'the sun' and 'shining' as constituents of the fact. In this process it

is  possible  to  commit  an  error;  hence  even  where  a fact  has  the  first  or

absolute kind of self-evidence, a judgement believed to correspond to the fact

is not absolutely infallible, because it may not really correspond to the fact.

But if it does correspond (in the sense explained in the preceding chapter),

then it must be true.

The second sort of self-evidence will be that which belongs to judgements

in the first instance, and is not derived from direct perception of a fact as a

single complex whole. This second kind of self-evidence will have degrees,

from the very highest degree down to a bare inclination in favour of the

belief. Take, for example, the case of a horse trotting away from us along a

hard road. At first our certainty that we hear the hoofs is complete; gradually,

if we listen intently, there comes a moment when we think perhaps it was

imagination or the blind upstairs or our own heartbeats; at last we become

doubtful whether there was any noise at all; then we think we no longer hear

anything, and at last we know we no longer hear anything. In this process,

there is a continual gradation of self-evidence, from the highest degree to the

least, not in the sense-data themselves, but in the judgements based on them.

Or again: Suppose we are comparing two shades of colour, one blue and

one green. We can be quite sure they are different shades of colour; but if the

green colour is gradually altered to be more and more like the blue, becoming

first a blue-green, then a greeny-blue, then blue, there will come a moment

when we are doubtful whether we can see any difference, and then a moment

when we know that we cannot see any difference. The same thing happens in

tuning a musical instrument, or in any other case where there is a continuous

gradation. Thus self-evidence of this sort is a matter of degree; and it seems

plain that the higher degrees are more to be trusted than the lower degrees.

In derivative knowledge our ultimate premisses must have some degree of

self-evidence,  and  so  must  their  connexion  with  the  conclusions  deduced

from them. Take for example a piece of reasoning in geometry. It is notenough  that  the  axioms  from  which  we  start  should  be  self-evident:  it  is

necessary also that, at each step in the reasoning, the connexion of premiss

and conclusion should be self-evident. In difficult reasoning, this connexion

has often only a very small degree of self-evidence; hence errors of reasoning

are not improbable where the difficulty is great.

  From  what  has  been  said  it  is  evident  that,  both  as  regards  intuitive

knowledge and as regards derivative knowledge, if we assume that intuitive

knowledge is trustworthy in proportion to the degree of its self-evidence,

there will be a gradation in trustworthiness, from the existence of noteworthy

sense-data and the simpler truths of logic and arithmetic, which may be taken

as quite certain, down to judgements which seem only just more probable

than their opposites. What we firmly believe, if it is true, is called knowledge,

provided it is either intuitive or inferred (logically or psychologically) from

intuitive knowledge from which it follows logically. What we firmly believe,

if  it  is  not  true,  is  called error.  What  we  firmly  believe,  if  it  is  neither

knowledge nor error, and also what we believe hesitatingly, because it is, or

is derived from, something which has not the highest degree of self-evidence,

may  be  called probable  opinion.  Thus  the  greater  part  of  what  would

commonly pass as knowledge is more or less probable opinion.

In  regard  to  probable  opinion,  we  can  derive  great  assistance  from

coherence, which we rejected as the definition of truth, but may often use as a

criterion.  A  body  of  individually  probable  opinions,  if  they  are  mutually

coherent, become more probable than any one of them would be individually.

It is in this way that many scientific hypotheses acquire their probability.

They fit into a coherent system of probable opinions, and thus become more

probable than they would be in isolation. The same thing applies to general

philosophical hypotheses. Often in a single case such hypotheses may seem

highly doubtful, while yet, when we consider the order and coherence which

they introduce into a mass of probable opinion, they become pretty nearly

certain. This applies, in particular, to such matters as the distinction between

dreams and waking life. If our dreams, night after night, were as coherent one

with  another  as  our  days,  we  should  hardly  know  whether  to  believe  the

dreams  or  the  waking  life.  As  it  is,  the  test  of  coherence  condemns  the

dreams  and  confirms  the  waking  life.  But  this  test,  though  it  increases

probability where it is successful, never gives absolute certainty, unless there

is  certainty  already  at  some  point  in  the  coherent  system.  Thus  the  mere

organization  of  probable  opinion  will  never,  by  itself,  transform  it  intoindubitable knowledge.

  





 CHAPTER XIV. THE LIMITS OF

PHILOSOPHICAL KNOWLEDGE

In all that we have said hitherto concerning philosophy, we have scarcely

touched on many matters that occupy a great space in the writings of most

philosophers. Most philosophers—or, at any rate, very many—profess to be

able  to  prove,  by a  priori  metaphysical  reasoning,  such  things  as  the

fundamental dogmas of religion, the essential rationality of the universe, the

illusoriness of matter, the unreality of all evil, and so on. There can be no

doubt that the hope of finding reason to believe such theses as these has been

the chief inspiration of many life-long students of philosophy. This hope, I

believe, is vain. It would seem that knowledge concerning the universe as a

whole is not to be obtained by metaphysics, and that the proposed proofs that,

in virtue of the laws of logic such and such things must exist and such and

such others cannot, are not capable of surviving a critical scrutiny. In this

chapter we shall briefly consider the kind of way in which such reasoning is

attempted, with a view to discovering whether we can hope that it may be

valid.

The great representative, in modern times, of the kind of view which we

wish  to  examine,  was  Hegel  (1770-1831).  Hegel's  philosophy  is  very

difficult, and commentators differ as to the true interpretation of it. According

to the interpretation I shall adopt, which is that of many, if not most, of the

commentators and has the merit of giving an interesting and important type

of  philosophy,  his  main  thesis  is  that  everything  short  of  the  Whole  is

obviously  fragmentary,  and  obviously  incapable  of  existing  without  the

complement  supplied  by  the  rest  of  the  world.  Just  as  a  comparative

anatomist, from a single bone, sees what kind of animal the whole must have

been, so the metaphysician, according to Hegel, sees, from any one piece of

reality, what the whole of reality must be—at least in its large outlines. Every

apparently separate piece of reality has, as it were, hooks which grapple it to

the next piece; the next piece, in turn, has fresh hooks, and so on, until the

whole  universe  is  reconstructed.  This  essential  incompleteness  appears,

according  to  Hegel,  equally  in  the  world  of  thought  and  in  the  world  of

things.  In  the  world  of  thought,  if  we  take  any  idea  which  is  abstract  or

incomplete, we find, on examination, that if we forget its incompleteness, we

become  involved  in  contradictions;  these  contradictions  turn  the  idea  inquestion into its opposite, or antithesis; and in order to escape, we have to

find a new, less incomplete idea, which is the synthesis of our original idea

and its antithesis. This new idea, though less incomplete than the idea we

started with, will be found, nevertheless, to be still not wholly complete, but

to pass into its antithesis, with which it must be combined in a new synthesis.

In  this  way  Hegel  advances  until  he  reaches  the  'Absolute  Idea',  which,

according to him, has no incompleteness, no opposite, and no need of further

development. The Absolute Idea, therefore, is adequate to describe Absolute

Reality; but all lower ideas only describe reality as it appears to a partial

view, not as it is to one who simultaneously surveys the Whole. Thus Hegel

reaches the conclusion that Absolute Reality forms one single harmonious

system, not in space or time, not in any degree evil, wholly rational, and

wholly spiritual. Any appearance to the contrary, in the world we know, can

be proved logically—so he believes—to be entirely due to our fragmentary

piecemeal view of the universe. If we saw the universe whole, as we may

suppose God sees it, space and time and matter and evil and all striving and

struggling  would  disappear,  and  we  should  see  instead  an  eternal  perfect

unchanging spiritual unity.

In this conception, there is undeniably something sublime, something to

which we could wish to yield assent. Nevertheless, when the arguments in

support of it are carefully examined, they appear to involve much confusion

and many unwarrantable assumptions. The fundamental tenet upon which the

system is built up is that what is incomplete must be not self-subsistent, but

must  need  the  support  of  other  things  before  it  can  exist.  It  is  held  that

whatever has relations to things outside itself must contain some reference to

those outside things in its own nature, and could not, therefore, be what it is if

those outside things did not exist. A man's nature, for example, is constituted

by his memories and the rest of his knowledge, by his loves and hatreds, and

so on; thus, but for the objects which he knows or loves or hates, he could not

be what he is. He is essentially and obviously a fragment: taken as the sum-

total of reality he would be self-contradictory.

This whole point of view, however, turns upon the notion of the 'nature' of

a thing, which seems to mean 'all the truths about the thing'. It is of course the

case  that  a  truth  which  connects  one  thing  with  another  thing  could  not

subsist if the other thing did not subsist. But a truth about a thing is not part

of the thing itself, although it must, according to the above usage, be part of

the 'nature' of the thing. If we mean by a thing's 'nature' all the truths aboutthe thing, then plainly we cannot know a thing's 'nature' unless we know all

the thing's relations to all the other things in the universe. But if the word

'nature' is used in this sense, we shall have to hold that the thing may be

known when its 'nature' is not known, or at any rate is not known completely.

There is a confusion, when this use of the word 'nature' is employed, between

knowledge of things and knowledge of truths. We may have knowledge of a

thing  by  acquaintance  even  if  we  know  very  few  propositions  about  it—

theoretically we need not know any propositions about it. Thus, acquaintance

with a thing does not involve knowledge of its 'nature' in the above sense.

And although acquaintance with a thing is involved in our knowing any one

proposition about a thing, knowledge of its 'nature', in the above sense, is not

involved. Hence, (1) acquaintance with a thing does not logically involve a

knowledge of its relations, and (2) a knowledge of some of its relations does

not involve a knowledge of all of its relations nor a knowledge of its 'nature'

in the above sense. I may be acquainted, for example, with my toothache, and

this knowledge may be as complete as knowledge by acquaintance ever can

be, without knowing all that the dentist (who is not acquainted with it) can

tell me about its cause, and without therefore knowing its 'nature' in the above

sense. Thus the fact that a thing has relations does not prove that its relations

are logically necessary. That is to say, from the mere fact that it is the thing it

is we cannot deduce that it must have the various relations which in fact it

has. This only seems to follow because we know it already.

It follows that we cannot prove that the universe as a whole forms a single

harmonious system such as Hegel believes that it forms. And if we cannot

prove this, we also cannot prove the unreality of space and time and matter

and evil, for this is deduced by Hegel from the fragmentary and relational

character of these things. Thus we are left to the piecemeal investigation of

the  world,  and  are  unable  to  know  the  characters  of  those  parts  of  the

universe that are remote from our experience. This result, disappointing as it

is to those whose hopes have been raised by the systems of philosophers, is in

harmony with the inductive and scientific temper of our age, and is borne out

by  the  whole  examination  of  human  knowledge  which  has  occupied  our

previous chapters.

  Most of the great ambitious attempts of metaphysicians have proceeded by

the attempt to prove that such and such apparent features of the actual world

were self-contradictory, and therefore could not be real. The whole tendency

of modern thought, however, is more and more in the direction of showingthat the supposed contradictions were illusory, and that very little can be

proved a priori from considerations of what must be. A good illustration of

this is afforded by space and time. Space and time appear to be infinite in

extent, and infinitely divisible. If we travel along a straight line in either

direction, it is difficult to believe that we shall finally reach a last point,

beyond  which  there  is  nothing,  not  even  empty  space.  Similarly,  if  in

imagination we travel backwards or forwards in time, it is difficult to believe

that we shall reach a first or last time, with not even empty time beyond it.

Thus space and time appear to be infinite in extent.

  Again, if we take any two points on a line, it seems evident that there must

be other points between them however small the distance between them may

be: every distance can be halved, and the halves can be halved again, and so

on ad infinitum. In time, similarly, however little time may elapse between

two moments, it seems evident that there will be other moments between

them. Thus space and time appear to be infinitely divisible. But as against

these apparent facts—infinite extent and infinite divisibility—philosophers

have advanced arguments tending to show that there could be no infinite

collections of things, and that therefore the number of points in space, or of

instants in time, must be finite. Thus a contradiction emerged between the

apparent nature of space and time and the supposed impossibility of infinite

collections.

Kant, who first emphasized this contradiction, deduced the impossibility of

space and time, which he declared to be merely subjective; and since his time

very  many  philosophers  have  believed  that  space  and  time  are  mere

appearance,  not  characteristic  of  the  world  as  it  really  is.  Now,  however,

owing to the labours of the mathematicians, notably Georg Cantor, it has

appeared that the impossibility of infinite collections was a mistake. They are

not  in  fact  self-contradictory,  but  only  contradictory  of  certain  rather

obstinate mental prejudices. Hence the reasons for regarding space and time

as  unreal  have  become  inoperative,  and  one  of  the  great  sources  of

metaphysical constructions is dried up.

The mathematicians, however, have not been content with showing that

space as it is commonly supposed to be is possible; they have shown also that

many other forms of space are equally possible, so far as logic can show.

Some of Euclid's axioms, which appear to common sense to be necessary,

and were formerly supposed to be necessary by philosophers, are now known

to derive their appearance of necessity from our mere familiarity with actualspace, and not from any a priori logical foundation. By imagining worlds in

which these axioms are false, the mathematicians have used logic to loosen

the  prejudices  of  common  sense,  and  to  show  the  possibility  of  spaces

differing—some more, some less—from that in which we live. And some of

these spaces differ so little from Euclidean space, where distances such as we

can measure are concerned, that it is impossible to discover by observation

whether our actual space is strictly Euclidean or of one of these other kinds.

Thus  the  position  is  completely  reversed.  Formerly  it  appeared  that

experience left only one kind of space to logic, and logic showed this one

kind to be impossible. Now, logic presents many kinds of space as possible

apart from experience, and experience only partially decides between them.

Thus, while our knowledge of what is has become less than it was formerly

supposed to be, our knowledge of what may be is enormously increased.

Instead of being shut in within narrow walls, of which every nook and cranny

could be explored, we find ourselves in an open world of free possibilities,

where much remains unknown because there is so much to know.

  What has happened in the case of space and time has happened, to some

extent, in other directions as well. The attempt to prescribe to the universe by

means of a priori principles has broken down; logic, instead of being, as

formerly,  the  bar  to  possibilities,  has  become  the  great  liberator  of  the

imagination,  presenting  innumerable  alternatives  which  are  closed  to

unreflective common sense, and leaving to experience the task of deciding,

where decision is possible, between the many worlds which logic offers for

our choice. Thus knowledge as to what exists becomes limited to what we

can learn from experience—not to what we can actually experience, for, as

we have seen, there is much knowledge by description concerning things of

which  we  have  no  direct  experience.  But  in  all  cases  of  knowledge  by

description, we need some connexion of universals, enabling us, from such

and such a datum, to infer an object of a certain sort as implied by our datum.

Thus in regard to physical objects, for example, the principle that sense-data

are signs of physical objects is itself a connexion of universals; and it is only

in virtue of this principle that experience enables us to acquire knowledge

concerning physical objects. The same applies to the law of causality, or, to

descend to what is less general, to such principles as the law of gravitation.

  Principles such as the law of gravitation are proved, or rather are rendered

highly probable, by a combination of experience with some wholly a priori

principle, such as the principle of induction. Thus our intuitive knowledge,which is the source of all our other knowledge of truths, is of two sorts: pure

empirical  knowledge,  which  tells  us  of  the  existence  and  some  of  the

properties  of  particular  things  with  which  we  are  acquainted,  and  pure a

priori  knowledge,  which  gives  us  connexions  between  universals,  and

enables us to draw inferences from the particular facts given in empirical

knowledge.  Our  derivative  knowledge  always  depends  upon  some  pure a

priori  knowledge  and  usually  also  depends  upon  some  pure  empirical

knowledge.

  Philosophical knowledge, if what has been said above is true, does not

differ  essentially  from  scientific  knowledge;  there  is  no  special  source  of

wisdom  which  is  open  to  philosophy  but  not  to  science,  and  the  results

obtained by philosophy are not radically different from those obtained from

science. The essential characteristic of philosophy, which makes it a study

distinct  from  science,  is  criticism.  It  examines  critically  the  principles

employed in science and in daily life; it searches out any inconsistencies there

may be in these principles, and it only accepts them when, as the result of a

critical  inquiry,  no  reason  for  rejecting  them  has  appeared.  If,  as  many

philosophers  have  believed,  the  principles  underlying  the  sciences  were

capable,  when  disengaged  from  irrelevant  detail,  of  giving  us  knowledge

concerning the universe as a whole, such knowledge would have the same

claim  on  our  belief  as  scientific  knowledge  has;  but  our  inquiry  has  not

revealed any such knowledge, and therefore, as regards the special doctrines

of the bolder metaphysicians, has had a mainly negative result. But as regards

what would be commonly accepted as knowledge, our result is in the main

positive: we have seldom found reason to reject such knowledge as the result

of our criticism, and we have seen no reason to suppose man incapable of the

kind of knowledge which he is generally believed to possess.

When, however, we speak of philosophy as a criticism of knowledge, it is

necessary  to  impose  a  certain  limitation.  If  we  adopt  the  attitude  of  the

complete  sceptic,  placing  ourselves  wholly  outside  all  knowledge,  and

asking, from this outside position, to be compelled to return within the circle

of knowledge, we are demanding what is impossible, and our scepticism can

never be refuted. For all refutation must begin with some piece of knowledge

which the disputants share; from blank doubt, no argument can begin. Hence

the criticism of knowledge which philosophy employs must not be of this

destructive  kind,  if  any  result  is  to  be  achieved.  Against  this  absolute

scepticism, no logical argument can be advanced. But it is not difficult to seethat scepticism of this kind is unreasonable. Descartes' 'methodical doubt',

with which modern philosophy began, is not of this kind, but is rather the

kind of criticism which we are asserting to be the essence of philosophy. His

'methodical  doubt'  consisted  in  doubting  whatever  seemed  doubtful;  in

pausing, with each apparent piece of knowledge, to ask himself whether, on

reflection, he could feel certain that he really knew it. This is the kind of

criticism which constitutes philosophy. Some knowledge, such as knowledge

of the existence of our sense-data, appears quite indubitable, however calmly

and thoroughly we reflect upon it. In regard to such knowledge, philosophical

criticism does not require that we should abstain from belief. But there are

beliefs—such,  for  example,  as  the  belief  that  physical  objects  exactly

resemble our sense-data—which are entertained until we begin to reflect, but

are  found  to  melt  away  when  subjected  to  a  close  inquiry.  Such  beliefs

philosophy will bid us reject, unless some new line of argument is found to

support  them.  But  to  reject  the  beliefs  which  do  not  appear  open  to  any

objections, however closely we examine them, is not reasonable, and is not

what philosophy advocates.

The  criticism  aimed  at,  in  a  word,  is  not  that  which,  without  reason,

determines  to  reject,  but  that  which  considers  each  piece  of  apparent

knowledge on its merits, and retains whatever still appears to be knowledge

when this consideration is completed. That some risk of error remains must

be admitted, since human beings are fallible. Philosophy may claim justly

that it diminishes the risk of error, and that in some cases it renders the risk so

small as to be practically negligible. To do more than this is not possible in a

world where mistakes must occur; and more than this no prudent advocate of

philosophy would claim to have performed.

  





 CHAPTER XV. THE VALUE OF PHILOSOPHY

  Having now come to the end of our brief and very incomplete review of

the problems of philosophy, it will be well to consider, in conclusion, what is

the  value  of  philosophy  and  why  it  ought  to  be  studied.  It  is  the  more

necessary to consider this question, in view of the fact that many men, under

the influence of science or of practical affairs, are inclined to doubt whether

philosophy is anything better than innocent but useless trifling, hair-splitting

distinctions,  and  controversies  on  matters  concerning  which  knowledge  is

impossible.

This view of philosophy appears to result, partly from a wrong conception

of the ends of life, partly from a wrong conception of the kind of goods

which philosophy strives to achieve. Physical science, through the medium of

inventions, is useful to innumerable people who are wholly ignorant of it;

thus  the  study  of  physical  science  is  to  be  recommended,  not  only,  or

primarily, because of the effect on the student, but rather because of the effect

on mankind in general. Thus utility does not belong to philosophy. If the

study  of  philosophy  has  any  value  at  all  for  others  than  students  of

philosophy, it must be only indirectly, through its effects upon the lives of

those who study it. It is in these effects, therefore, if anywhere, that the value

of philosophy must be primarily sought.

But further, if we are not to fail in our endeavour to determine the value of

philosophy, we must first free our minds from the prejudices of what are

wrongly called 'practical' men. The 'practical' man, as this word is often used,

is one who recognizes only material needs, who realizes that men must have

food for the body, but is oblivious of the necessity of providing food for the

mind. If all men were well off, if poverty and disease had been reduced to

their  lowest  possible  point,  there  would  still  remain  much  to  be  done  to

produce a valuable society; and even in the existing world the goods of the

mind are at least as important as the goods of the body. It is exclusively

among the goods of the mind that the value of philosophy is to be found; and

only those who are not indifferent to these goods can be persuaded that the

study of philosophy is not a waste of time.

  Philosophy,  like  all  other  studies,  aims  primarily  at  knowledge.  The

knowledge it aims at is the kind of knowledge which gives unity and system

to  the  body  of  the  sciences,  and  the  kind  which  results  from  a  critical

examination of the grounds of our convictions, prejudices, and beliefs. But itcannot  be  maintained  that  philosophy  has  had  any  very  great  measure  of

success in its attempts to provide definite answers to its questions. If you ask

a mathematician, a mineralogist, a historian, or any other man of learning,

what definite body of truths has been ascertained by his science, his answer

will last as long as you are willing to listen. But if you put the same question

to a philosopher, he will, if he is candid, have to confess that his study has not

achieved positive results such as have been achieved by other sciences. It is

true  that  this  is  partly  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that,  as  soon  as  definite

knowledge concerning any subject becomes possible, this subject ceases to be

called philosophy, and becomes a separate science. The whole study of the

heavens, which now belongs to astronomy, was once included in philosophy;

Newton's  great  work  was  called  'the  mathematical  principles  of  natural

philosophy'. Similarly, the study of the human mind, which was a part of

philosophy, has now been separated from philosophy and has become the

science of psychology. Thus, to a great extent, the uncertainty of philosophy

is  more  apparent  than  real:  those  questions  which  are  already  capable  of

definite answers are placed in the sciences, while those only to which, at

present, no definite answer can be given, remain to form the residue which is

called philosophy.

This is, however, only a part of the truth concerning the uncertainty of

philosophy. There are many questions—and among them those that are of the

profoundest interest to our spiritual life—which, so far as we can see, must

remain insoluble to the human intellect unless its powers become of quite a

different order from what they are now. Has the universe any unity of plan or

purpose,  or  is  it  a  fortuitous  concourse  of  atoms?  Is  consciousness  a

permanent part of the universe, giving hope of indefinite growth in wisdom,

or is it a transitory accident on a small planet on which life must ultimately

become impossible? Are good and evil of importance to the universe or only

to man? Such questions are asked by philosophy, and variously answered by

various philosophers. But it would seem that, whether answers be otherwise

discoverable or not, the answers suggested by philosophy are none of them

demonstrably true. Yet, however slight may be the hope of discovering an

answer, it is part of the business of philosophy to continue the consideration

of such questions, to make us aware of their importance, to examine all the

approaches to them, and to keep alive that speculative interest in the universe

which is apt to be killed by confining ourselves to definitely ascertainable

knowledge.  Many philosophers, it is true, have held that philosophy could establish the

truth of certain answers to such fundamental questions. They have supposed

that what is of most importance in religious beliefs could be proved by strict

demonstration to be true. In order to judge of such attempts, it is necessary to

take a survey of human knowledge, and to form an opinion as to its methods

and  its  limitations.  On  such  a  subject  it  would  be  unwise  to  pronounce

dogmatically; but if the investigations of our previous chapters have not led

us  astray,  we  shall  be  compelled  to  renounce  the  hope  of  finding

philosophical proofs of religious beliefs. We cannot, therefore, include as part

of the value of philosophy any definite set of answers to such questions.

Hence,  once  more,  the  value  of  philosophy  must  not  depend  upon  any

supposed body of definitely ascertainable knowledge to be acquired by those

who study it.

The  value  of  philosophy  is,  in  fact,  to  be  sought  largely  in  its  very

uncertainty. The man who has no tincture of philosophy goes through life

imprisoned in the prejudices derived from common sense, from the habitual

beliefs of his age or his nation, and from convictions which have grown up in

his mind without the co-operation or consent of his deliberate reason. To such

a man the world tends to become definite, finite, obvious; common objects

rouse no questions, and unfamiliar possibilities are contemptuously rejected.

As soon as we begin to philosophize, on the contrary, we find, as we saw in

our opening chapters, that even the most everyday things lead to problems to

which only very incomplete answers can be given. Philosophy, though unable

to tell us with certainty what is the true answer to the doubts which it raises,

is able to suggest many possibilities which enlarge our thoughts and free

them from the tyranny of custom. Thus, while diminishing our feeling of

certainty as to what things are, it greatly increases our knowledge as to what

they may be; it removes the somewhat arrogant dogmatism of those who

have never travelled into the region of liberating doubt, and it keeps alive our

sense of wonder by showing familiar things in an unfamiliar aspect.

  Apart from its utility in showing unsuspected possibilities, philosophy has

a value—perhaps its chief value—through the greatness of the objects which

it contemplates, and the freedom from narrow and personal aims resulting

from this contemplation. The life of the instinctive man is shut up within the

circle of his private interests: family and friends may be included, but the

outer  world  is  not  regarded  except  as  it  may  help  or  hinder  what  comes

within  the  circle  of  instinctive  wishes.  In  such  a  life  there  is  somethingfeverish and confined, in comparison with which the philosophic life is calm

and free. The private world of instinctive interests is a small one, set in the

midst of a great and powerful world which must, sooner or later, lay our

private world in ruins. Unless we can so enlarge our interests as to include the

whole  outer  world,  we  remain  like  a  garrison  in  a  beleagured  fortress,

knowing  that  the  enemy  prevents  escape  and  that  ultimate  surrender  is

inevitable. In such a life there is no peace, but a constant strife between the

insistence of desire and the powerlessness of will. In one way or another, if

our life is to be great and free, we must escape this prison and this strife.

One  way  of  escape  is  by  philosophic  contemplation.  Philosophic

contemplation does not, in its widest survey, divide the universe into two

hostile camps—friends and foes, helpful and hostile, good and bad—it views

the whole impartially. Philosophic contemplation, when it is unalloyed, does

not aim at proving that the rest of the universe is akin to man. All acquisition

of  knowledge  is  an  enlargement  of  the  Self,  but  this  enlargement  is  best

attained when it is not directly sought. It is obtained when the desire for

knowledge is alone operative, by a study which does not wish in advance that

its  objects  should  have  this  or  that  character,  but  adapts  the  Self  to  the

characters  which  it  finds  in  its  objects.  This  enlargement  of  Self  is  not

obtained when, taking the Self as it is, we try to show that the world is so

similar to this Self that knowledge of it is possible without any admission of

what seems alien. The desire to prove this is a form of self-assertion and, like

all self-assertion, it is an obstacle to the growth of Self which it desires, and

of  which  the  Self  knows  that  it  is  capable.  Self-assertion,  in  philosophic

speculation as elsewhere, views the world as a means to its own ends; thus it

makes the world of less account than Self, and the Self sets bounds to the

greatness of its goods. In contemplation, on the contrary, we start from the

not-Self,  and  through  its  greatness  the  boundaries  of  Self  are  enlarged;

through the infinity of the universe the mind which contemplates it achieves

some share in infinity.

For  this  reason  greatness  of  soul  is  not  fostered  by  those  philosophies

which assimilate the universe to Man. Knowledge is a form of union of Self

and not-Self; like all union, it is impaired by dominion, and therefore by any

attempt to force the universe into conformity with what we find in ourselves.

There is a widespread philosophical tendency towards the view which tells us

that Man is the measure of all things, that truth is man-made, that space and

time and the world of universals are properties of the mind, and that, if therebe anything not created by the mind, it is unknowable and of no account for

us.  This  view,  if  our  previous  discussions  were  correct,  is  untrue;  but  in

addition  to  being  untrue,  it  has  the  effect  of  robbing  philosophic

contemplation of all that gives it value, since it fetters contemplation to Self.

What  it  calls  knowledge  is  not  a  union  with  the  not-Self,  but  a  set  of

prejudices, habits, and desires, making an impenetrable veil between us and

the world beyond. The man who finds pleasure in such a theory of knowledge

is like the man who never leaves the domestic circle for fear his word might

not be law.

The true philosophic contemplation, on the contrary, finds its satisfaction

in every enlargement of the not-Self, in everything that magnifies the objects

contemplated,  and  thereby  the  subject  contemplating.  Everything,  in

contemplation, that is personal or private, everything that depends upon habit,

self-interest, or desire, distorts the object, and hence impairs the union which

the intellect seeks. By thus making a barrier between subject and object, such

personal and private things become a prison to the intellect. The free intellect

will see as God might see, without a here and now, without hopes and fears,

without the trammels of customary beliefs and traditional prejudices, calmly,

dispassionately, in the sole and exclusive desire of knowledge—knowledge

as impersonal, as purely contemplative, as it is possible for man to attain.

Hence  also  the  free  intellect  will  value  more  the  abstract  and  universal

knowledge into which the accidents of private history do not enter, than the

knowledge brought by the senses, and dependent, as such knowledge must

be, upon an exclusive and personal point of view and a body whose sense-

organs distort as much as they reveal.

The mind which has become accustomed to the freedom and impartiality

of philosophic contemplation will preserve something of the same freedom

and impartiality in the world of action and emotion. It will view its purposes

and desires as parts of the whole, with the absence of insistence that results

from seeing them as infinitesimal fragments in a world of which all the rest is

unaffected by any one man's deeds. The impartiality which, in contemplation,

is the unalloyed desire for truth, is the very same quality of mind which, in

action, is justice, and in emotion is that universal love which can be given to

all,  and  not  only  to  those  who  are  judged  useful  or  admirable.  Thus

contemplation  enlarges  not  only  the  objects  of  our  thoughts,  but  also  the

objects of our actions and our affections: it makes us citizens of the universe,

not only of one walled city at war with all the rest. In this citizenship of theuniverse consists man's true freedom, and his liberation from the thraldom of

narrow hopes and fears.

  Thus, to sum up our discussion of the value of philosophy; Philosophy is to

be studied, not for the sake of any definite answers to its questions, since no

definite answers can, as a rule, be known to be true, but rather for the sake of

the questions themselves; because these questions enlarge our conception of

what  is  possible,  enrich  our  intellectual  imagination  and  diminish  the

dogmatic assurance which closes the mind against speculation; but above all

because,  through  the  greatness  of  the  universe  which  philosophy

contemplates, the mind also is rendered great, and becomes capable of that

union with the universe which constitutes its highest good.

   

 


                              Philosophical Essays

                                       Contents

 

    PREFACE TO THE 1966 EDITION

    PREFACE TO ORIGINAL EDITION

    1 THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

    2 ON HISTORY

    3 SCIENCE AND HYPOTHESIS

    4 PRAGMATISM

    5 WILLIAM JAMES’S CONCEPTION OF TRUTH

    6 THE MONISTIC THEORY OF TRUTH

    7 ON THE NATURE OF TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD

                     PREFACE TO THE 1966 EDITION

  The volume to which this is a preface is essentially a reprint of a book,

  with  the  same  title,  published  in  1910.  However,  two  essays  in  that

  volume,  namely  ‘The  Free  Man’s  Worship’  and  ‘The  Study  of

  Mathematics’, were reprinted in ‘Mysticism and Logic’ and are therefore

  not included in the present volume. They are replaced by an article on

  history and one on Poincaré’s ‘Science and Hypothesis’.

  I have not attempted to make such emendations in the texts reprinted in

  this volume as might be called for by changes in my opinions during the

  intervening fifty-five years. The chief change is that I no longer believe in

  objective ethical values as I did when (following Moore) I wrote the first

  essay in the present volume.                    PREFACE TO ORIGINAL EDITION

  The following essays, with the exception of the last, are reprints, with

  some alterations, of articles which have appeared in various periodicals.

  The first three essays are concerned with ethical subjects, while the last

  four are concerned with the nature of truth. I include among the ethical

  essays  the  one  on  ‘The  Study  of  Mathematics’,  because  this  essay  is

  concerned rather with the value of mathematics than with an attempt to

  state what mathematics is. Of the four essays which are concerned with

  Truth, two deal with Pragmatism, whose chief novelty is a new definition

  of  ‘truth’.  One  deals  with  the  conception  of  truth  advocated  by  those

  philosophers  who  are  more  or  less  affiliated  to  Hegel,  while  the  last

  endeavours to set forth briefly, without technicalities, the view of truth

  which commends itself to the author. All the essays, with the possible

  exception of the one on ‘The Monistic Theory of Truth’, are designed to

  appeal to those who take an interest in philosophical questions without

  having had a professional training in philosophy.

  I have to thank the editor of The New Quarterly for permission to reprint

  ‘The Study of Mathematics’ and Sections I, II, III, V and VI of the essay

  on ‘The Elements of Ethics’, and for Section IV I have to thank the editor

  of the Hibbert Journal. My acknowledgments are also due to the editors of

  The Independent Review, The Edinburgh Review, The Albany Review, and

  the Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, for permission to reprint the

  essays  II,  IV,  V  and  VI  respectively.  In  the  sixth  essay  as  originally

  printed, there was a third section, which is now replaced by the seventh

  essay.

  Oxford 

  July 1910

    Postscript.—The  death  of  William  James,  which  occurred  when  the

  printing of this book was already far advanced, makes me wish to express,

  what in the course of controversial writings does not adequately appear,

  the profound respect and personal esteem which I felt for him, as did all

  who  knew  him,  and  my  deep  sense  of  the  public  and  private  loss

  occasioned  by  his  death.  For  readers  trained  in  philosophy,  no  such

  assurance  was  required;  but  for  those  unaccustomed  to  the  tone  of  a

  subject in which agreement is necessarily rarer than esteem, it seemed

  desirable to record what to others would be a matter of course.

  October 1910  Philosophical Essays                                              1

                      THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

  THE SUBJECT-MATTER OF ETHICS

  The  study  of  Ethics  is  perhaps  most  commonly  conceived  as  being

  concerned  with  the  questions  ‘What  sort  of  actions  ought  men  to

  perform?’ and ‘What sort of actions ought men to avoid?’ It is conceived,

  that is to say, as dealing with human conduct, and as deciding what is

  virtuous and what vicious among the kinds of conduct between which, in

  practice,  people  are  called  upon  to  choose.  Owing  to  this  view  of  the

  province  of  ethics,  it  is  sometimes  regarded  as the  practical  study,  to

  which all others may be opposed as theoretical; the good and the true are

  sometimes spoken of as independent kingdoms, the former belonging to

  ethics, while the latter belongs to the sciences.

  This view, however, is doubly defective. In the first place, it overlooks the

  fact  that  the  object  of  ethics,  by  its  own  account,  is  to  discover  true

  propositions about virtuous and vicious conduct, and that these are just as

  much  a  part  of  truth  as  true  propositions  about  oxygen  or  the

    multiplication  table.  The  aim is,  not  practice,  but  propositions  about

  practice; and propositions about practice are not themselves practical, any

  more  than  propositions  about  gases  are  gaseous.  One  might  as  well

  maintain that botany is vegetable or zoology animal. Thus the study of

  ethics is not something outside science and co-ordinate with it: it is merely

  one among sciences.

  In the second place, the view in question unduly limits the province of

  ethics.  When  we  are  told  that  actions  of  certain  kinds  ought  to  be

  performed or avoided, as, for example, that we ought to speak the truth, or

  that we ought not to steal, we may always legitimately ask for a reason,

  and  this  reason  will  always  be  concerned,  not  only  with  the  actions

  themselves, but also with the goodness or badness of the consequences

  likely to follow from such actions. We shall be told that truth-speaking

  generates mutual confidence, cements friendships, facilitates the dispatch

  of business, and hence increases the wealth of the society which practises

  it,  and  so  on.  If  we  ask  why  we  should  aim  at  increasing  mutual

  confidence, or cementing friendships, we may be told that obviously these

  things are good, or that they lead to happiness, and happiness is good. If

  we still ask why, the plain man will probably feel irritation, and will reply  that he does not know. His irritation is due to the conflict of two feelings

  —the one, that whatever is true must have a reason; the other, that the

  reason he has already given is so obvious that it is merely contentious to

  demand a reason for the reason. In the second of these feelings he may be

  right; in the first, he is certainly wrong. In ordinary life, people only ask

  why when they are unconvinced. If a reason is given which they do not

  doubt, they are satisfied. Hence, when they do ask why, they usually have

  a logical right to expect an answer, and they come to think that a belief for

  which no reason can be given is an unreasonable belief. But in this they

  are mistaken, as they would soon discover if their habit of asking why

  were more persistent.

  It is the business of the philosopher to ask for reasons as long as reasons

  can legitimately be demanded, and to register the propositions which give

  the most ultimate reasons that are attainable. Since a proposition can only

  be  proved  by  means  of  other  propositions,  it  is  obvious  that  not  all

  propositions  can  be  proved,  for  proofs  can  only  begin  by  assuming

  something. And since the consequences have no more certainty than their

  premisses, the things that are proved are no more certain than the things

  that are accepted merely because they are obvious, and are then made the

  basis of our proofs. Thus in the case of ethics, we must ask why such and

  such actions ought to be performed, and continue our backward inquiry for

  reasons  until  we  reach  the  kind  of  proposition  of  which  proof  is

  impossible,  because  it  is  so  simple  or  so  obvious  that  nothing  more

  fundamental can be found from which to deduce it.

  Now when we ask for the reasons in favour of the actions which moralists

  recommend,  these  reasons  are,  usually,  that  the  consequences  of  the

  actions  are  likely  to  be good,  or  if  not  wholly  good,  at  least  the  best

  possible  under  the  circumstances.  Hence  all  questions  of  conduct

  presuppose the decision as to what things other than conduct are good and

  what bad. What is called good conduct is conduct which is a means to

  other things which are good on their own account; and hence the study of

  what is good on its own account is necessary before we can decide upon

  rules of conduct. And the study of what is good or bad on its own account

  must be included in ethics, which thus ceases to be concerned only with

  human conduct.

  The first step in ethics, therefore, is to be quite clear as to what we mean

  by good and bad. Only then can we return to conduct, and ask how right  conduct is related to the production of goods and the avoidance of evils. In

  this,  as  in  all  philosophical  inquiries,  after  a  preliminary  analysis  of

  complex data we proceed again to build up complex things from their

  simpler constituents, starting from ideas which we understand though we

  cannot define them, and from premisses which we know though we cannot

  prove them. The appearance of dogmatism in this procedure is deceptive,

  for the premisses are such as ordinary reasoning unconsciously assumes,

  and there is less real dogmatism in believing them after a critical scrutiny

  than in employing them implicitly without examination.  II. THE MEANING OF GOOD AND BAD

  Good and Bad, in the sense in which the words are here intended (which

  is,  I  believe,  their  usual  sense),  are  ideas  which  everybody,  or  almost

  everybody, possesses. These ideas are apparently among those which form

  the simplest constituents of our more complex ideas, and are therefore

  incapable of being analysed or built up out of other simpler ideas. When

  people ask ‘What do you mean by “good”?’ the answer must consist, not

  in a verbal definition such as could be given if one were asked ‘What do

  you mean by “pentagon”?’ but in such a characterization as shall call up

  the appropriate idea to the mind of the questioner. This characterization

  may, and probably will, itself contain the idea of good, which would be a

  fault  in  a  definition,  but  is  harmless  when  our  purpose  is  merely  to

  stimulate the imagination to the production of the idea which is intended.

  It is in this way that children are taught the names of colours: they are

  shown (say) a red book, and told that that is red; and for fear they should

  think ‘red’ means ‘book’, they are shown also a red flower, a red ball, and

  so on, and told that these are all red. Thus the idea of redness is conveyed

  to their minds, although it is quite impossible to analyse redness or to find

  constituents which compose it.

  In the case of ‘good’, the process is more difficult, both because goodness

  is  not  perceived  by  the  senses,  like  redness,  and  because  there  is  less

  agreement as to the things that are good than as to the things that are red.

  This is perhaps one reason that has led people to think that the notion of

  good could be analysed into some other notion, such as pleasure or object

  of  desire.  A  second  reason,  probably  more  potent,  is  the  common

  confusion that makes people think they cannot understand an idea unless

  they can define it—forgetting that ideas are defined by other ideas, which

  must be already understood if the definition is to convey any meaning.

  When  people  begin  to  philosophize,  they  seem  to  make  a  point  of

  forgetting everything familiar and ordinary; otherwise their acquaintance

  with redness or any other colour might show them how an idea can be

  intelligible where definition, in the sense of analysis, is impossible.

  To explain what we mean by Good and Bad, we may say that a thing is

  good when on its own account it ought to exist, and bad when on its own

  account it ought not to exist. If it seems to be in our power to cause a thing

  to exist or not to exist, we ought to try to make it exist if it is good, and not

  exist if it is bad. When a thing is good, it is fitting that we should feel  pleasure in its existence; when it is bad, it is fitting that we should feel

  pain in its existence. But all such characterizations really presuppose the

  notions of good and bad, and are therefore useful only as means of calling

  up the right ideas, not as logical definitions.

  It might be thought that ‘good’ could be defined as the quality of whatever

  we ought to try to produce. This would merely put ought in the place of

  good as our ultimate undefined notion; but as a matter of fact the good is

  much wider than what we ought to try to produce. There is no reason to

  doubt that some of the lost tragedies of Aeschylus were good, but we

  ought not to try to re-write them, because we should certainly fail. What

  we  ought  to  do,  in  fact,  is  limited  by  our  powers  and  opportunities,

  whereas the good is subject to no such limitation. And our knowledge of

  goods is confined to the things we have experienced or can imagine; but

  presumably  there  are  many  goods  of  which  we  human  beings  have

  absolutely  no  knowledge,  because  they  do  not  come  within  the  very

  restricted range of our thoughts and feelings. Such goods are still goods,

  although human conduct can have no reference to them. Thus the notion

  of good is wider and more fundamental than any notion concerned with

  conduct; we use the notion of good in explaining what right conduct is, but

  we do not use the notion of right conduct in explaining what good is.

  A fairly plausible view is that ‘good’ means the same as ‘desired’, so that

  when we say a thing is good we mean that it is desired. Thus anything is

  good which we either hope to acquire or fear to lose. Yet it is commonly

  admitted that there are bad desires; and when people speak of bad desires,

  they seem to mean desires for what is bad. For example, when one man

  desires another man’s pain, it is obvious that what is desired is not good

  but bad. But the supporter of the view that ‘good’ means ‘desired’ will say

  that  nothing  is  good  or  bad  in  itself,  but  is  good  for  one  person  and

  perhaps bad for another. This must happen, he will say, in every case of a

  conflict of desires; if I desire your suffering, then your suffering is good

  for me, though it is bad for you. But the sense of good and bad which is

  needed in ethics is not in this way personal; and it is quite essential, in the

  study of ethics, to realize that there is an impersonal sense. In this sense,

  when a thing is good, it ought to exist on its own account, not on account

  of  its  consequences,  nor  yet  of  who  is  going  to  enjoy  it.  We  cannot

  maintain that for me a thing ought to exist on its own account, while for

  you it ought not; that would merely mean that one of us is mistaken, since  in fact everything either ought to exist or ought not. Thus the fact that one

  man’s desire may be another man’s aversion proves that ‘good’, in the

  sense  relevant  to  ethics,  does  not  mean  the  same  as  ‘desired’,  since

  everything is in itself either good or not good, and cannot be at once good

  for me and bad for you. This could only mean that its effects on me were

  good, and on you bad; but here good and bad are again impersonal.

  There is another line of argument, more subtle but more instructive, by

  which we can refute those who say that ‘good’ means ‘desired’, or who

  propose any other idea, such as pleasure, as the actual meaning of ‘good’.

  This line of argument will not prove that the things that are good are not

  the same as the things that are desired; but it will prove that, if this were

  the case, it could not be proved by appealing to the meaning of the word

  ‘good’. So far, it might be thought that such an argument could only have

  a  purely  logical  importance.  But  in  fact  this  is  not  so.  Many  ethical

  theories have been based upon the contention that ‘good’ means so-and-

  so, and people have accepted consequences of this contention which, if

  they had relied upon inspection untrammelled by false theory, they would

  almost  certainly  have  rejected.  Whoever  believes  that  ‘good’  means

  ‘desired’ will try to explain away the cases where it seems as if what is

  desired is bad; but if he no longer holds this theory, he will be able to

  allow free play to his unbiased ethical perceptions, and will thus escape

  errors into which he would otherwise have fallen.

  The argument in question is this: If anyone affirms that the good is the

  desired, we consider what he says, and either assent or dissent; but in any

  case our assent or dissent is decided by considering what the good and the

  desired really are. When, on the contrary, someone gives a definition of

  the meaning of a word, our state of mind is quite different. If we are told

  ‘a pentagon is a figure which has five sides’, we do not consider what we

  know about pentagons, and then agree or disagree; we accept this as the

  meaning of the word, and we know that we are getting information, not

  about pentagons, but merely about the word ‘pentagon’. What we are told

  is the sort of thing that we expect dictionaries to tell us. But when we are

  told that the good is the desired, we feel at once that we are being told

  something  of  philosophical  importance,  something  which  has  ethical

  consequences,  something  which  it  is  quite  beyond  the  scope  of  a

  dictionary to tell us. The reason of this is, that we already know what we

  mean by the good, and what we mean by the desired; and if these two  meanings always applied to the same objects, that would not be a verbal

  definition, but an important truth. The analogue of such a proposition is

  not the above definition of a pentagon, but rather: ‘A pentagon (defined as

  above) is a figure which has five angles.’ Whenever a proposed definition

  sets us thinking whether it is true in fact, and not whether that is how the

  word is used, there is reason to suspect that we are not dealing with a

  definition,  but  with  a  significant  proposition,  in  which  the  word

  professedly defined has a meaning already known to us, either as simple

  or as defined in some other way. By applying this test, we shall easily

  convince ourselves that all hitherto suggested definitions of the good are

  significant,  not  merely  verbal,  propositions;  and  that  therefore,  though

  they may be true in fact, they do not give the meaning of the word ‘good’.

  The importance of this result is that so many ethical theories depend upon

  the denial of it. Some have contended that ‘good’ means ‘desired’, others

  that ‘good’ means ‘pleasure’, others again that it means ‘conformity to

  Nature’ or ‘obedience to the will of God’. The mere fact that so many

  different  and  incompatible  definitions  have  been  proposed  is  evidence

  against any of them being really definitions; there have never been two

  incompatible definitions of the word ‘pentagon’. None of the above are

  really definitions; they are all to be understood as substantial affirmations

  concerning  the  things  that  are  good.  All  of  them  are,  in  my  opinion,

  mistaken in fact as well as in form, but I shall not here undertake to refute

  them severally.

  It is important to realize that when we say a thing is good in itself, and not

  merely as a means, we attribute to the thing a property which it either has

  or does not have, quite independently of our opinion on the subject, or of

  our wishes or other people’s. Most men are inclined to agree with Hamlet:

  ‘There is nothing good or bad but thinking makes it so.’ It is supposed that

  ethical preferences are a mere matter of taste, and that if X thinks A is a

  good thing, and Y thinks it is a bad thing, all we can say is that A is good

  for X and bad for Y. This view is rendered plausible by the divergence of

  opinion  as  to  what  is  good  and  bad,  and  by  the  difficulty  of  finding

  arguments to persuade people who differ from us in such a question. But

  the difficulty in discovering the truth does not prove that there is no truth

  to be discovered. If X says A is good, and Y says A is bad, one of them

  must be mistaken, though it may be impossible to discover which. If this

  were not the case, there would be no difference of opinion between them.  If, in asserting that A is good, X meant merely to assert that A had a

  certain relation to himself, say of pleasing his taste in some way; and if Y,

  in saying that A is not good, meant merely to deny that A had a like

  relation  to  himself:  then  there  would  be  no  subject  of  debate  between

  them. It would be absurd, if X said ‘I am eating a pigeon-pie’, for Y to

  answer ‘that is false: I am eating nothing’. But this is no more absurd than

  a dispute as to what is good, if, when we say A is good, we mean merely

  to affirm a relation of A to ourselves. When Christians assert that God is

  good,  they  do  not  mean  merely  that  the  contemplation  of  God  rouses

  certain emotions in them: they may admit that this contemplation rouses

  no such emotion in the devils who believe and tremble, but the absence of

  such emotions is one of the things that make devils bad. As a matter of

  fact, we consider some tastes better than others: we do not hold merely

  that some tastes are ours and other tastes are other people’s. We do not

  even always consider our own tastes the best: we may prefer bridge to

  poetry, but think it better to prefer poetry to bridge. And when Christians

  affirm that a world created by a good God must be a good world, they do

  not mean that it must be to their taste, for often it is by no means to their

  taste, but they use its goodness to argue that it ought to be to their taste.

  And they do not mean merely that it is to God’s taste: for that would have

  been equally the case if God had not been good. Thus, good and bad are

  qualities which belong to objects independently of our opinions, just as

  much as round and square do; and when two people differ as to whether a

  thing is good, only one of them can be right, though it may be very hard to

  know which is right.

  One very important consequence of the indefinability of ‘good’ must be

  emphasized, namely, the fact that knowledge as to what things exist, have

  existed, or will exist, can throw absolutely no light upon the question as to

  what things are good. There might, as far as mere logic goes, be some

  general proposition to the effect ‘whatever exists, is good’, or ‘whatever

  exists,  is  bad’,  or  ‘what  will  exist  is  better  (or  worse)  than  what  does

  exist’. But no such general proposition can be proved by considering the

  meaning  of  ‘good’,  and  no  such  general  proposition  can  be  arrived  at

  empirically from experience, since we do not know the whole of what

  does exist, nor yet of what has existed or will exist. We cannot therefore

  arrive  at  such  a  general  proposition,  unless  it  is  itself  self-evident,  or

  follows from some self-evident proposition, which must (to warrant the  consequence) be of the same general kind. But as a matter of fact, there is,

  so far as I can discover, no self-evident proposition as to the goodness or

  badness of all that exists or has existed or will exist. It follows that, from

  the fact that the existent world is of such and such a nature, nothing can be

  inferred as to what things are good or bad.

  The belief that the world is wholly good has, nevertheless, been widely

  held. It has been held either because, as a part of revealed religion, the

  world  has  been  supposed  created  by  a  good  and  omnipotent  God,  or

  because, on metaphysical grounds, it was thought possible to prove that

  the sum-total of existent things must be good. With the former line of

  argument we are not here concerned; the latter must be briefly dealt with.

  The belief that, without assuming any ethical premiss, we can prove that

  the  world  is  good,  or  indeed  any  other  result containing the notion of

  good, logically involves the belief that the notion of good is complex and

  capable of definition. If when we say that a thing is good we mean (for

  example) that it has three other simpler properties, then, by proving that a

  thing has those three properties we prove that it is good, and thus we get a

  conclusion involving the notion of good, although our premisses did not

  involve  it.  But  if  good  is  a  simple  notion,  no  such  inference  will  be

  possible; unless our premisses contain the notion of good, our conclusion

  cannot  contain  it.  The  case  is  analogous  to  the  case  of  elements  and

  compounds in chemistry. By combining elements or compounds we can

  get  a  new  compound,  but  no  chemical  operation  will  give  an  element

  which  was  not  present  in  the  beginning.  So,  if  good  is  simple,  no

  propositions not containing this notion can have consequences which do

  contain it.

  As a matter of fact, those who have endeavoured to prove that the world as

  a whole is good have usually adopted the view that all evil consists wholly

  in the absence of something and that nothing positive is evil. This they

  have usually supported by defining ‘good’ as meaning the same as ‘real’.

  Spinoza says: ‘By reality and perfection I mean the same thing’; and hence

  it follows, with much less trouble than metaphysicians have usually taken

  in the proof, that the real is perfect. This is the view in ‘Abt Vogler’: ‘The

  evil is null, is nought, is silence implying sound.’

  Whenever it is said that all evil is limitation, the same doctrine is involved;

  what is meant is that evil never consists in the existence of something

  which  can  be  called  bad,  but  only  in  the  non-existence  of  something.  Hence  everything  that  does  exist  must  be  good,  and  the  sum-total  of

  existence, since it exists most, must be the best of all. And this view is set

  forth as resulting from the meaning of ‘evil’.

  The notion that non-existence is what is meant by ‘evil’ is refuted exactly

  as the previous definitions of ‘good’ were refuted. And the belief that, as a

  matter  of  fact,  nothing  that  exists  is  evil, is  one  which  no  one  would

  advocate except a metaphysician defending a theory. Pain and hatred and

  envy  and  cruelty  are  surely  things  that  exist,  and  are  not  merely  the

  absence  of  their  opposites;  but  the  theory  should  hold  that  they  are

    indistinguishable from the blank unconsciousness of an oyster. Indeed, it

  would seem that this whole theory has been advanced solely because of

  the  unconscious  bias  in  favour  of  optimism,  and  that  its  opposite  is

  logically just as tenable. We might urge that evil consists in existence, and

  good  in  non-existence;  that  therefore  the  sum-total  of  existence  is  the

  worst  thing  there  is,  and  that  only  non-existence  is  good.  Indeed,

  Buddhism does seem to maintain some such view. It is plain that this view

  is false; but logically it is no more absurd than its opposite.

  We cannot, then, infer any results as to what is good or bad from a study

  of the things that exist. This conclusion needs chiefly, at the present time,

  to  be  applied  against  evolutionary  ethics.  The  phrase  ‘survival  of  the

  fittest’ seems to have given rise to the belief that those who survive are the

  fittest  in  some  ethical  sense,  and  that  the  course  of  evolution  gives

  evidence  that  the  later  type  is  better  than  the  earlier.  On  this  basis,  a

  worship  of  force  is  easily  set  up,  and  the  mitigation  of  struggle  by

  civilization comes to be deprecated. It is thought that what fights most

  successfully is most admirable, and that what does not help in fighting is

  worthless.  Such  a  view  is  wholly  destitute  of  logical  foundation.  The

  course of nature, as we have seen, is irrelevant in deciding as to what is

  good or bad. A priori, it would be as probable that evolution should go

  from bad to worse, as that it should go from good to better. What makes

  the view plausible is the fact that the lower animals existed earlier than the

  higher, and that among men the civilized races are able to defeat and often

  exterminate the uncivilized. But here the ethical preference of the higher

  to the lower animals, and of the exterminators to the exterminated, is not

  based  upon  evolution,  but  exists  independently,  and  unconsciously

  intrudes into our judgment of the evolutionary process. If evolutionary

  ethics were sound, we ought to be entirely indifferent as to what the course  of evolution may be, since whatever it is is thereby proved to be the best.

  Yet if it should turn out that the Negro or the Chinaman was able to oust

  the European, we should cease to have any admiration of evolution; for as

  a matter of fact our preference of the European to the Negro is wholly

  independent of the European’s greater prowess with the Maxim gun.

  Broadly, the fact that a thing is unavoidable affords no evidence that it is

  not an evil; and the fact that a thing is impossible affords no evidence that

  it  is  not  a  good.  It  is  doubtless  foolish,  in  practice,  to  fret  over  the

  inevitable; but it is false, in theory, to let the actual world dictate our

  standard of good and evil. It is evident that among the things that exist

  some are good, some bad, and that we know too little of the universe to

  have  any  right  to  an  opinion  as  to  whether  the  good  or  the  bad

  preponderates, or as to whether either is likely in the future to gain on the

  other.  Optimism  and  pessimism  alike  are  general  theories  as  to  the

  universe which there is no reason whatever for accepting; what we know

  of the world tends to suggest that the good and the evil are fairly balanced,

  but it is of course possible that what we do not know is very much better

  or  very  much  worse  than  what  we  do  know.  Complete  suspense  of

  judgment in this matter is therefore the only rational attitude.

  III. RIGHT AND WRONG

  The ideas of right and wrong conduct are, as we have seen, those with

  which  ethics  is  generally  supposed  to  be  most  concerned.  This  view,

  which is unduly narrow, is fostered by the use of the one word ‘good’,

  both for the sort of conduct which is right, and for the sort of things which

  ought to exist on account of their intrinsic value. This double use of the

  word ‘good’ is very confusing, and tends greatly to obscure the distinction

  of ends and means. I shall therefore speak of right actions, not of good

  actions, confining the word ‘good’ to the sense explained in Section II.

  The  word  ‘right’  is  very  ambiguous,  and  it  is  by  no  means  easy  to

  distinguish the various meanings which it has in common parlance. Owing

  to  the  variety  of  these  meanings,  adherence  to  any  one  necessarily

  involves  us  in  apparent  paradoxes  when  we  use  it  in  a  context  which

  suggests one of the other meanings. This is the usual result of precision of

  language; but so long as the paradoxes are merely verbal, they do not give

  rise to more than verbal objections.

  In judging of conduct we find at the outset two widely divergent methods,

  of which one is advocated by some moralists, the other by others, while  both  are  practised  by  those  who  have  no  ethical  theory.  One  of  these

  methods, which is that advocated by utilitarians, judges the rightness of an

  act by relation to the goodness or badness of its consequences. The other

  method, advocated by intuitionists, judges by the approval or disapproval

  of the moral sense or conscience. I believe that it is necessary to combine

  both theories in order to get a complete account of right and wrong. There

  is, I think, one sense in which a man does right when he does what will

  probably have the best consequences, and another in which he does right

  when  he  follows  the  dictates  of  his  conscience,  whatever  the  probable

  consequences may be. (There are many other senses which we may give to

  the word ‘right’, but these two seem to be the most important.) Let us

  begin by considering the second of these senses.

  The  question  we  have  to  ask  ourselves  is:  What  do  we  mean  by  the

  dictates of the moral sense? If these are to afford a definition of right

  conduct, we cannot say that they consist in judging that such and such acts

  are right, for that would make our definition circular. We shall have to say

  that the moral sense consists in a certain specific emotion of approval

  towards an act, and that an act is to be called right when the agent, at the

  moment of action, feels this emotion of approval towards the action which

  he decides to perform. There is certainly a sense in which a man ought to

  perform any act which he approves, and to abstain from any act which he

  disapproves; and it seems also undeniable that there are emotions which

  may  be  called  approval  and  disapproval.  Thus  this  theory,  whether

  adequate or not, must be allowed to contain a part of the truth.

  It  is,  however,  fairly  evident  that  there  are  other  meanings  of  right

  conduct, and that, though there is an emotion of approval, there is also a

  judgment of approval, which may or may not be true. For we certainly

  hold that a man who has done an action which his conscience approved

  may have been mistaken, and that in some sense his conscience ought not

  to have approved his action. But this would be impossible if nothing were

  involved except an emotion. To be mistaken implies a judgment; and thus

  we must admit that there is such a thing as a judgment of approval. If this

  were not the case we could not reason with a man as to what is right; what

  he approves would be necessarily right for him to do, and there could be

  no argument against his approval. We do in fact hold that when one man

  approves  of  a  certain  act,  while  another  disapproves,  one  of  them  is

  mistaken, which would not be the case with a mere emotion. If one man  likes oysters and another dislikes them, we do not say that either of them

  is mistaken.

  Thus there is a judgment of approval, and this must consist of a judgment

  that  an  act  is,  in  a  new  sense,  right.  The  judgment  of  approval  is  not

  merely the judgment that we feel the emotion of approval, for then another

  who disapproved would not necessarily hold our judgment of approval to

  be mistaken. Thus, in order to give a meaning to the judgment of approval,

  it is necessary to admit a sense of right other than approved. In this sense,

  when we approve an act we judge that it is right, and we may be mistaken

  in so judging. This new sense is objective, in the sense that it does not

  depend  upon  the  opinions  and  feelings  of  the  agent.  Thus  a  man  who

  obeys the dictates of his conscience is not always acting rightly in the

  objective sense. When a man does what his conscience approves, he does

  what  he believes  to  be  objectively  right,  but  not  necessarily  what is

  objectively right. We need, therefore, some other criterion than the moral

  sense for judging what is objectively right.

  It is in defining objective rightness that the consequences of an action

  become relevant. Some moralists, it is true, deny the dependence upon

  consequences; but that is to be attributed, I think, to confusion with the

  subjective  sense.  When  people  argue  as  to  whether  such  and  such  an

  action is right, they always adduce the consequences which it has or may

  be expected to have. A statesman who has to decide what is the right

  policy, or a teacher who has to decide what is the right education, will be

  expected to consider what policy or what education is likely to have the

  best  results.  Whenever  a  question  is  at  all  complicated,  and  cannot  be

  settled by following some simple rule, such as ‘thou shalt not steal’, or

  ‘thou shalt not bear false witness’, it is at once evident that the decision

  cannot be made except by consideration of consequences.

  But even when the decision can be made by a simple precept, such as not

  to  lie  or  not  to  steal,  the  justification  of  the  precept  is  found  only  by

  consideration of consequences. A code such as the Decalogue, it must be

  admitted, can hardly be true without exception if the goodness or badness

  of consequences is what determines the rightness or wrongness of actions;

  for in so complex a world it is unlikely that obedience to the Decalogue

  will always produce better consequences than disobedience. Yet it is a

  suspicious circumstance that breaches of those of the Ten Commandments

  which people still hold it a duty to obey do, as a matter of fact, have bad  consequences  in  the  vast  majority  of  instances,  and  would  not  be

  considered  wrong  in  a  case  in  which  it  was  fairly  certain  that  their

  consequences would be good. This latter fact is concealed by a question-

  begging addition of moral overtones to words. Thus, e.g., ‘thou shalt do no

  murder’ would be an important precept if it were interpreted, as Tolstoy

  interprets it, to mean ‘thou shalt not take human life’. But it is not so

  interpreted;  on  the  contrary,  some  taking  of  human  life  is  called

  ‘justifiable  homicide’.  Thus  murder  comes  to  mean  ‘unjustifiable

  homicide’;  and  it  is  a  mere  tautology  to  say,  ‘Thou  shalt  do  no

  unjustifiable homicide’. That this should be announced from Sinai would

  be as fruitless as Hamlet’s report of the ghost’s message: ‘There’s ne’er a

  villain, dwelling in all Denmark, but he’s an arrant knave.’ As a matter of

  fact, people do make a certain classification of homicides, and decide that

  certain kinds are justifiable and certain others unjustifiable. But there are

  many  doubtful  cases:  tyrannicide,  capital  punishment,  killing  in  war,

  killing in self-defence, killing in defence of others, are some of these. And

  if a decision is sought, it is sought usually by considering whether the

  consequences of actions belonging to these classes are on the whole good

  or bad. Thus the importance of precepts such as the Ten Commandments

  lies in the fact that they give simple rules, obedience to which will in

  almost  all  cases  have  better  consequences  than  disobedience;  and  the

  justification of the rules is not wholly independent of consequences.

  In  common  language  the  received  code  of  moral  rules  is  usually

  presupposed, and an action is only called immoral when it infringes one of

  these rules. Whatever does not infringe them is regarded as permissible, so

  that on most of the occasions of life no one course of action is marked out

  as  alone right.  If  a  man  adopts  a  course  of  action  which,  though  not

  contrary to the received code, will probably have bad consequences, he is

  called unwise rather than immoral. Now, according to the distinction we

  have made between objective and subjective rightness, a man may well act

  in a way which is objectively wrong without doing what is subjectively

  wrong, i.e. what his conscience disapproves. An act (roughly speaking, I

  shall return to this point presently) is immoral when a man’s conscience

  disapproves  it,  but  is  judged  only  unwise  or  injudicious  when  his

  conscience approves it, although we judge that it will probably have bad

  consequences.  Now  the  usual  moral  code  is  supposed,  in  common

  language,  to  be  admitted  by  every  man’s  conscience,  so  that  when  he  infringes it, his action is not merely injudicious, but immoral; on the other

  hand,  where  the  code  is  silent,  we  regard  an  unfortunate  action  as

  objectively  but  not  subjectively  wrong,  i.e.  as  injudicious,  but  not

  immoral. The acceptance of a moral code has the great advantage that, in

  so far as its rules are objectively right, it tends to harmonize objective and

  subjective rightness. Thus it tends to cover all frequent cases, leaving only

  the rarer ones to the individual judgment of the agent. Hence when new

  sorts of cases become common, the moral code soon comes to deal with

  them; thus each profession has its own code concerning cases common in

  the profession, though not outside it. But the moral code is never itself

  ultimate; it is based upon an estimate of probable consequences, and is

  essentially  a  method  of  leading  men’s  judgment  to  approve  what  is

  objectively right and disapprove what is objectively wrong. And when

  once a fairly correct code is accepted, the exceptions to it become very

  much  fewer  than  they  would  otherwise  be,  because  one  of  the

  consequences  of  admitting  exceptions  is  to  weaken  the  code,  and  this

  consequence is usually bad enough to outweigh the good resulting from

  admitting such and such an exception. This argument, however, works in

  the  opposite  direction  with  a  grossly  incorrect  code;  and  it  is  to  be

  observed  that  most  conventional  codes  embody  some  degree  of

  unwarrantable  selfishness,  individual,  professional,  or  national,  and  are

  thus in certain respects worthy of detestation.

  What  is  objectively  right,  then,  is  in  some  way  dependent  on

  consequences. The most natural supposition to start from would be that the

  objectively right act, under any circumstances, is the one which will have

  the best consequences. We will define this as the most fortunate act. The

  most fortunate act, then, is the one which will produce the greatest excess

  of good over evil, or the least excess of evil over good (for there may be

  situations in which every possible act will have consequences that are on

  the whole bad). But we cannot maintain that the most fortunate act is

  always the one which is objectively right, in the sense that it is what a wise

  man will hold that he ought to do. For it may happen that the act which

  will in fact prove the most fortunate is likely, according to all the evidence

  at our disposal, to be less fortunate than some other. In such a case, it will

  be, at least in one sense, objectively wrong to go against the evidence, in

  spite of the actual good result of our doing so. There have certainly been

  some men who have done so much harm that it would have been fortunate  for the world if their nurses had killed them in infancy. But if their nurses

  had done so their action would not have been objectively right, because

  the probability was that it would not have the best effects. Hence it would

  seem  we  must  take  account  of  probability  in  judging  of  objective

  rightness; let us then consider whether we can say that the objectively

  right act is the one which will probably be most fortunate. I shall define

  this as the wisest act.

  The wisest  act,  then,  is  that  one  which,  when  account  is  taken  of  all

  available data, gives us the greatest expectation of good on the balance, or

  the least expectation of evil on the balance. There is, of course, a difficulty

  as  to  what  are  to  be  considered  available  data;  but  broadly  we  can

  distinguish,  in  any  given  state  of  knowledge,  things  capable  of  being

  foreseen from things which are unpredictable. I suppose account to be

  taken  of  the  general  body  of  current  knowledge,  in  fact  the  sort  of

  consideration which people expect when they ask legal or medical advice.

  There is no doubt this brings us nearer to what is objectively right than we

  were when we were considering the actually most fortunate act. For one

  thing,  it  justifies  the  unavoidable  limitation  to  not  very distant

  consequences, which is almost always necessary if a practical decision is

  to  be  reached.  For  the  likelihood  of  error  in  calculating  distant

  consequences is so great that their contribution to the probable good or

  evil is very small, though their contribution to the actual good or evil is

  likely to be much greater than that of the nearer consequences. And it

  seems evident that what it is quite impossible to know cannot be relevant

  in judging as to what conduct is right. If, as is possible, a cataclysm is

  going to destroy life on this planet this day week, many acts otherwise

  useful will prove to have been wasted labour, for example, the preparation

  of next year’s Nautical Almanac; but since we have no reason to expect

  such  a  cataclysm,  the  rightness  or  wrongness  of  acts  is  plainly  to  be

  estimated without regard to it.

  One apparent objection at once suggests itself to the definition. Very few

  acts  are  of  sufficient  importance  to  justify  such  elaborate  and  careful

  consideration as is required for forming an opinion as to whether they are

  the wisest. Indeed, the least important decisions are often those which it

  would  be  hardest  to  make  on  purely  reasonable  grounds.  A  man  who

  debates on each day which of two ways of taking exercise is likely to

  prove most beneficial is considered absurd; the question is at once difficult  and  unimportant,  and  is  therefore  not  worth  spending  time  over.  But

  although it is true that unimportant decisions ought not to be made with

  excessive  care,  there  is  danger  of  confusion  if  this  is  regarded  as  an

  objection to our definition of objective rightness. For the act which, in the

  case supposed, is objectively wrong is the act of deliberation, not the act

  decided  upon  as  a  result  of  deliberation.  And  the  deliberation  is

  condemned by our definition, for it is very unlikely that there is no more

  beneficial way of spending time than in debating trivial points of conduct.

  Thus,  although  the  wisest  act  is  the  one  which,  after  complete

  investigation,  appears  likely  to  give  the  most  fortunate  results,  yet  the

  complete investigation required to show that it is the wisest act is only

  itself  wise  in  the  case  of  very  important decisions.  This  is  only  an

  elaborate  way  of  saying  that  a  wise  man  will  not  waste  time  on

  unimportant details. Hence this apparent objection can be answered.

  One further addition is required for the definition of the objectively right

  act, namely, that it must be possible. Among the acts whose consequences

  are to be considered we must not include such as are either physically

  impossible to perform or impossible for the agent to think of. This last

  condition introduces difficulties connected with determinism, which are

  discussed in Section IV. Ignoring these difficulties, we may say that the

  objectively  right  act  is  that  one  which,  of  all  that  are  possible,  will

  probably have the best consequences.

  We must now return to the consideration of subjective rightness, with a

  view to distinguishing conduct which is merely mistaken from conduct

  which is immoral or blame-worthy. We here require a new sense of ought,

  which it is by no means easy to define. In the objective sense, a man ought

  to do what is objectively right. But in the subjective sense, which we have

  now to examine, he sometimes ought to do what is objectively wrong. For

  example, we saw that it is often objectively right to give less consideration

  to an unimportant question of conduct than would be required for forming

  a trustworthy judgment as to what is objectively right. Now it seems plain

  that  if  we  have  given  to  such  a  question  the  amount  and  kind  of

  consideration which is objectively right, and we then do what appears to

  us  objectively  right,  our  action  is,  in  some  sense,  subjectively  right,

  although it may be objectively wrong. Our action could certainly not be

  called a sin, and might even be highly virtuous, in spite of its objective

  wrongness. It is these notions of what is sinful and what is virtuous that  we have now to consider.

  The first suggestion that naturally occurs is that an act is subjectively right

  when it is judged by the agent to be objectively right, and subjectively

  wrong when it is judged to be objectively wrong. I do not mean that it is

  subjectively right when the agent judges that it is the act which, of all that

  are possible, will probably have the best results; for the agent may not

  accept the above account of objective rightness. I mean merely that it is

  the one towards which he has the judgment of approval. A man may judge

  an act to be right without judging that its consequences will be probably

  the best possible; I only contend that, when he truly judges it to be right,

  then its consequences will probably be the best possible. But his judgment

  as to what is objectively right may err, not only by a wrong estimate of

  probable consequences, or by failing to think of an act which he might

  have  thought  of,  but  also  by  a  wrong  theory  as  to  what  constitutes

  objective  rightness.  In  other  words,  the  definition  I  gave  of  objective

  rightness is not meant as an analysis of the meaning of the word, but as a

  mark  which  in  fact  attaches  to  all  objectively  right  actions  and  to  no

  others.

  We are to consider then the suggestion that an act is moral when the agent

  approves it and immoral when he disapproves it; using ‘moral’ to mean

  ‘subjectively  right’  and  ‘immoral’  to  mean  ‘subjectively  wrong’.  This

  suggestion, it is plain, will not stand without much modification. In the

  first  place,  we  often  hold  it  immoral  to  approve  some  things  and

  disapprove others, unless there are special circumstances to excuse such

  approval or disapproval. In the second place, unreflecting acts, in which

  there is no judgment either of approval or disapproval, are often moral or

  immoral. For both these reasons the suggested definition must be regarded

  as inadequate.

  The doctrine that an act is never immoral when the agent thinks it right has

  the drawback (or the advantage) that it excuses almost all the acts which

  would be commonly condemned. Very few people deliberately do what, at

  the moment, they believe to be wrong; usually they first argue themselves

  into a belief that what they wish to do is right. They decide that it is their

  duty to teach so-and-so a lesson, that their rights have been so grossly

  infringed that if they take no revenge there will be an encouragement to

  injustice,  that  without  a  moderate  indulgence  in  pleasure  a  character

  cannot develop in the best way, and so on and so on. Yet we do not cease  to blame them on that account. Of course it may be said that a belief

  produced by a course of self-deception is not a genuine belief, and that the

  people who invent such excuses for themselves know all the while that the

  truth is the other way. Up to a point this is no doubt true, though I doubt if

  it is always true. There are, however, other cases of mistaken judgment as

  to  what  is  right,  where  the  judgment  is  certainly  genuine,  and  yet  we

  blame  the  agent.  These  are  cases  of  thoughtlessness,  where  a  man

  remembers consequences to himself, but forgets consequences to others.

  In such a case he may judge correctly and honestly on all the data that he

  remembers, yet if he were a better man he would remember more data.

  Most of the actions commonly condemned as selfish probably come under

  this head. Hence we must admit that an act may be immoral, even if the

  agent quite genuinely judges that it is right.

  Unreflecting  acts,  again,  in  which  there  is  no  judgment  as  to  right  or

  wrong, are often praised or blamed. Acts of generosity, for example, are

  more  admired  when  they  are  impulsive  than  when  they  result  from

  reflection.  I  cannot  think  of  any  act  which  is  more  blamed  when  it  is

  impulsive than when it is deliberate; but certainly many impulsive acts are

  blamed—for  example,  such  as  spring  from  an  impulse  of  malice  or

  cruelty.

  In  all  these  cases  where  reflection  is  absent,  and  also  in  the  case  of

  inadequate reflection, it may be said that blame does not belong properly

  to the act, but rather to the character revealed by the act, or, if to some

  acts, then to those previous deliberate acts by which the character has been

  produced which has resulted in the present act. The cases of self-deception

  would then be dismissed on the ground that the self-deceiver never really

  believes  what  he  wishes  to  believe.  We  could  then  retain  our  original

  definition, that a moral act is one which the agent judges to be right, while

  an immoral one is one which he judges to be wrong. But I do not think this

  would accord with what most people really mean. I rather think that a

  moral act should be defined as one which the agent would have judged to

  be right if he had considered the question candidly and with due care; if,

  that  is  to  say,  he  had  examined  the  data  before  him  with  a  view  to

  discovering what was right, and not with a view to proving such and such

  a course to be right. If an act is unimportant, and at the same time not

  obviously less right than some obvious alternative, we shall consider it

  neither moral nor immoral; for in such a case the act does not deserve  careful  consideration.  The  amount  of  care  which  a  decision  deserves

  depends upon its importance and difficulty; in the case of a statesman

  advocating  a  new  policy,  for  example,  years  of  deliberation  may

  sometimes be necessary to excuse him from the charge of levity. But with

  less  important  acts,  it  is  usually  right  to  decide  even  when  further

  reflection might show the present decision to be erroneous. Thus there is a

  certain amount of reflection appropriate to various acts, while some right

  acts are best when they spring from impulse (though these are such as

  reflection would approve). We may therefore say that an act is moral when

  it is one which the agent would judge to be right after an appropriate

  amount of candid thought, or, in the case of acts which are best when they

  are unreflecting, after the amount and kind of thought requisite to form a

  first opinion. An act is immoral when the agent would judge it to be wrong

  after an appropriate amount of reflection. It is neither moral nor immoral

  when it is unimportant and a small amount of reflection would not suffice

  to show whether it was right or wrong.

  We may now sum up our discussion of right and wrong. When a man asks

  himself: ‘What ought I to do?’ he is asking what conduct is right in an

  objective sense. He cannot mean: ‘What ought a person to do who holds

  my views as to what a person ought to do?’ for his views as to what a

  person ought to do are what will constitute his answer to the question

  ‘What ought  I  to  do?’  But  the  onlooker,  who  thinks  that  the  man  has

  answered  this  question  wrongly,  may  nevertheless  hold  that,  in  acting

  upon his answer, the man was acting rightly in a second, subjective, sense.

  This second sort of right action we call moral action. We held that an

  action  is moral  when  the  agent  would  judge  it  to  be right  after  an

  appropriate amount of candid thought, or after a small amount in the case

  of acts which are best when they are unreflecting; the appropriate amount

  of thought being dependent upon the difficulty and the importance of the

  decision. And we held that an action is right when, of all that are possible,

  it is the one which will probably have the best results. There are many

  other meanings of right, but these seem to be the meanings required for

  answering  the  questions:  ‘What  ought  I  to  do?’  and  ‘What  acts  are

  immoral?’ 

  IV. DETERMINISM AND MORALS

  The importance to ethics of the free-will question is a subject upon which

  there has existed almost as much diversity of opinion as on the free-will

  question itself. It has been urged by advocates of free-will that its denial

  involves the denial of merit and demerit, and that, with the denial of these,

  ethics collapses. It has been urged on the other side that, unless we can

  foresee, at least partially, the consequences of our actions, it is impossible

  to know what course we ought to take under any given circumstances; and

  that  if  other  people’s  actions  cannot  be  in  any  degree  predicted,  the

  foresight  required  for  rational  action  becomes  impossible.  I  do  not

  propose, in the following discussion, to go into the free-will controversy

  itself. The grounds in favour of determinism appear to me over-whelming,

  and I shall content myself with a brief indication of these grounds. The

  question I am concerned with is not the freewill question itself, but the

  question how, if at all, morals are affected by assuming determinism.

  In considering this question, as in most of the other problems of ethics, the

  moralist who has not had a philosophical training appears to me to go

  astray, and become involved in needless complications, through supposing

  that right and wrong in conduct are the ultimate conceptions of ethics,

  rather than good and bad, in the effects of conduct and in other things. The

  words ‘good’ and ‘bad’ are used both for the sort of conduct which is right

  or wrong, and for the sort of effects to be expected from right and wrong

  conduct, respectively. We speak of a good picture, a good dinner, and so

  on, as well as of a good action. But there is a great difference between

  these two meanings of good. Roughly speaking, a good action is one of

  which the probable effects are good in the other sense. It is confusing to

  have two meanings for one word, and we therefore agreed in the previous

  section to speak of a right action rather than a good action. In order to

  decide whether an action is right, it is necessary, as we have seen, to

  consider its probable effects. If the probable effects are, on the whole,

  better  than  those  of  any  other  action  which  is  possible  under  the

    circumstances, then the action is right. The things that are good are things

  which, on their own account, and apart from any consideration of their

  effects, we ought to wish to see in existence: they are such things as, we

  may suppose, might make the world appear to the Creator worth creating.

  I do not wish to deny that right conduct is among the things that are good  on their own account; but if it is so, it depends for its intrinsic goodness

  upon the goodness of those other things which it aims at producing, such

  as love or happiness. Thus the rightness of conduct is not the fundamental

  conception upon which ethics is built up. This fundamental conception is

  intrinsic goodness or badness.

  As the outcome of our discussions in the previous section, I shall assume

  the  following  definitions.  The objectively  right  action,  in  any

    circumstances, is that action which, of all that are possible, gives us, when

  account is taken of all available data, the greatest expectation of probable

  good  effects,  or  the  least  expectation  of  probable  bad  effects.  The

  subjectively right or moral action is that one which will be judged by the

  agent to be objectively right if he devotes to the question an appropriate

  amount  of  candid  thought,  or,  in  the  case  of  actions  that  ought  to  be

  impulsive, a small amount. The appropriate amount of thought depends

  upon the importance of the action and the difficulty of the decision. An act

  is neither moral nor immoral when it is unimportant, and a small amount

  of reflection would not suffice to show whether it was right or wrong.

  After these preliminaries, we can pass to the consideration of our main

  topic.

  The principle of causality—that every event is determined by previous

  events, and can (theoretically) be predicted when enough previous events

  are known—appears to apply just as much to human actions as to other

  events. It cannot be said that its application to human actions, or to any

  other phenomena, is wholly beyond doubt; but a doubt extending to the

  principle of causality must be so fundamental as to involve all science, all

  everyday  knowledge,  and  everything,  or  almost  everything,  that  we

  believe about the actual world. If causality is doubted, morals collapse,

  since a right action, as we have seen, is one of which the probable effects

  are  the  best  possible,  so  that  estimates  of  right  and  wrong  necessarily

  presuppose that our actions can have effects, and therefore that the law of

  causality holds. In favour of the view that human actions alone are not the

  effects of causes, there appears to be no ground whatever except the sense

  of spontaneity. But the sense of spontaneity only affirms that we can do as

  we  choose,  and  choose  as  we  please,  which  no  determinist  denies;  it

  cannot affirm that our choice is independent of all motives, and indeed

  introspection tends rather to show the opposite. It is said by the advocates

  of freewill that determinism destroys morals, since it shows that all our  actions are inevitable, and that therefore they deserve neither praise nor

  blame. Let us consider how far, if at all, this is the case.

  The  part  of  ethics  which  is  concerned,  not  with  conduct,  but  with  the

  meaning of good and bad, and the things that are intrinsically good and

  bad,  is  plainly  quite  independent  of  freewill.  Causality  belongs  to  the

  description of the existing world, and we saw that no inference can be

  drawn from what exists to what is good. Whether, then, causality holds

  always,  sometimes,  or  never  is  a  question  wholly  irrelevant  in  the

  consideration of intrinsic goods and evils. But when we come to conduct

  and the notion of ought, we cannot be sure that determinism makes no

  difference. For we saw that the objectively right action may be defined as

  that  one  which,  of  all  that  are possible  under  the  circumstances,  will

  probably on the whole have the best consequences. The action which is

  objectively  right  must  therefore  be  in  some  sense possible.  But  if

  determinism is true, there is a sense in which no action is possible except

  the one actually performed. Hence, if the two senses of possibility are the

  same, the action actually performed is always objectively right; for it is the

  only possible action, and therefore there is no other possible action which

  would have had better results. There is here, I think, a real difficulty. But

  let us consider the various kinds of possibility which may be meant.

  In order that an act may be a possible act, it must be physically possible to

  perform, it must be possible to think of, and it must be possible to choose

  if  we  think  of  it.  Physical  possibility,  to  begin  with,  is  obviously

  necessary. There are circumstances under which I might do a great deal of

  good by running from Oxford to London in five minutes. But I should not

  be called unwise, or guilty of an objectively wrong act, for omitting to do s

  o. We m ay d e fine an act as physically possible when it will occur if I

  will it. Acts for which this condition fails are not to be taken account of in

  estimating rightness or wrongness.

  To judge whether an act is possible to think of is more difficult, but we

  certainly take account of it in judging what a man ought to do. There is no

  physical impossibility about employing one’s spare moments in writing

  lyric poems better than any yet written, and this would certainly be a more

  useful employment than most people find for their spare moments. But we

  do not blame people for not writing lyric poems unless, like FitzGerald,

  they are people that we feel could have written them. And not only do we

  not blame them, but we feel that their action may be objectively as well as  subjectively right if it is the wisest that they could have thought of. But

  what they could have thought of is not the same as what they did think of.

  Suppose a man in a fire or a shipwreck becomes so panic-stricken that he

  never for a moment thinks of the help that is due to other people, we do

  not on that account hold that he does right in only thinking of himself.

  Hence in some sense (though it is not quite clear what this sense is), some

  of the courses of action which a man does not think of are regarded as

  possible for him to think of, though others are admittedly impossible.

  There is thus a sense in which it must be possible to think of an action, if

  we are to hold that it is objectively wrong not to perform the action. There

  is also, if determinism is true, a sense in which it is not possible to think of

  any  action  except  those  which  we  do  think  of.  But  it  is  questionable

  whether these two senses of possibility are the same. A man who finds that

  his  house  is  on  fire  may  run  out  of  it  in  a  panic  without  thinking  of

  warning the other inmates; but we feel, rightly or wrongly, that it was

  possible for him to think of warning them in a sense in which it is not

  possible for a prosaic person to think of a lyric poem. It may be that we

  are wrong in feeling this difference, and that what really distinguishes the

  two  cases  is  dependence  upon  past  decisions.  That  is  to  say,  we  may

  recognize that no different choice among alternatives thought of at any

  time would have turned an ordinary man into a good lyric poet; but that

  most men, by suitably choosing among alternatives actually thought of,

  can acquire the sort of character which will lead them to remember their

  neighbours in a fire. And if a man engages in some useful occupation of

  which a natural effect is to destroy his nerve, we may conceivably hold

  that this excuses his panic in an emergency. In such a point, it would seem

  that our judgment may really be dependent on the view we take as to the

  existence of freewill; for the believer in freewill cannot allow any such

  excuse.

  If  we  try  to  state  the  difference  we  feel  between  the  case  of  the  lyric

  poems and the case of the fire, it seems to come to this: that we do not

  hold  an  act  objectively  wrong  when  it  would  have  required  what  we

  recognize as a special aptitude in order to think of a better act, and when

  we believe that the agent did not possess this aptitude. But this distinction

  seems to imply that there is not such a thing as a special aptitude for this

  or that virtue; a view which cannot, I think, be maintained. An aptitude for

  generosity or for kindness may be as much a natural gift as an aptitude for  poetry; and an aptitude for poetry may be as much improved by practice as

  an aptitude for kindness or generosity. Thus it would seem that there is no

  sense in which it is possible to think of some actions which in fact we do

  not think of, but impossible to think of others, except the sense that the

  ones  we  regard  as  possible  would  have  been  thought  of  if  a  different

  choice among alternatives actually thought of had been made on some

  previous occasion. We shall then modify our previous definition of the

  objectively right action by saying that it is the probably most beneficial

  among those that occur to the agent at the moment of choice. But we shall

  hold that, in certain cases, the fact that a more beneficial alternative does

  not  occur  to  him  is  evidence  of  a  wrong  choice  on  some  previous

  occasion.

  But since occasions of choice do often arise, and since there certainly is a

  sense in which it is possible to choose any one of a number of different

  actions which we think of, we can still distinguish some actions as right

  and some as wrong. Our previous definitions of objectively right actions

  and  of  moral  actions  still  hold,  with  the  modification  that,  among

  physically possible actions, only those which we actually think of are to be

  regarded as possible. When several alternative actions present themselves,

  it is certain that we can both do which we choose, and choose which we

  will.  In  this  sense  all  the  alternatives  are  possible.  What  determinism

  maintains is, that our will to choose this or that alternative is the effect of

  antecedents; but this does not prevent our will from being itself a cause of

  other  effects.  And  the  sense  in  which  different  decisions  are  possible

  seems sufficient to distinguish some actions as right and some as wrong,

  some as moral and some as immoral.

  Connected with this is another sense in which, when we deliberate, either

  decision is possible. The fact that we judge one course objectively right

  may  be  the  cause  of  our  choosing  this  course:  thus,  before  we  have

  decided as to which course we think right, either is possible in the sense

  that either will result from our decision as to which we think right. This

  sense of possibility is important to the moralist, and illustrates the fact that

  determinism does not make moral deliberation futile.

  Determinism  does  not,  therefore,  destroy  the  distinction  of  right  and

  wrong; and we saw before that it does not destroy the distinction of good

  and bad: we shall still be able to regard some people as better than others,

  and some actions as more right than others. But it is said that praise and  blame and responsibility are destroyed by determinism. When a madman

  commits what in a sane man we should call a crime, we do not blame him,

  partly because he probably cannot judge rightly as to consequences, but

  partly also because we feel that he could not have done otherwise: if all

  men are really in the position of the madman, it would seem that all ought

  to escape blame. But I think the question of choice really decides as to

  praise and blame. The madman, we believe (excluding the case of wrong

  judgment as to consequences), did not choose between different courses,

  but was impelled by a blind impulse. The sane man who (say) commits a

  murder has, on the contrary, either at the time of the murder or at some

  earlier time, chosen the worst of two or more alternatives that occurred to

  him; and it is for this we blame him. It is true that the two cases merge into

  each other, and the madman may be blamed if he has become mad in

  consequence of vicious self-indulgence. But it is right that the two cases

  should not be too sharply distinguished, for we know how hard it often is

  in practice to decide whether people are what is called ‘responsible for

  their actions’. It is sufficient that there is a distinction, and that it can be

  applied  easily  in  most  cases,  though  there  are  marginal  cases  which

  present  difficulties.  We  apply  praise  or  blame,  then,  and  we  attribute

  responsibility,  where  a  man,  having  to  exercise  choice,  has  chosen

  wrongly;  and  this  sense  of  praise  or  blame  is  not  destroyed  by

  determinism.

  Determinism, then, does not in any way interfere with morals. It is worth

  noticing that freewill, on the contrary, would interfere most seriously, if

  anybody really believed in it. People never do, as a matter of fact, believe

  that anyone else’s actions are not determined by motives, however much

  they may think themselves free. Bradshaw consists entirely of predictions

  as to the actions of engine-drivers; but no one doubts Bradshaw on the

  ground that the volitions of engine-drivers are not governed by motives. If

  we really believed that other people’s actions did not have causes, we

  could never try to influence other people’s actions; for such influence can

  only result if we know, more or less, what causes will produce the actions

  we desire. If we could never try to influence other people’s actions, no

  man could try to get elected to Parliament, or ask a woman to marry him:

  argument,  exhortation,  and  command  would  become  mere  idle  breath.

  Thus  almost  all  the  actions  with  which  morality  is  concerned  would

  become irrational, rational action would be wholly precluded from trying  to influence people’s volitions, and right and wrong would be interfered

  with in a way in which determinism certainly does not interfere with them.

  Most morality absolutely depends upon the assumption that volitions have

  causes, and nothing in morals is destroyed by this assumption.

  Most people, it is true, do not hold the freewill doctrine in so extreme a

  form as that against which we have been arguing. They would hold that

  most of a man’s actions have causes, but that some few, say one per cent,

  are uncaused spontaneous assertions of will. If this view is taken, unless

  we can mark off the one per cent of volitions which are uncaused, every

  inference as to human actions is infected with what we may call one per

  cent  of  doubt.  This,  it  must  be  admitted,  would  not  matter  much  in

  practice, because, on other grounds, there will usually be at least one per

  cent of doubt in predictions as to human actions. But from the standpoint

  of theory there is a wide difference: the sort of doubt that must be admitted

  in any case is a sort which is capable of indefinite diminution, while the

  sort  derived  from  the  possible  intervention  of  freewill  is  absolute  and

  ultimate.  In  so  far,  therefore,  as  the  possibility  of  uncaused  volitions

  comes in, all the consequences above pointed out follow; and in so far as it

  does not come in, determinism holds. Thus one per cent of freewill has

  one per cent of the objectionableness of absolute freewill, and has also

  only one per cent of the ethical consequences.

  In fact, however, no one really holds that right acts are uncaused. It would

  be  a  monstrous  paradox  to  say  that  a  man’s  decision  ought  not  to  be

  influenced by his belief as to what is his duty; yet, if he allows himself to

  decide on an act because he believes it to be his duty, his decision has a

  motive,  i.e.  a  cause,  and  is  not  free  in  the  only  sense  in  which  the

  determinist  must  deny  freedom.  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  the

  objections to determinism are mainly attributable to misunderstanding of

  its  purport.  Hence,  finally  it  is  not  determinism  but  freewill  that  has

  subversive consequences. There is therefore no reason to regret that the

  grounds in favour of determinism are overwhelmingly strong.  V. EGOISM

  We have next to consider an objection to the view that objective rightness

  consists  in  probably  having  the  best  consequences  on  the  whole.  The

  objection I mean is that of egoism: that a man’s first duty is to himself,

  and that to secure his own good is more imperative than to secure other

  people’s. Extensions of this view are, that a man should prefer the interest

  of his family to that of strangers, of his countrymen to that of foreigners,

  or of his friends to that of his enemies. All these views have in common

  the belief that, quite apart from practicability, the ends which one man

  ought  to  pursue  are  different  from  those  which  another  man  ought  to

  pursue.

  Egoism has several different meanings. It may mean that every man is

    psychologically bound to pursue his own good exclusively; it may mean

  that every man will achieve the best result on the whole by pursuing his

  own good; it may mean that his own good is the only thing a man ought to

  think good; and it may mean, lastly, that there is no such thing as the

  general good at all, but only individual goods, and that each man is only

  concerned with what is good for himself. These meanings all presuppose

  that  we  know  what  is  meant  by  ‘my  good’;  but  this  is  not  an  easy

  conception to define clearly. I shall therefore begin by considering what it

  is capable of meaning.

  ‘My good’ is a phrase capable of many different meanings. It may mean

  any good that I desire, whether this has any further special relation to me

  or not. Or, again, it may mean my pleasure, or any state of mind in me

  which  is  good.  Or  it  may  include  honour  and  respect  from  others,  or

  anything which is a good and has some relation to me in virtue of which it

  can  be  considered mine.  The  two  meanings  with  which  we  shall  be

  concerned are: (1) any good I desire, (2) any good having to me some

  relation other than that I desire it, which it does not have to others, of the

  kind which makes it mine, as my pleasure, my reputation, my learning, my

  virtue, etc.

  The theory that every man is psychologically bound to pursue his own

  good  exclusively  is,  I  think,  inconsistent  with  known  facts  of  human

  nature,  unless  ‘my  good’  is  taken  in  the  sense  of  ‘something  which  I

  desire’,  and  even  then  I  do  not  necessarily  pursue  what  I  desire  most

  strongly. The important point is, that what I desire has not necessarily any

  such other relation to me as would make it my good in the second of the  above senses. This is the point which must now occupy us.

  If ‘my good’ means a good which is mine in some other sense than that I

  desire it, then I think it can be shown that my good is by no means the

  only  object  of  my  actions.  There  is  a  common  confusion  in  people’s

  thoughts on this subject, namely the following: If I desire anything, its

  attainment will give me more or less pleasure, and its non-attainment will

  give me more or less pain. Hence it is inferred that I desire it on account of

  the pleasure it would give me, and not on its own account. But this is to

  put the cart before the horse. The pleasure we get from things usually

  depends upon our having had a desire which they satisfy; the pleasures of

  eating and drinking, for example, depend upon hunger and thirst. Or take,

  again, the pleasure people get from the victory of their own party in a

  contest. Other people would derive just the same pleasure from the victory

  of the opposite party; in each case the pleasure depends for its existence

  upon the desire, and would not exist if the desire had not existed. Thus we

  cannot  say  that  people  only  desire  pleasure.  They  desire  all  kinds  of

  things, and pleasures come from desires much oftener than desires from

  imagined  pleasures.  Thus  the  mere  fact  that  a  man  will  derive  some

  pleasure from achieving his object is no reason for saying that his desire is

  self-centred.

  Such arguments are necessary for the refutation of those who hold it to be

  obvious a  priori  that  every  man  must  always  pursue  his  own  good

  exclusively. But, as is often the case with refutations of a priori theories,

  there is an air of logic-chopping about a discussion as to whether desire or

  the pleasure expected from its satisfaction ought to have priority. Let us

  leave these questions, and consider whether, as a matter of fact, people’s

  actions can be explained on the egoistic hypothesis. The most obvious

  instances to the contrary are, of course, cases of self-sacrifice—of men to

  their country, for example, or of parents to children. But these instances

  are so obvious that the egoistic theory is ready with an answer. It will

  maintain that, in such cases, the people who make the sacrifice would not

  be happy if they did not make it, that they desire the applause of men or of

  their  own  consciences,  that  they  find  in  the  moment  of  sacrifice  an

  exaltation which realizes their highest self, etc., etc., etc. Let us examine

  these arguments. It is said that the people in question would not be happy

  if they did not make the sacrifice. This is often false in fact, but we may let

  that pass. Why would they not be happy? Either because others would  think less well of them, or because they themselves would feel pangs of

  conscience, or because they genuinely desired the object to be attained by

  their sacrifice and could not be happy without it. In the last case they have

  admittedly  a  desire  not  centred  in  self;  the  supposed  effect  upon  their

  happiness is due to the desire, and would not otherwise exist, so that the

  effect upon happiness cannot be brought into account for the desire. But if

  people may have desires for things that lie outside their ego, then such

  desires, like others, may determine action, and it is possible to pursue an

  object which is not ‘my’ good in any sense except that I desire and pursue

  it. Thus, in all cases of self-sacrifice, those who hold the egoistic theory

  will have to maintain that the outside end secured by the self-sacrifice is

  not desired. When a soldier sacrifices his life he does not desire the victory

  of his country, and so on. This is already sufficiently preposterous, and

  sufficiently contrary to plain fact. But it is not enough. Assuming that this

  is the case, let us suppose that self-sacrifice is dictated, not by desire for

  any outside end, but by fear of the disapproval of others. If this were so

  there  would  be  no  self-sacrifice  if  no  one  would  know  of  its  non-

  performance. A man who saw another drowning would not try to save him

  if he was sure that no one would see him not jumping into the water. This

  also is plainly contrary to fact. It may be said that the desire for approval,

  as well as the fear of disapproval, ought to be taken into account; and a

  man can always make sure of approval by judicious boasting. But men

  have made sacrifices universally disapproved, for example, in maintaining

  unpopular  opinions;  and  very  many  have  made  sacrifices  of  which  an

  essential part was that they should not be mentioned. Hence the defender

  of psychological egoism is driven back on the approval of conscience as

  the motive to an act of self-sacrifice. But it is really impossible to believe

  that all who deny themselves are so destitute of rational foresight as this

  theory  implies.  The  pangs  of  conscience  are  to  most  people  a  very

  endurable pain, and practice in wrong-doing rapidly diminishes them. And

  if  the  act  of  self-denial  involves  the  loss  of  life,  the  rapture  of  self-

  approbation, which the virtuous man is supposed to be seeking, must in

  any case be very brief. I conclude that the psychology of egoism is only

  produced by the exigencies of a wrong theory, and is not in accordance

  with the facts of observable human nature.

  Thus,  when  we  consider  human  actions  and  desires  apart  from

  preconceived theories, it is obvious that most of them are objective and  have no direct reference to self. If ‘my good’ means an object belonging to

  me in the sense of being a state of my mind, or a whole of which a state of

  my mind is a part, or what others think about me, then it is false that I can

  only desire or pursue my good. The only sense in which it is true is when

  ‘my good’ is taken to mean ‘what I desire’; but what I desire need not

  have any other connection with myself, except that I desire it. Thus there

  is no truth in the doctrine that men do, as a matter of fact, only desire or

  pursue objects specially related to themselves in any way except as objects

  desired or pursued.

  The next form of egoism to be considered is the doctrine that every man

  will  best  serve  the  general  good  by  pursuing  his  own.  There  is  a

  comfortable eighteenth-century flavour about this doctrine—it suggests a

  good income, a good digestion, and an enviable limitation of sympathy.

  We may admit at once that in a well-ordered world it would be true, and

  even that, as society becomes better organized, it becomes progressively

  truer, since rewards will more and more be attached to useful actions. And

  in so far as a man’s own good is more in his control than other people’s,

  his actions will rightly concern themselves more with it than with other

  people’s. For the same reason he will be more concerned with the good of

  his family than with that of people with whom he has less to do, and more

  with the good of his own country than with that of foreign countries. But

  the  scope  of  such  considerations  is  strictly  limited,  and  everyone  can

  easily find in his own experience cases where the general good has been

  served by what at any rate appears to be a self-sacrifice. If such cases are

  to be explained away, it is necessary to alter the conception of ‘my own

  good’ in a way which destroys the significance of the doctrine we are

  considering. It may be said, for example, that the greatest of goods is a

  virtuous life. It will then follow that whoever lives a virtuous life secures

  for himself the greatest of goods. But if the doctrine means to assert, as it

  usually does, that self-centred desires, if they are prudent and enlightened,

  will suffice to produce the most useful conduct, then a refutation may be

  obtained either from common experience or from any shining example of

  public merit. The reformer is almost always a man who has strong desires

  for  objects  quite  unconnected  with  himself;  and  indeed  this  is  a

  characteristic of all who are not petty-minded. I think the doctrine depends

  for its plausibility, like psychological egoism, upon regarding every object

  which I desire as my good, and supposing that it must be mine in some  other sense than that I desire it.

  The doctrine that my good is the only thing that I ought to think good can

  only be logically maintained by those who hold that I ought to believe

  what is false. For if I am right in thinking that my good is the only good,

  then everyone else is mistaken unless he admits that my good, not his, is

  the only good. But this is an admission which I can scarcely hope that

  others will be willing to make.

  But what is really intended is, as a rule, to deny that there is any such thing

  as the general good at all. This doctrine cannot be logically refuted, unless

  by discovering in those who maintain it some opinion which implies the

  opposite. If a man were to maintain that there is no such thing as colour,

  for example, we should be unable to disprove his position, provided he

  was careful to think out its implications. As a matter of fact, however,

  everybody does hold opinions which imply a general good. Everybody

  judges that some sorts of communities are better than others; and most

  people who affirm that when they say a thing is good they mean merely

  that they desire it, would admit that it is better two people’s desires should

  be satisfied than only one person’s. In some such way people fail to carry

  out the doctrine that there is no such concept as good; and if there is such a

  concept, then what is good is not good for me or for you, but is simply

  good. The denial that there is such a thing as good in an impersonal sense

  is only possible, therefore, to those who are content to have no ethics at

  all.

  It is possible to hold that, although there is such a thing as the general

  good, and although this is not always best served by pursuing my own

  good,  yet  it  is  always  right  to  pursue  my  own  good  exclusively.  This

  doctrine is not now often held as regards individuals; but in international

  politics it is commonly held as regards nations. Many Englishmen and

  many Germans would admit that it is right for an English statesman to

  pursue  exclusively  the  good  of  England,  and  a  German  the  good  of

  Germany, even if that good is to be attained by greater injury to the other.

  It is difficult to see what grounds there can be for such a view. If good is

  to be pursued at all, it can hardly be relevant who is going to enjoy the

  good. It would be as reasonable for a man on Sundays to think only of his

  welfare on future Sundays, and on Mondays to think only of Mondays.

  The doctrine, in fact, seems to have no merit except that it justifies acts

  otherwise unjustifiable. It is, indeed, so evident that it is better to secure a  greater good for A than a lesser good for B, that it is hard to find any still

  more evident principle by which to prove this. And if A happens to be

  someone else, and B to be myself, that cannot affect the question, since it

  is irrelevant to the general maxim who A and B may be.

  If no form of egoism is valid, it follows that an act which ought to be

  performed may involve a self-sacrifice not compensated by any personal

  good acquired by means of such an act. So unwilling, however, are people

  to  admit  self-sacrifice  as  an  ultimate  duty  that  they  will  often  defend

  theological dogmas on the ground that such dogmas reconcile self-interest

  with duty. Such reconciliations, it should be observed, are in any case

  merely external; they do not show that duty means the pursuit of one’s

  own interest, but only that the acts which it dictates are those that further

  one’s  own  interest.  Thus  when  it  is  pretended  that  there  are logical

  grounds making such reconciliations imperative, we must reply that the

  logical  purpose  aimed  at  could  only  be  secured  by  showing  that  duty

  means the same as self-interest. It is sometimes said that the two maxims,

  ‘You  ought  to  aim  at  producing  the  greatest  possible  good’  and  ‘You

  ought  to  pursue  your  own  interest’,  are  equally  evident;  and  each  is

  supposed  to  be  true  in  all  possible  circumstances  and  in  all  possible

  worlds.  But  if  that  were  the  case,  a  world  where  self-interest  and  the

  general  good  might  conflict  ought  not  only  to  be  non-existent,  but

  inconceivable; yet so far is it from being inconceivable that many people

  conceive it to be exemplified in the actual world. Hence the view that

  honesty is the best policy may be a comfort to the reluctant saint, but

  cannot be a solution to the perplexed logician. The notion, therefore, that a

  good God or a future life can be logically inferred to remove the apparent

  conflict of self-interest and the general good is quite unwarrantable. If

  there were a logical puzzle, it could only be removed by showing that self-

  interest and the general good mean the same thing, not by showing that

  they coincide in fact. But if the above discussion has been sound, there is

  no logical puzzle: we ought to pursue the general good, and when this

  conflicts with self-interest, self-interest ought to give way.

  VI. METHODS OF ESTIMATING GOODS AND

  EVILS

  In order to complete our account of ethics, it would be natural to give a list

  of the principal goods and evils of which we have experience. I shall,  however, not attempt to give such a list, since I hold that the reader is

  probably quite as capable as I am of judging what things are good and

  what bad. All that I propose to do in this section is to examine the view

  that  we  can  never  know  what  is  good  and  what  bad,  and  to  suggest

  methods  to  be  employed  and  fallacies  to  be  avoided  in  considering

  intrinsic goodness or badness.

  There is a widespread ethical scepticism, which is based upon observation

  of men’s differences in regard to ethical questions. It is said that A thinks

  one thing good, and B thinks another, and there is no possible way in

  which  either  can  persuade  the  other  that  he  is  wrong.  Hence,  it  is

  concluded, the whole thing is really only a matter of taste, and it is a waste

  of time to ask which is right when two people differ in a judgment of

  value.

  It would be absurd to deny that, as compared with physical science, ethics

  does suffer from a measure of the defect which such sceptics allege. It

  must be admitted that ultimately the judgment ‘this thing is good’ or ‘that

  thing is bad’ must be an immediate judgment, which results merely from

  considering the thing appraised, and cannot be proved by any argument

  that  would  appeal  to  a  man  who  had  passed  an  opposite  immediate

  judgment. I think it must also be admitted that, even after every possible

  precaution against error has been taken, people’s immediate judgments of

  value do still differ more or less. But such immediate differences seem to

  me to be the exception: most of the actual differences are of a kind which

  argument  might  lessen,  since  usually  the  opinion  held  is  either  one  of

  which the opposite is demonstrable or one which is falsely believed to be

  itself demonstrable. This second alternative embraces all false beliefs held

  because they flow from a false theory; and such beliefs, though often the

  direct contraries of what immediate inspection would lead to, are apt to be

  a complete bar to inspection. This is a very familiar phenomenon. Sydney

  Smith, believed to be always witty, says ‘pass the mustard’, and the whole

  table is convulsed with laughter. Much wrong judgment in ethics is of this

  nature.

  In regard to the things that are good or bad, in themselves, and not merely

  on account of their effects, there are two opposite errors of this sort to be

  avoided—the  one  the  error  of  the  philosopher,  the  other  that  of  the

  moralist. The philosopher, bent on the construction of a system, is inclined

  to symplify the facts unduly, to give them a symmetry which is fictitious,  and to twist them into a form in which they can all be deduced from one or

  two general principles. The moralist, on the other hand, being primarily

  concerned with conduct, tends to become absorbed in means, to value the

  actions  men  ought  to  perform  more  than  the  ends  which  such  actions

  serve. This latter error—for in theorizing it is an error—is so forced upon

  us  by  the  exigencies  of  practice  that  we  may  easily  come  to  feel  the

  ultimate ends of life far less important than the proximate and intermediate

  purposes which we consciously endeavour to realize. And hence most of

  what they value in this world would have to be omitted by many moralists

  from any imagined heaven, because there such things as self-denial and

  effort and courage and pity could find no place. The philosopher’s error is

  less common than the moralist’s, because the love of system and of the

  intellectual  satisfaction  of  a  deductive  edifice  is  rarer  than  the  love  of

  virtue. But among writers on ethics the philosopher’s error occurs oftener

  than the other, because such writers are almost always among the few men

  who have the love of system. Kant has the bad eminence of combining

  both  errors  in  the  highest  possible  degree,  since  he  holds  that  there  is

  nothing good except the virtuous will—a view which simplifies the good

  as much as any philosopher could wish, and mistakes means for ends as

  completely as any moralist could enjoin.

  The moralist’s fallacy illustrates another important point. The immediate

  judgments which are required in ethics concern intrinsic goods and evils,

  not  right  and  wrong  conduct.  I  do  not  wish  to  deny  that  people  have

  immediate judgments of right and wrong, nor yet that in action it is usually

  moral to follow such judgments. What I mean is that such judgments are

  not among those which ethics must accept without proof, provided that

  (whether  by  the  suggestions  of  such  judgments  or  otherwise)  we  have

  accepted  some  such  general  connection  of  right  action  with  good

  consequences as was advocated in Section III. For then, if we know what

  is good and bad, we can discover what is right or wrong; hence in regard

  to right and wrong it is unnecessary to rely upon immediate inspection—a

  method which must be allowed some scope, but should be allowed as little

  as possible.

  I think when attention is clearly confined to good and bad, as opposed to

  right and wrong, the amount of disagreement between different people is

  seen to be much less than might at first be thought. Right and wrong, since

  they depend upon consequences, will vary as men’s circumstances vary,  and will be largely affected, in particular, by men’s beliefs about right and

  wrong, since many acts will in all likelihood have a worse effect if they

  are generally believed to be wrong than if they are generally believed to be

  right, while with some acts the opposite is the case. (For example, a man

  who,  in  exceptional  circumstances,  acts  contrary  to  a  received  and

  generally true moral rule, is more likely to be right if he will be thought to

  be  wrong,  for  then  his  action  will  have  less  tendency  to  weaken  the

  authority of the rule.) Thus differences as regards rules of right action are

  not  a  ground  for  scepticism,  provided  the  different  rules  are  held  in

  different societies. Yet such differences are in practice a very powerful

  solvent of ethical beliefs.

  Some  differences  as  to  what  is  good  in  itself  must,  however,  be

  acknowledged even when all possible care has been taken to consider the

  question  by  itself.  For  example,  retributive  punishment,  as  opposed  to

  deterrent or reformative punishment, was almost universally considered

  good  until  a  recent  time;  yet  in  our  own  day  it  is  very  generally

  condemned. Hell can only be justified if retributive punishment is good;

  and the decay of a belief in hell appears to be mainly due to a change of

  feeling on this point.

  But even where there seems to be a difference as to ends, this difference is

  often due to some theory on one side or on both, and not to immediate

  inspection. Thus in the case of hell, people may reason, consciously or

    unconsciously,  that  revelation  shows  that  God  created  hell,  and  that

  therefore  retributive  punishment  must  be  good;  and  this  argument

  doubtless  influences  many  who  would  otherwise  hold  retributive

  punishment to be bad. Where there is such an influence we do not have a

  genuine difference in an immediate judgment as to intrinsic good or bad;

  and in fact such differences are, I believe, very rare indeed.

  A source of apparent differences is that some things which in isolation are

  bad or indifferent are essential ingredients in what is good as a whole, and

  some things which are good or indifferent are essential ingredients in what

  is bad as a whole. In such cases we judge differently according as we are

  considering a thing in isolation or as an ingredient in some larger whole.

  To  judge  whether  a  thing  is  in  itself  good,  we  have  to  ask  ourselves

  whether we should value it if it existed otherwise than as an ingredient in

  some whole which we value. But to judge whether a thing ought to exist,

  we have to consider whether it is a part of some whole which we value so  much that we prefer the existence of the whole with its possibly bad part

  to the existence of neither. Thus compassion is a good of which someone’s

  misfortune is an essential part; envy is an evil of which someone’s good is

  an essential part. Hence the position of some optimists, that all the evil in

  the  world  is  necessary  to  constitute  the  best  possible  whole,  is  not

  logically  absurd,  though  there  is,  so  far  as  I  know,  no  evidence  in  its

  favour. Similarly the view that all the good is an unavoidable ingredient in

  the worst possible whole is not logically absurd; but this view, not being

  agreeable, has found no advocates.

  Even where none of the parts of a good whole are bad, or of a bad whole

  good,  it  often  happens  that  the  value  of  a  complex  whole  cannot  be

  measured by adding together the values of its parts; the whole is often

  better or worse than the sum of the values of its parts. In all aesthetic

  pleasures,  for  example,  it  is  important  that  the  object  admired  should

  really be beautiful: in the admiration of what is ugly there is something

  ridiculous, or even sometimes repulsive, although, apart from the object,

  there may be no difference in the value of the emotion per se. And yet,

  apart  from  the  admiration  it  may  produce,  a  beautiful  object,  if  it  is

  inanimate, appears to be neither good nor bad. Thus in themselves an ugly

  object  and  the  emotion  it  excites  in  a  person  of  bad  taste  may  be

  respectively just as good as a beautiful object and the emotion it excites in

  a person of good taste; yet we consider the enjoyment of what is beautiful

  to be better, as a whole, than an exactly similar enjoyment of what is ugly.

  If we did not we should be foolish not to encourage bad taste, since ugly

  objects are much easier to produce than beautiful ones. In like manner, we

  consider it better to love a good person than a bad one. Titania’s love for

  Bottom may be as lyric as Juliet’s for Romeo; yet Titania is laughed at.

  Thus many goods must be estimated as wholes, not piecemeal; and exactly

  the same applies to evils. In such cases the wholes may be called organic

  unities.

  Many theorists who have some simple account of the sole good have also,

  probably without having recognized them as such, immediate judgments

  of value inconsistent with their theory, from which it appears that their

  theory  is  not  really  derived  from  immediate  judgments  of  value.  Thus

  those who have held that virtue is the sole good have generally also held

  that in heaven it will be rewarded by happiness. Yet a reward must be a

  good; thus they plainly feel that happiness also is a good. If virtue were the  sole good it would be logically compelled to be its own reward.

  A similar argument can be brought against those who hold that the sole

  good is pleasure (or happiness, as some prefer to call it). This doctrine is

  regarded as self-evident by many, both philosophers and plain men. But

  although the general principle may at first sight seem obvious, many of its

  applications  are  highly  paradoxical.  To  live  in  a  fool’s  paradise  is

  commonly  considered  a  misfortune;  yet  in  a  world  which  allows  no

  paradise  of  any  other  kind  a  fool’s  paradise  is  surely  the  happiest

  habitation. All hedonists are at great pains to prove that what are called the

  higher pleasures are really the more pleasurable. But plainly their anxiety

  to prove this arises from an uneasy instinct that such pleasures are higher,

  even if they are not more pleasurable. The bias which appears in hedonist

  arguments  on  this  point  is  otherwise  quite  inexplicable.  Although  they

  hold that, ‘quantity of pleasure being equal, pushpin is as good as poetry,’

  they  are  careful  to  argue  that  quantity  of  pleasure  is not equal, but is

  greater  in  the  case  of  poetry—a  proposition  which  seems  highly

  disputable, and chiefly commended by its edifying nature. Anyone would

  admit that the pleasure of poetry is a greater good than the pleasure of

  bathing  on  a  hot  day;  but  few  people  could  say  honestly  that  it  is  as

  intense. And even states of mind which, as a whole, are painful, may be

  highly good. Love of the dead may easily be the best thing in a life; yet it

  cannot but be full of pain. And conversely, we condemn pleasure derived

  from the love of what is bad; even if we admit that the pleasure in itself is

  a good, we consider the whole state of mind bad. If two bitter enemies

  lived in different countries, and each falsely believed that the other was

  undergoing tortures, each might feel pleasure; yet we should not consider

  such a state of things good. We should even think it much worse than a

  state in which each derived pain from the belief that the other was in

  torture. It may, of course, be said that this is due to the fact that hatred in

  general causes more pain than pleasure, and hence is condemned broadly

  on hedonistic grounds, without sufficient regard to possible exceptions.

  But the possibility of exceptions to the principle that hatred is bad can

  hardly be seriously maintained, except by a theorist in difficulties.

  Thus while we may admit that all pleasure, in itself, is probably more or

  less good, we must hold that pleasures are not good in proportion to their

  intensity, and that many states of mind, although pleasure is an element in

  them, are bad as a whole, and may even be worse than they would be if the  pleasure were absent. And this result has been reached by appealing to

  ethical judgments with which almost everyone would agree. I conclude,

  therefore, from all that has been adduced in this section, that although

  some  ultimate  ethical  differences  must  be  admitted  between  different

  people, by far the greater part of the commonly observed differences are

  due either to asking the wrong question (as, e.g., by mistaking means for

  ends),  or  to  the  influence  of  a  hasty  theory  in  falsifying  immediate

  judgments. There is reason to hope, therefore, that a very large measure of

  agreement on ethical questions may be expected to result from clearer

  thinking; and this is probably the chief benefit to be ultimately derived

  from the study of ethics.

  We  may  now  sum  up  our  whole  discussion  of  ethics.  The  most

  fundamental notions in ethics, we agreed, are the notions of intrinsic good

  and evil. These are wholly independent of other notions, and the goodness

  or badness of a thing cannot be inferred from any of its other qualities,

  such as its existence or non-existence. Hence what actually occurs has no

  bearing on what ought to occur, and what ought to occur has no bearing on

  what does occur. The next pair of notions with which we were concerned

  were those of objective right and wrong. The objectively right act is the

  act  which  a  man  will  hold  that  he  ought  to  perform  when  he  is  not

  mistaken. This, we decided, is that one, of all the acts that are possible,

  which will probably produce the best results. Thus in judging what actions

  are right we need to know what results are good. When a man is mistaken

  as to what is objectively right, he may nevertheless act in a way which is

  subjectively right; thus we need a new pair of notions, which we called

  moral  and immoral.  A  moral  act  is  virtuous  and  deserves  praise;  an

  immoral act is sinful and deserves blame. A moral act, we decided, is one

  which the agent would have judged right after an appropriate amount of

  candid  reflection,  where  the  appropriate  amount  of  reflection  depends

  upon the difficulty and importance of his decision. We then considered the

  bearing  of  determinism  on  morals,  which  we  found  to  consist  in  a

  limitation  of  the  acts  which  are possible  under  any  circumstances.  If

  determinism is true, there is a sense in which no act is possible except the

  one which in fact occurs; but there is another sense, which is the one

  relevant  to  ethics,  in  which  any  act  is  possible  which  is  contemplated

  during  deliberation  (provided  it  is physically  possible,  i.e.  will  be

  performed if we will to perform it). We then discussed various forms of  egoism,  and  decided  that  all  of  them  are  false.  Finally,  we  considered

  some  mistakes  which  are  liable  to  be  made  in  attempting  to  form  an

  immediate judgment as to the goodness or badness of a thing, and we

  decided that, when these mistakes are avoided, people probably differ very

  little in their judgments of intrinsic value. The making of such judgments

  we  did  not  undertake;  for  if  the  reader  agrees,  he  could  make  them

  himself,  and  if  he  disagrees  without  falling  into  any  of  the  possible

  confusions, there is no way of altering his opinion.                                              2

                                  ON HISTORY

  Of  all  the  studies  by  which  men  acquire  citizenship  of  the  intellectual

    commonwealth, no single one is so indispensable as the study of the past.

  To know how the world developed to the point at which our individual

  memory  begins;  how  the  religions,  the  institutions,  the  nations  among

  which we live, became what they are; to be acquainted with the great of

  other times, with customs and beliefs differing widely from our own—

  these things are indispensable to any consciousness of our position, and to

  any emancipation from the accidental circumstances of our education. It is

  not only to the historian that history is valuable, not only to the professed

  student  of  archives  and  documents,  but  to  all  who  are  capable  of  a

  contemplative  survey  of  human  life.  But  the  value  of  history  is  so

  multiform, that those to whom some one of its sides appeals with especial

  force are in constant danger of forgetting all the others.  I

  History is valuable, to begin with, because it is true; and this, though not

  the whole of its value, is the foundation and condition of all the rest. That

  all knowledge, as such, is in some degree good, would appear to be at least

  probable;  and  the  knowledge  of  every  historical  fact  possesses  this

  element of goodness, even if it possesses no other. Modern historians, for

  the most part, seem to regard truth as constituting the whole of the value

  of history. On this ground they urge the self-effacement of the historian

  before the document; every intrusion of his own personality, they fear,

  will involve some degree of falsification. Objectivity before all things is to

  be sought, they tell us; let the facts be merely narrated, and allowed to

  speak for themselves—if they can find tongues. It follows, as a part of the

  position, that all facts are equally important; and, although this doctrine

  can never be quite conformed to in practice, it seems nevertheless to float

  before  many  minds  as  an  ideal  toward  which  research  may  gradually

  approximate.

  That the writing of history should be based on the study of documents is

  an opinion which it would be absurd to controvert. For they alone contain

  evidence as to what really occurred; and it is plain that untrue history can

  have no great value. Moreover, there is more life in one document than in

  fifty histories (omitting a very few of the best); by the mere fact that it

  contains what belongs to that actual past time, it has a strangely vivid life-

  in-death,  such  as  belongs  to  our  own  past  when  some  sound  or  scent

  awakens  it.  And  a  history  written  after  the  event  can  hardly  make  us

  realize that the actors were ignorant of the future; it is difficult to believe

  that the late Romans did not know their empire was about to fall, or that

  Charles I was unaware of so notorious a fact as his own execution.

  But if documents are, in so many ways, superior to any deliberate history,

  what  function  remains  to  the  historian?  There  is,  to begin  with,  the

  business of selection. This would be admitted by all; for the materials are

  so vast, that it is impossible to present the whole of them. But it is not

  always realized that selection involves a standard of value among facts,

  and therefore implies that truth is not the sole aim in recording the past.

  For all facts are equally true; and selection among them is only possible by

  means of some other criterion than their truth. And the existence of some

  such criterion is obvious; no one would maintain, for example, that the

  little Restoration scandals recorded by Grammont are as important as the  letters on the Piedmontese massacres, by which Milton, in the name of

  Cromwell, summoned the tardy potentates of Europe.

  It may be said, however, that the only true principle of selection is the

  purely scientific one; those facts are to be regarded as important which

  lead to the establishment of general laws. Whether there ever will be a

  science of history, it is quite impossible to guess; at any rate it is certain

  that no such science exists at present, except to some slight degree in the

  province of economics. In order that the scientific criterion of importance

  among  facts  should  be  applicable,  it  is  necessary  that  two  or  more

  hypotheses should have been invented, each accounting for a large number

  of  the  facts  and  that  then  a  crucial  fact  should  be  discovered  which

  discriminates  between  the  rivals.  Facts  are  important,  in  the  inductive

  sciences, solely in relation to theories; and new theories give importance

  to new facts. So, for example, the doctrine of Natural Selection brought

  into prominence all transitional and intermediate species, the existence of

  rudiments, and the embryological record of descent. But it will hardly be

  maintained that history has reached, or is soon likely to reach, a point

  where such standards are applicable to its facts. History, considered as a

  body of truth, seems destined long to remain almost purely descriptive.

  Such  generalizations  as  have  been  suggested—omitting  the  sphere  of

    economics—are, for the most part, so plainly unwarranted as to be not

  even worthy of refutation. Burke argued that all revolutions end in military

  tyrannies, and predicted Napoleon. In so far as his argument was based on

  the  analogy  of  Cromwell,  it  was  a  very  lucky  hit;  but  certainly  not  a

  scientific law. It is true that numerous instances are not always necessary

  to establish a law, provided the essential and relevant circumstances can

  be easily disentangled. But, in history, so many circumstances of a small

  and accidental nature are relevant, that no broad and simple uniformities

  are possible.

  And there is a further point against this view of history as solely or chiefly

  a causal science. Where our main endeavour is to discover general laws,

  we regard these as intrinsically more valuable than any of the facts which

  they inter-connect. In astronomy, the law of gravitation is plainly better

  worth  knowing  than  the  position  of  a  particular  planet  on  a  particular

  night, or even on every night throughout a year. There are in the law a

  splendour and simplicity and sense of mastery, which illuminate a mass of

  otherwise uninteresting details. And so again in biology: until the theory  of  evolution  put  meaning  into  the  bewildering  variety  of  organic

  structures,  the  particular  facts  were  interesting  only  to  the  professed

  naturalist. But in history the matter is far otherwise. In economics, it is

  true, the data are often subordinate to the attempts at science which are

  based  upon  them;  but  in  all  other  departments,  the  data  are  more

  interesting,  and  the  scientific  superstructure  less  satisfactory.  Historical

  facts, many of them, have an intrinsic value, a profound interest on their

  own account, which makes them worthy of study, quite apart from any

  possibility of linking them together by means of causal laws.

  The study of history is often recommended on the ground of its utility in

  regard  to  the  problems  of  present-day  politics.  That  history  has  great

  utility in this respect, it is impossible to deny; but it is necessary very

  carefully to limit and define the kind of guidance to be expected from it.

  The ‘teachings of history’, in the crude sense, pre-suppose the discovery

  of causal laws, usually of a very sweeping kind; and ‘teachings’ of this

  sort, though in certain cases they may do no harm, are always theoretically

  unsound.  In  the  eighteenth  century  perpetually,  and  in  our  own  day

  occasionally, arguments as to the value of liberty or democracy are drawn

  from Greece and Rome; their greatness or their decay, according to the

  bias  of  the  author,  is  attributed  to  these  causes.  What  can  be  more

  grotesque  than  to  hear  the  rhetoric  of  the  Romans  applied  to  the

  circumstances of the French Revolution! The whole organization of a City

  State, based on slavery, without representative institutions, and without

  printing, is so utterly remote from any modern democracy as to make all

  analogy, except of the vaguest kind, totally frivolous and unreal. So with

  regard  to  imperialism,  arguments  are  drawn  from  the  successes  and

  failures of the ancients. Shall we believe, for example, that Rome was

  ruined by the perpetual extension of her frontiers? Or shall we believe,

  with  Mommsen,  that  the  failure  to  conquer  the  Germans  between  the

  Rhine  and  the  Danube  was  one  of  her  most  fatal  errors?  All  such

  arguments will always be conducted according to the prejudices of the

  author; and all alike, even if they have some measure of truth in regard to

  the past, must be quite inapplicable to the present.

  This evil is greatest when history is regarded as teaching some general

  philosophical doctrine, such as: Right, in the long run, is Might; Truth

  always prevails in the end; or, Progress is a universal law of society. All

  such doctrines require, for their support, a careful choice of place and  time, and, what is worse, a falsification of values. A very flagrant instance

  of this danger is Carlyle. In the case of Puritanism, it led him to justify all

  Cromwell’s acts of impatience and illegality, and arbitrarily to arrest his

  survey in 1658; how he accounted for the Restoration, it is impossible to

  say. In other cases, it led him still further astray. For it is often hard to

  discover on which side the Right lies, but the Might is visible to all men;

  thus the doctrine that Right is Might slides insensibly into the belief that

  Might  is  Right.  Hence  the  praise  of  Frederick  and  Napoleon  and

  Bismarck, the pitiless contempt for the Negroes, the Irish, and the ‘thirty-

  thousand  distressed  needlewomen’.  In  some  such  way,  every  general

  theory that all is for the best must be forced by the facts into defence of the

  indefensible.

  Nevertheless,  history  has  a  function  in  regard  to  current  affairs,  but  a

  function less direct, less exact, and less decisive. It may, in the first place,

  suggest minor maxims, whose truth, when they are once propounded, can

  be seen without the help of the events that suggested them. This is largely

  the case in economics, where most of the motives concerned are simple. It

  is the case also, for a similar reason, in regard to strategy. Wherever, out

  of the facts, a simple deductive argument from indubitable premises can

  be elicited, history may yield useful precepts. But these will only apply

  where the end is given, and are therefore of a technical nature. They can

  never tell the statesman what end to pursue, but only, within certain limits,

  how some of the more definite ends, such as wealth, or victory in war, are

  to be attained.

  II

  Another and a greater utility, however, belongs also to history. It enlarges

  the  imagination,  and  suggests  possibilities  of  action  and  feeling  which

  would not have occurred to an uninstructed mind. It selects from past lives

  the elements which were significant and important; it fills our thoughts

  with splendid examples, and with the desire for greater ends than unaided

  reflection would have discovered. It relates the present to the past, and

  thereby the future to the present. It makes visible and living the growth

  and greatness of nations, enabling us to extend our hopes beyond the span

  of our own lives. In all these ways, a knowledge of history is capable of

  giving to statesmanship, and to our daily thoughts, a breadth and scope

  unattainable by those whose view is limited to the present.

  What the past does for us may be judged, perhaps, by the consideration of  those younger nations whose energy and enterprise are winning the envy

  of Europe. In them we see developing a type of man, endowed with all the

  hopefulness of the Renaissance or of the Age of Pericles, persuaded that

  his more vigorous efforts can quickly achieve whatever has proved too

  difficult for the generations that preceded him. Ignorant and contemptuous

  of  the  aims  that  inspired  those  generations,  unaware  of  the  complex

  problems that they attempted to solve, his rapid success in comparatively

  simple  achievements  encourages  his  confident  belief  that  the  future

  belongs  to  him.  But  to  those  who  have  grown  up  surrounded  by

  monuments  of  men  and  deeds  whose  memory  they  cherish,  there  is  a

  curious  thinness  about  the  thoughts  and  emotions  that  inspire  this

  confidence; optimism seems to be sustained by a too exclusive pursuit of

  what can be easily achieved; and hopes are not transmuted into ideals by

  the habit of appraising current events by their relation to the history of the

  past. Whatever is different from the present is despised. That among those

  who contributed nothing to the dominion of Mammon great men lived,

  that wisdom may reside in those whose thoughts are not dominated by the

  machine, is incredible to this temper of mind. Action, Success, Change,

  are its watchwords; whether the action is noble, the success in a good

  cause,  or  the  change  an  improvement  in  anything  except  wealth,  are

  questions which there is no time to ask. Against this spirit, whereby all

  leisure, all care for the ends of life, are sacrificed to the struggle to be first

  in a worthless race, history and the habit of living with the past are the

  surest antidotes; and in our age, more than ever before, such antidotes are

  needed.

  The record of great deeds is a defeat of Time; for it prolongs their power

  through many ages after they and their authors have been swallowed by

  the  abyss  of  the  non-existent.  And,  in  regard  to  the  past,  where

  contemplation is not obscured by desire and the need for action, we see,

  more clearly than in the lives about us, the value, for good and evil, of the

  aims men have pursued and the means they have adopted. It is good, from

  time to time, to view the present as already past, and to examine what

  elements  it  contains  that  will  add  to  the  world’s  store  of  permanent

  possessions, that will live and give life when we and all our generation

  have perished. In the light of this contemplation, all human experience is

  transformed, and whatever is sordid or personal is purged away. And, as

  we grow in wisdom, the treasure-house of the ages opens to our view;  more  and  more  we  learn  to  know  and  love  the  men  through  whose

  devotion all this wealth has become ours. Gradually, by the contemplation

  of great lives, a mystic communion becomes possible, filling the soul like

  music from an invisible choir. Still, out of the past, the voices of heroes

  call  us.  As,  from  a  lofty  promontory,  the  bell  of  an  ancient  cathedral,

  unchanged since the day when Dante returned from the kingdom of the

  dead, still sends its solemn warning across the waters, so their voice still

  sounds across the intervening sea of time; still, as then, its calm deep tones

  speak to the solitary tortures of cloistered aspiration, putting the serenity

  of things eternal in place of the doubtful struggle against ignoble joys and

  transient pleasures. Not by those about them were they heard; but they

  spoke to the winds of heaven, and the winds of heaven tell the tale to the

  great of later days. The great are not solitary; out of the night come the

  voices  of  those  who  have  gone  before,  clear  and  courageous;  and  so

  through  the  ages  they  march,  a  mighty  procession,  proud,  undaunted,

  unconquerable. To join in this glorious company, to swell the immortal

  paeon of those whom fate could not subdue—this may not be happiness;

  but what is happiness to those whose souls are filled with that celestial

  music?  To  them  is  given  what  is  better  than  happiness:  to  know  the

  fellowship of the great, to live in the inspiration of lofty thoughts, and to

  be illumined in every perplexity by the fire of nobility and truth.

  But history is more than the record of individual men, however great: it is

  the province of history to tell the biography, not only of men, but of Man;

  to present the long procession of generations as but the passing thoughts of

  one continuous life; to transcend their blindness and brevity in the slow

  unfolding of the tremendous drama in which all play their part. In the

  migrations of races, in the birth and death of religions, in the rise and fall

  of  empires,  the  unconscious  units,  without  any  purpose  beyond  the

  moment, have contributed unwittingly to the pageant of the ages; and,

  from the greatness of the whole, some breath of greatness breathes over all

  who participated in the march. In this lies the haunting power of the dim

  history beyond written records. There, nothing is known but the cloudy

  outlines of huge events; and, of all the separate lives that came and went,

  no  memory  remains.  Through  unnumbered  generations,  forgotten  sons

  worshipped  at  the  tombs  of  forgotten  fathers,  forgotten  mothers  bore

  warriors whose bones whitened the silent steppes of Asia. The clash of

  arms, the hatreds and oppressions, the blind conflicts of dumb nations, are  all still, like a distant waterfall; but slowly, out of the strife, the nations

  that we know emerged, with a heritage of poetry and piety transmitted

  from the buried past.

  And this quality, which is all that remains of pre-historic times, belongs

  also to the later periods where the knowledge of details is apt to obscure

  the movement of the whole. We, too, in all our deeds, bear our part in a

  process of which we cannot guess the development: even the obscurest are

  actors in a drama of which we know only that it is great. Whether any

  purpose that we value will be achieved, we cannot tell; but the drama

  itself, in any case, is full of Titanic grandeur. This quality it is the business

  of the historian to extract from the bewildering multitude of irrelevant

  details. From old books, wherein the loves, the hopes, the faiths of bygone

  generations lie embalmed, he calls pictures before our minds, pictures of

  high endeavours and brave hopes, living still through his care, in spite of

  failure and death. Before all is wrapped in oblivion, the historian must

  compose afresh, in each succeeding age, the epitaph upon the life of Man.

  The past alone is truly real: the present is but a painful, struggling birth

  into the immutable being of what is no longer. Only the dead exist fully.

  The lives of the living are fragmentary, doubtful, and subject to change;

  but the lives of the dead are complete, free from the sway of Time, the all

  but omnipotent lord of the world. Their failures and successes, their hopes

  and fears, their joys and pains, have become eternal—our efforts cannot

  now abate one jot of them. Sorrows long buried in the grave, tragedies of

  which  only  a  fading  memory  remains,  loves  immortalized  by  Death’s

  hallowing touch—these have a power, a magic, an untroubled calm, to

  which no present can attain.

  Year by year, comrades die, hopes prove vain, ideals fade; the enchanted

  land of youth grows more remote, the road of life more wearisome; the

  burden of the world increases, until the labour and the pain become almost

  too heavy to be borne; joy fades from the weary nations of the earth, and

  the tyranny of the future saps men’s vital force; all that we love is waning,

  waning from the dying world. But the past, ever devouring the transient

  offspring of the present, lives by the universal death; steadily, irresistibly,

  it adds new trophies to its silent temple, which all the ages build; every

  great  deed,  every  splendid  life,  every  achievement  and  every  heroic

  failure, is there enshrined. On the banks of the river of Time, the sad

  procession of human generations is marching slowly to the grave; in the  quiet country of the Past, the march is ended, the tired wanderers rest, and

  all their weeping is hushed.                                              3

                      SCIENCE AND HYPOTHESIS

  In this book, which consists in the main of previous articles somewhat re-

  written, M. Poincaré’s well-known merits appear to the full—his lucid and

  trenchant brevity, his air of easy mastery, which often makes his thought

  appear less profound than it is, and his power of co-ordinating the whole

  domain of mathematics and physics in a single system of ideas. But these

  merits, great as they are, are accompanied by what cannot but appear as

  defects to anyone accustomed to philosophy. His fundamental principles,

  as a rule, are assumed without discussion, presumably on the ground that

  they are self-evident, yet many of them are at the extreme of one side in

    time-honoured  controversies.  Such  are:  Deduction  can  never  give  new

  truth; mathematics, so far as it is not mere definition, derives its certainty

  from the fact that its principles concern not nature, but properties of the

  mind;  science  teaches  us,  not  about  things  themselves,  but  about  their

  relations; ‘experiment is the sole source of truth. It alone can teach us

  something  new;  it  alone  can  give  us  certainty.’  There  are  also  some

  principles embedded in the chapter on probability; but these are harder to

  discover or to state precisely.

  The first section, on Number and Magnitude, begins with the question: If

  mathematics is not deductive, why is it rigorous? and if it is deductive,

  why is it not one vast tautology? The conclusion arrived at is that all pure

  mathematics depends upon mathematical induction—the principle, that is,

  that if a property belongs to the number o, and also belongs to n + 1,

  whenever it belongs to n,  then  this  property  belongs  to  all  the  natural

  numbers. This principle may be expressed popularly by saying that we can

  get  to  any  one  of  the  natural  numbers,  starting  from  o,  by  successive

  additions of 1 continued for a sufficient (finite) number of times. This

  principle,  M.  Poincaré  says,  enables  mathematics  to  pass  from  the

  particular to the general; it condenses within itself an infinite number of

  syllogisms: it is synthetic a priori intuition; it affirms the power of the

  mind to conceive the indefinite repetition of the same act, when the act is

  once possible; it is ‘necessarily imposed upon us, because it is only the

  affirmation of a property of the mind itself ’ (p. 13); yet ‘this induction is

  only possible if the same operation can be repeated indefinitely’ (p. 16).

  Since the above theory of deduction underlies most of the later parts of the

  book,  I  shall  consider  it  at  some  length.  First  of  all,  the  meaning  of  mathematical  induction  according  to  M.  Poincaré  is  far  from  clear.  It

  affirms, we are told, that we can conceive the indefinite repetition of an

  act which is once possible. Yet it is not a mere repetition that is meant.

  What is affirmed is not (say) that if we can at one time add 1 to 2 then we

  can do so at another time; what is affirmed is that if we can add 1 to 2 and

  so get 3, we can add 1 to 3 and so get 4, and so on ad infinitum. That is, it

  is affirmed that if an operation transforms an object a into an object b, it

  can be performed on b so as to turn it into c: in better words, if a has the

  relation R to b then b will have the relation R to some term c. Now this

  property holds of some relations, but not of others; hence M. Poincaré has

  to  admit  that  induction  is  only  possible  if  the  same  operation  can  be

  repeated indefinitely. Hence his a priori synthetic intuition becomes: ‘If

  an operation is one of those than can be repeated indefinitely, then it is

  capable of indefinite repetition.’ It can hardly be this principle which saves

  mathematics from being a ‘vast tautology’.

  The fact is, of course, that M. Poincaré only means to apply his principle

  to the operation of adding 1 to a number. The property of the mind which

  is in question is, therefore, this: ‘It is possible to add 1 to any number

  whatever.’  But  this  does  not  yield  us  the  principle  of  mathematical

  induction, which says not merely that the addition of 1 will always give a

  number, but that every natural number can be obtained by such additions

  starting from o. It limits the natural numbers at the same time that it shows

  the series of them to be endless: they all appear in this series, any point of

  which  can  be  reached  by  successive  steps  starting  from  o.  Now  this

  limitation, which is what is really used when proofs are conducted by

  means of mathematical induction, is not a synthetic a priori intuition, or a

  property  of  the  mimd,  or  a  condensation  of  an  infinite  number  of

  syllogisms; it is merely the definition of a finite number. A finite number

  means one to which mathematical induction applies; an infinite number

  means one to which it does not apply. There are infinite numbers, and

  many theorems can be proved concerning them, as well as concerning

  things which are not numbers at all; hence plainly mathematical induction

  is not what accounts for the fruitfulness of mathematics.

  Again, M. Poincaré is mistaken in regarding mathematical induction as a

  means of passing from the particular to the general: it is merely a means of

  passing from one general proposition to another. Our premisses are, first,

  that a certain property belongs to o; this, we may admit, is particular;  second, that every finite number n is such that, if n has the said property,

  so has n + 1; this is general. The conclusion is that every finite number has

  the  said  property;  but  this  conclusion  has  exactly  the  same  degree  of

  generality  as  our  second  premiss.  The  appearance  of  passing  from

  particular to general arises only from neglect of our second premiss.

  The notion that a principle is rendered certain by expressing a property of

  the mind is also curious. ‘The mind’ must be somebody’s mind; all minds

  are a part of nature; minds differ from time to time and from person to

  person;  and  psychology  is  not  usually  considered  more  certain  than

  arithmetic.  M.  Poincaré’s  view,  like  Kant’s,  assumes  that  we  know

  already, before we have any other knowledge, that all minds are alike in

  certain  respects;  that  their  likeness  consists  in  their  all  sharing  certain

  beliefs; that these beliefs have no warrant except their universal existence,

  i.e. that they are universal delusions; and that universal delusions are what

  we call a priori truths, and as such are the indispensable premisses of all

  really indubitable knowledge.

  M. Poincaré gives no reasons for the view that deduction can never give

  new  truths.  The  fact  is  that  the  general  principles  of  deduction  are

  analogous, in this respect, to what he conceives mathematical induction to

  be;  that  is  to  say,  they  lead  to  conclusions  which  are  other  than

  themselves, so that in this sense they are synthetic. We shall conclude,

  therefore,  that  mathematics  does  not,  as  M.  Poincaré  affirms  (p.  24),

  contain an inductive element, and yet is not ‘a vast tautology’.

  The second part, on Space, repeats the contention that none of the various

  Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometries is truer than another, but that the

  Euclidean  is  the  most  convenient.  The  argument  is,  that  all  our

  experiments concern bodies, and that any apparently non-Euclidean result

  can be interpreted as due to the nature of bodies, not to the nature of space.

  Admitting this, I do not think the consequence follows. In the first place, it

  does not follow that the Euclidean geometry must always remain the most

  convenient. But this point is of less importance than the following: There

  are relations which arrange the points of space in any order imaginable,

  e.g. so that objects which we perceive as near together would be widely

  separated, while objects which, in the perceived spatial order, are very

  distant, would come between objects which are very near to us. In short,

  relations subsist between points which make a complete re-arrangement of

  them,  not  at  all  resembling  the  arrangement  we  perceive.  These  other  arrangements differ from the one we perceive, it would seem, just in the

  fact that we do not perceive them; and this brings out the necessity of

  supposing that the spatial relations we regard as actual are perceived. But

  if  this  is  the  case,  then  those  relations  constitute  a  Euclidean  or  some

  definite non-Euclidean space, though it may be impossible for us to know

  which. In any case, it is an empirical fact that the material parts of any

  ordinary object are nearer to each other than are the parts of two objects

  between which the said object lies, and that we do perceive bodies as

  made up of parts more or less contiguous. All this shows that matter is

  arranged by perception in a spatial order which is certainly different from

  some of the possible orders; and it is only for reasons whose origin is in

  perception that we select at all from among the orders that are a priori

  possible.  And  this  suffices  to  prove  that  geometry  is  not wholly

  conventional, as M. Poincaré contends.

  The third part, on Force, discusses rational mechanics, and finds that its

  principles also are really definitions. ‘There is no escape,’ we are told,

  ‘from  the  following  definition,  which  is  only  a  confession  of  failure:

  Masses are co-efficients which it is found convenient to introduce into

  calculations’ (p. 103). The discussion of which this is the conclusion is

  admirable.  But  it  is  admitted  that  the  principles  of  mechanics  were

  obtained, and ought to be obtained, by experiment, and this introduces an

  element which is not conventional. The view advocated seems to be that

  actual bodies behave in a way very like the way in which the ideal bodies

  of  rational  mechanics  behave,  but  that  the  principles  of mechanics  are

  rendered conventional by the fact that, whenever they might seem to be

  violated, we prefer to invent hypothetical bodies or hypothetical motions

  which prevent the violation. Thus a principle, it would seem, becomes

  conventional the moment we are less willing to abandon it than to seek a

    supplementary hypothesis to preserve it. It is possible, however—though

  M. Poincaré takes no account of the possibility—to believe that such a

  principle  is  strictly  true,  and  that  any  supplementary  hypothesis  which

  may  be  necessary  to  preserve  it  is  thereby  proved  to  be  also  true.  M.

  Poincaré ignores such a view, because it leads to the result that a law may

  be true although experiment can neither prove nor disprove it. The course

  of science seems to be, that a general principle is found to account for a

  number of phenomena, while others, though not inconsistent with it, are

  not to be explained by it without further hypotheses. In every subsequent  experiment, as M. Poincaré points out, no one hypothesis is really being

  tested, but a whole body of hypotheses; and if any one of them is regarded

  as  beyond  doubt,  it  will  almost  always  be  possible  to  explain  a

  phenomenon by denying one or more of the other hypotheses. Hence a

  hypothesis  which  we  no  longer  regard  as  open  to  doubt  is  thereby

  withdrawn from the region of experimental verification; but it does not

  follow that such a hypothesis is a mere convention. Indeed, if it did, mere

  completeness of proof would constitute disproof.

  There  is  an  unsatisfactory  chapter  on  absolute  and  relative  motion,  in

  which it is admitted that, from Foucault’s pendulum, from the flattening of

  the earth at the poles, and from the different weights of a given mass in

  different latitudes, it would be possible to infer the rotation of the earth

  even if the sky were always cloudy and we saw no heavenly bodies. It

  follows that the rotation of the earth would be convenient as accounting

  for  the  phenomena  even  if  there  were  no  heavenly  bodies;  but  this

  involves absolute rotation, and is therefore meaningless, in M. Poincaré’s

  opinion. He says (p. 117): ‘This affirmation, “the earth turns round”, has

  no  meaning,  since  it  cannot  be  verified  by  experiment  …  or,  in  other

  words, these two propositions, “the earth turns round,” and “it is more

  convenient to suppose that the earth turns round,” have one and the same

  meaning.’ But if ‘the earth turns round’ has no meaning, it has the same

  meaning as ‘Abracadabra’, and therefore, if M. Poincaré is right, it has the

  same meaning as ‘it is more convenient to suppose that Abracadabra’. But

  M. Poincaré supposes it true that it is more convenient to suppose the earth

  turns round; yet I cannot see what convenience is going to result from

  supposing Abracadabra. In short, what it is convenient to suppose must

  have  some  meaning;  hence,  it  would  seem,  the  facts  which  make  it

  convenient to suppose that the earth turns round prove that there is such a

  thing as absolute rotation.

  The fourth and last part, on Nature, deals with physics, and points out

  where, according to M. Poincaré, the domain of convention and definition

  ceases,  and  substantial  scientific  laws  come  into  play.  There  is  an

  interesting comparison of the methods of English and French physicists,

  giving the preference, in the main, to the former as more experimental and

  less concerned to rear a logical edifice. There is also an interesting but

    unsatisfactory discussion of probability, whose importance, in inductive

  proofs,  M.  Poincaré  very  justly  emphasizes,  though  this  discussion  is  rather marred, logically, by the assumption that, in the long run, the most

  probable distribution, say of heads and tails, will actually occur (p. 188),

  whereas we can only say that it will probably occur. But I pass by these

  matters to consider the main theses of this part, which are two: (1) that

  science deals only with the relations of things; (2) that experiment is the

  sole test of truth.

  Questions concerning the real, as opposed to the relation of real things, are

  said to be illusory and devoid of meaning (pp. xxiv, 163). Certainly we

  have much more belief in the accuracy of our perceptions of relations than

  in that of our perceptions of qualities. When we see green in one place and

  red  in  another,  we  are  willing  to  believe  that  secondary  qualities  are

  subjective, but not that the fact of difference between what is in the two

  places is an illusion. It is only by holding fast to relations as perceived that

  science manages, on an empirical basis, to construct a world so different

  from that of perception. Why we should trust in our perception of relations

  I do not know; but it is a fact that we do so. But I do not see how it can be

  maintained that questions as to the qualities of real things are unmeaning.

  The proposition amounts to this, that if a really exists, a statement about a

  has no meaning unless it asserts a relation to a b which also really exists.

  The fact seems to be, not that such propositions are unmeaning, but that,

  except in psychology, they are unknowable. We may even push the theory

  further, and say that in general even the relations are for the most part

  unknown, and what is known are properties of the relations, such as are

  dealt with by mathematics. And this, I think, expresses substantially the

  same view as that which M. Poincaré really holds.

  That experiment alone can teach us something new, is a view underlying

  all  M.  Poincaré’s  theories,  and  is  connected  with  his  opinion  that

  deductions  are  mere  tautologies.  Yet  he  himself  admits  that  a  good

  experiment  teaches  more  than  an  isolated  fact  (p.  142),  and  that  ‘the

  physicist  who  would  content  himself  with  experiment  pure  and  simple

  would be compelled to enunciate very extraordinary laws indeed’ (p. 143).

  But it is surely plain that if experiment were the sole source of truth, no

  experiment could teach anything beyond itself. To do this, the result of the

  experiment must imply other propositions, and this implication, in the long

  run, cannot itself be wholly proved by experiment. We speak of general

  laws being proved by experiment, but the mere fact of their generality

  shows that they are not wholly proved by experiment, since all experience  is of particulars. When a general law is proved by experiment, it is merely

  selected  by  experiment  from  among  several,  which  are  themselves

  regarded a priori  as  the  only  possible  laws.  M.  Poincaré  more  or  less

  admits  that  the  uniformity  of  nature  and  other  fundamental  principles

  cannot  be proved  by  experiment;  but  he  concludes  that  they  are  only

  probable. His argument in favour of their being even probable depends,

  however, upon assumptions as to probability—notably that an observed

  regularity  is  not  likely  to  be  due  to  accident—which  are  certainly

  incapable of experimental proof, or of being made probable without some

  axiom concerning probability.

  The book throughout is interesting, and has the great merit of making its

  meaning  perfectly  definite.  Moreover,  M.  Poincaré’s  opinions,  whether

  one agrees or disagrees, are such as it is by no means easy to disprove, and

  the  disproof,  when  it  is  possible,  is  instructive.  Professor  Larmor’s

  introduction  suggests  that  its  author  feels  a  strong  objection  to  M.

  Poincaré’s scepticism, but this scepticism is never wanton, and has always

  a constructive purpose. I cannot but think that the translator has sometimes

  misplaced a negative; e.g. on page 48, ‘these geometries of Riemann …

  can never be … purely analytical’ surely does not translate ‘ne peuvent

  jamais être que’, which means ‘can never be more than’. Similar mistakes

  seem to occur on pages 18, 162, 205.                                              4

                                  PRAGMATISM

  The appearance in the world of a genuinely new philosophy is at all times

  an event of very great importance. More particularly is this the case when

  the new philosophy embodies the prevailing temper of the age better than

  any of its older rivals; for in that case it is likely to establish itself in

  popular favour, to colour the thoughts of the educated and half-educated

  public,  and  to  strengthen  those  elements  in  the  mental  atmosphere  to

  which  it  owes  its  success.  It  would  be  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  new

  philosophies are always adapted to the age in which they appear; but when

  they are not, they fail to win wide acceptance whatever their other merits

  may be. Spinoza, for example, deserved success as well as Leibniz; yet his

  works were almost wholly neglected until more than a century after his

  death, because the political and intellectual milieu was not one in which

  they  could  thrive.  Leibniz,  on  the  contrary,  gave  scope  to  the  love  of

  calculation  which  men  derived  from  the  discoveries  of  his  time,  and

  represented the world as a hierarchy of systems, each exactly like the Holy

  Roman Empire; his system, therefore, ruled the German mind until the

  ferment which preceded the French Revolution set men’s thoughts running

  in new channels.

  The philosophy which is called Pragmatism or Humanism is genuinely

  new, and is singularly well adapted to the predominant intellectual temper

  of our time. As regards its adaptation to the age, we shall have more to say

  when we have considered what it is. As regards novelty, its authors show a

  modesty which, in our opinion, is somewhat excessive. ‘Pragmatism, a

  new name for some old ways of thinking’, William James calls his book;

  and  Dr  Schiller  constantly  asserts  that  his  doctrines  are  those  of

  Protagoras. As for Protagoras, we know sufficiently little about him to be

  able to read into him almost any doctrine we please; and the appeal to him

  may be regarded as mainly due to the desire to produce an ancestry which

  has  acquired  respectability  by  the  lapse  of  time.  With  regard  to  more

  modern precursors, it must be admitted that many philosophers—as chief

  among whom we may mention Nietzsche—have paved the way for the

  new  doctrines.  Nevertheless  the  cardinal  point  in  the  pragmatist

  philosophy, namely, its theory of truth, is so new, and so necessary to the

  rest  of  the  philosophy,  even  to  those  parts  which  had  been  previously

  maintained  by  others,  that  its  inventors  cannot  be  regarded  as  merely  developing the thoughts of less explicit predecessors.

  The name ‘pragmatism’ was first invented by Mr C. S. Peirce, as long ago

  as 1878. It was applied by him to the doctrine that the significance of a

  thought  lies  in  the  actions  to  which  it  leads.  In  order  to  estimate  the

  difference  between  two  different  beliefs  about  the  same  matter,  he

  maintained we ought to consider what difference in conduct would result

  according as we adopted the one belief or the other. If no difference would

  result, the two beliefs are not effectively different. Mr Peirce’s doctrine,

  however,  remained  sterile  until  it  was  taken  up  twenty  years  later  by

  William James, who, while retaining the word ‘pragmatism’, gave it a

  more  sweeping  significance.  The  full-fledged philosophy  is  to  be

  attributed to him and Dr Schiller jointly. Professor Dewey, of Columbia

  University, is also to be reckoned among the founders of pragmatism. His

  writings are more technical and less popular than those of James and Dr

  Schiller, but on certain points his exposition is perhaps preferable to theirs.

  As an introduction to pragmatism, it is interesting to read William James’s

  essay on ‘The Will to Believe’, first published in 1896, and reprinted in

  book  form  in  the  following  year.  In  this  essay,  though  the  word

  ‘pragmatism’  does  not  appear,  we  find  much  that  is  characteristic  of

  James’s later views. The thesis he is advocating is that, in certain cases, it

  is right to believe whole-heartedly in one of two alternatives, even when

  there is no evidence as to which of them is true. These cases arise, he says,

  when we are compelled to choose between two hypotheses, each of which

  seems  to  us  possible,  and  when  it  makes  a  great  difference  which  we

  choose. The instances he has in mind are chiefly questions of morals and

  religion. In a moral perplexity we are compelled to come to some decision,

  since inaction is as much a decision as action. In regard to religion, also,

  we must act as though it were true or as though it were false; we are

  therefore practically compelled to choose. His contention is that, in such

  cases, it would be foolish to refuse to have faith merely on the ground that

  we do not find conclusive evidence on either side of the question. To

  quote his own words:

  Our passional nature not only lawfully may, but must, decide an option

  between propositions, whenever it is a genuine option that cannot by its

  nature  be  decided  on  intellectual  grounds;  for  to  say,  under  such

    circumstances, ‘Do not decide, but leave the question open’, is itself a

  passional decision—just like deciding yes or no—and is attended with the  same risk of losing the truth.

  He proceeds to justify himself against the charge of insufficient regard for

  truth, not, as he would do now, by contending that, in the absence of other

  evidence, the answer which gives the greatest emotional satisfaction is

  true,  but  on  a  variety  of  grounds  tending  to  show  that  there  are  no

  sufficient moral arguments against thinking it true. He points out, to begin

  with, that emotions and wishes, though often unable to alter our beliefs

  when  these  have  become  established,  nevertheless  play  a  great  part  in

  initially deciding what our beliefs are to be. He points out next that our

  duty in the matter of opinion has two branches: (i) we must know the

  truth; (ii) we must avoid error. These two precepts, he says, have very

  different results. If, in cases where evidence is lacking, we abstain wholly

  from either belief, we are sure of not incurring error, but, on the other

  hand, we are sure of not knowing truth. If, however, we decide for one of

  the alternatives, we have an even chance of knowing the truth. It follows

  that those who urge us to abstain from belief in the absence of evidence

  consider it more important to avoid error than to believe truth. This ‘horror

  of  being  duped’  he  represents  as  a  somewhat  contemptible  form  of

  cowardice;  ‘our  errors’,  he  says,  ‘are  surely  not  such  awfully  solemn

  things. In a world where we are so certain to incur them in spite of all our

  caution, a certain lightness of heart seems healthier than this excessive

  nervousness  on  their  behalf.’  The  legitimate  conclusion  from  this

  argument would be that, in such cases as William James has in mind, we

  ought  to  believe  both  alternatives;  for  in  that  case  we  are  sure  of

  ‘knowing’ the truth in the matter. If it were said that to believe both is a

  psychological impossibility, we would rejoin that, on the contrary, it is

  often done, and that those who cannot yet do it need only practise the ‘will

  to believe’ until they have learnt to believe that the law of contradiction is

  false—a feat which is by no means as difficult as it is often supposed to

  be.

  William  James  proceeds  to  point  out  that,  in  the  case  of  religion,  the

  choice between believing and disbelieving possesses all the characteristics

  of  the  options  which,  according  to him,  ought  to  be  decided  by  the

  emotions.  He  tacitly  assumes  that  there  is  no  evidence  for  or  against

  religion,  and  he  points  out  that  by  refusing  either  to  believe  or  to

  disbelieve we lose the benefits of religion just as much as by deciding to

  disbelieve.  Scepticism, then, is not avoidance of option; it is option of a certain kind

  of risk. Better risk loss of truth than chance of error—that is your faith-

  vetoer’s exact position. He is actively playing his stake as much as the

  believer is; he is backing the field against the religious hypothesis, just as

  the believer is backing the religious hypothesis against the field…. It is not

  intellect against all passions, then; it is only intellect with one passion

  laying down its law. And by what, forsooth, is the supreme wisdom of this

  passion warranted? Dupery for dupery, what proof is there that dupery

  through hope is so much worse than dupery through fear?

  The conclusion is that, although there is no evidence in favour of religion,

  we ought nevertheless to believe it if we find satisfaction in so doing.

  This essay on the will to believe is important, because it has been widely

  read and much criticized, both adversely and favourably, and because it

  affords  a  good  introduction  to  the  pragmatist  temper  of  mind.  Some

  practice in the will to believe is an almost indispensable preliminary to the

  acceptance  of  pragmatism;  and  conversely  pragmatism,  when  once

  accepted, is found to give the full justification of the will to believe. We

  shall therefore, before proceeding to pragmatism proper, consider briefly

  what there is to be said, on a common-sense basis, against the doctrines so

  persuasively set forth in this essay.

  We may observe, to begin with, the agnostic hypothesis upon which the

  whole argument rests. The hypothesis is that no evidence for or against

  religion is at present known. Pragmatists pose as the friends of religion

  (except in Italy), and many religious people have accepted them as allies.

  It is therefore worth while to emphasize this underlying hypothesis, and to

  point out the very questionable wisdom of accepting it as the basis of a

  defence  of  orthodoxy.  With  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  this  hypothesis,

  however, we need not concern ourselves in this discussion; the question

  for us is whether, granting the hypothesis, we can accept the results which

  William James derives from it.

  Let  us  observe,  in  the  first  place,  a  confusion  which  runs  through  the

  whole pragmatist account of knowledge, namely, the confusion between

  acting on an hypothesis and believing it. In the cases which William James

  has in mind, the option between rival hypotheses is, he says, a ‘forced’

  option; i.e. it is not avoidable:

  If I say, ‘Either accept this truth or go without it’, I put on you a forced

  option, for there is no standing place outside of the alternative.  This statement appears to us to be contrary to many of the plainest facts of

  daily life. If, in walking along a country road, I come to a fork where there

  is no signpost and no passer-by, I have, from the point of view of action, a

  ‘forced’ option. I must take one road or other if I am to have any chance of

  reaching  my  destination;  and  I  may  have  no  evidence  whatever  as  to

  which is the right road. I then act on one or other of the two possible

  hypotheses, until I find someone of whom I can ask the way. But I do not

  believe either hypothesis. My action is either right or wrong, but my belief

  is neither, since I do not entertain either of the two possible beliefs. The

  pragmatist assumption that I believe the road I have chosen to be the right

  one is erroneous. To infer belief from action, in the crude way involved in

  the assumption that we must ‘either accept this truth or go without it’, is to

  ignore  the  plain  fact  that  our  actions  are  constantly  based  upon

  probabilities, and that, in all such cases, we neither accept a truth nor go

  without it, but entertain it as an hypothesis. This applies, in particular, to

  the working hypotheses of science. A man of science who considers it

  worthwhile to devise experimental tests of an hypothesis, and to construct

  elaborate theories which use the hypothesis, is not on that account to be

  regarded  as believing  the  hypothesis.  Pragmatists  tell  us  that,  in  such

  cases,  the  initial  unverified belief  is  a  necessary  condition  for  the

  subsequent established theory, and by so doing they make out a case for

  the usefulness of believing before we have evidence. This is, however, a

  mistaken  analysis  of  the  state  of  mind  of  a  man  who  is  testing  an

  hypothesis.  All  that  is  required,  and  all  that  occurs  among  careful

  investigators,  is  the  belief  that  the  hypothesis  has  a  greater  or  smaller

  chance  of  being  true,  and  for  this  belief  there  is  probably  sufficient

  evidence. The actual belief that the hypothesis is true, when it occurs, is

  apt to be a hindrance, since it retards the abandonment of false hypotheses

  when the evidence goes against them, and if the belief is general, it makes

  people regard experimental verification as unnecessary. The Aristotelians

  who opposed Galileo and refused to give weight to his experiments had

  faithfully obeyed the precepts revived by William James.

  The  matter  is,  however,  more  complicated  in  such  cases  as  religious

  beliefs, where the chief benefit is derived from the emotional satisfaction

  of the belief itself, not from the useful actions to which it directly prompts.

  But here, too, the antithesis of ‘accepting’ or ‘going without’ is far too

  crude;  we  may  regard  the  belief  as  more  or  less  probable,  entertain  a  greater or less degree of hope that it may be true, and derive, accordingly,

  a greater or less proportion of the comfort we should derive from complete

  belief. In practice, to adopt the pragmatists’ test, the effect of partial belief

  is very different from that of complete belief. Complete belief, if the issue

  is sufficiently momentous, will justify persecution—assuming, as history

  warrants us in doing, that the blood of Protestant martyrs is the seed of the

  Catholic Church. An incomplete belief, on the contrary, will not warrant

  the  infliction  of  an  indubitable  evil  for  the  sake  of  a  gain  which  may

  possibly be illusory. This affords a pragmatic argument against conceding

  full belief in such cases as those with which William James is concerned.

  But if, as he assumes, there is a genuine possibility of the truth of an

  hypothesis,  it  is  in  accordance  with  all  the  strictest  tenets  of  scientific

  veracity  that  we  should  bear  the  hypothesis  in  mind,  and  allow  to  it

  whatever  influence  over  our  emotions  and  actions  corresponds  to  the

  degree of its probability.

  We will next examine the argument that, in doubtful cases, the precept ‘we

  must know the truth’ should lead us to believe one hypothesis at a venture,

  since,  if  we  believe  neither,  we  certainly  do  not  know  the  truth.  This

  argument rests upon an ambiguity in the word ‘know’. At first sight it

  might be thought that if we believe what is in fact true we must have

  knowledge. But this is not the sense in which the word is commonly used.

  Suppose, to take a trivial instance, that a man believed that the late Prime

  Minister’s name began with a B, but believed this because he thought Mr

  Balfour was the late Prime Minister. What he believes is in fact true, yet

  no  one  would  say  that  he  ‘knew’  that  the  late  Prime  Minister’s  name

  began with a B. In this case the true belief is based upon a false reason.

  But  the  case  is  similar  when  the  true  belief  is  based  upon  no  reason

  (except,  indeed,  in  the  case  of  immediate  data  such  as  the  facts  of

  perception). Thus if, in the case of an option which we have no rational

  means of deciding, we believe one alternative at a venture, we cannot be

  said to know, even if, by good luck, we have chosen the alternative which

  in fact is true. In such cases, we cannot know the truth, though we may be

  chance believe  it.  Hence  the  precept  ‘we  must  know  the  truth’,  which

  James invokes, is irrelevant to the issue. The usual antitheses of belief and

  disbelief, what is known and what is unknown, are not adequate to meet

  the situation. The true precept of veracity, which includes both the pursuit

  of truth and the avoidance of error, is this: ‘We ought to give to every  proposition  which  we  consider  as  nearly  as  possible  that  degree  of

  credence  which  is  warranted  by  the  probability  it  acquires  from  the

  evidence  known  to  us.’  The  further  questions,  what  propositions  to

  consider,  and  how  much  trouble  to  take  to  acquire  knowledge  of  the

  evidence, depend of course upon our circumstances and the importance of

  the issue. But to go about the world believing everything in the hope that

  thereby  we  shall  believe  as  much  truth  as  possible  is  like  practising

  polygamy in the hope that among so many we shall find someone who

  will make us happy.

  Another interesting point to observe in James’s doctrine is the immense

  multiplicity  of  differing  beliefs  which  it  simultaneously  justifies  in

  different people. This arises from the condition that the option must be

  what he calls a ‘living’ option, that is, it must be one in which either

  alternative seems to us possible.

  If I say to you: ‘Be a theosophist or be a Mohammedan’, it is probably a

  dead option, because for you neither hypothesis is likely to be alive. But if

  I say: ‘Be an agnostic or be a Christian’, it is otherwise: trained as you are,

  each hypothesis makes some appeal, however small, to your belief.

  He  points  out  that  to  different  people  different  options  are  living.  It

  follows that the beliefs which, on his principles, different men ought to

  adopt,  are  different,  since  the  three  conditions  for  adopting  a  belief

  without  evidence  are  that  the  option  should  be living,  forced,  and

  momentous.  One  gathers  (perhaps  wrongly)  from  his  instances  that  a

  Frenchman ought to believe in Catholicism, an American in the Monroe

  Doctrine,  and  an  Arab  in  the  Mahdi  (he  wrote  before  the  battle  of

  Omdurman).  It  seems  odd  that,  in  view  of  this  outcome,  he  should

  maintain that acceptance of his doctrine would diminish persecution; for

  an essential part of each of the above three creeds is that people who think

  otherwise must be taught their place.

  To sum up our criticism of ‘The Will to Believe’: It ignores the distinction

  between believing and entertaining an hypothesis, and wrongly assumes

  that  if  we  do  not  completely  believe  an  hypothesis,  we  must  either

  completely disbelieve it or wholly suspend judgment. Hence it is able to

  represent the option ‘Either accept this truth or go without it’ as one from

  which there is no escape, whereas all experiment, both in science and in

  daily life, implies a state of mind which accepts neither alternative. He

  assumes that we may be said to ‘know’ a truth, when we believe it at a  venture,  without  reasons,  and  that  therefore,  in  order  to  maximize  our

  knowledge, we have only to maximize our beliefs. And his doctrines lead

  to the conclusion that different people ought to have incompatible beliefs.

  These objections, we shall find, may also be urged against full-fledged

  pragmatism. But we must now approach somewhat more difficult topics

  than those which have concerned us hitherto, since pragmatism cannot be

  understood without examining its doctrine as to the nature of truth. To this

  doctrine, therefore, we will now turn our attention.

  The pragmatic theory of truth takes credit to itself—rightly, as we think—

  for a due consideration of error. Most theories as to the nature of truth

  have tacitly assumed to begin with that all our beliefs are true, and have

  arrived at results incompatible with the existence of error. They have then

  had to add a postscript explaining that what we call error is really partial

  truth. If we think it is Tuesday when it is really Wednesday, we are at least

  right in thinking that ‘it’ is a day of the week. If we think America was

  discovered  in  1066,  we  are  at  least  right  in  thinking  that  something

  important happened in that year. If we think Charles I died in his bed, we

  are at least so far right that, in view of the many people who do die in their

  beds, he probably had the potentiality of dying in his bed. And so on. Dr

  Schiller  rightly  points  to  the Theaetetus  as  showing  the  difficulties  to

  which a theory of knowledge is reduced by neglecting to take due account

  of error from the beginning; and among more recent books, Mr Joachim’s

  The Nature of Truth is used to point the same moral.

  Pragmatism,  then,  emphasizes  from  the  start  the  fact  that  some  of  our

  beliefs turn out to be mistaken, and that the proper business of a theory of

  truth is to show how truth and falsehood are distinguished. This might

  seem, to those not sophisticated by philosophy, to be an obvious truism;

  but in fact philosophy has always regarded it as its business to prove (as

  far as possible) that everything is true, rather than to distinguish between

  truth and falsehood. Similarly in ethics, philosophers have not sought to

  distinguish  between  the  good  and  the  bad,  so  much  as  to  prove  that

  everything  is  good.  If  little  truth  has  been  attained  in  philosophy,  the

  reason  is  chiefly  that  few  philosophers  have  wished  to  attain  truth.

  Whether pragmatists are superior in this respect we shall not venture to

  pronounce; but at any rate the peculiarity of their bias makes them willing

  to  admit  facts  which  other  philosophers  find  inconvenient,  and  among

  such facts is the prevalence of error.  In  order  to  discover  the  difference  between  truth  and  falsehood,

  pragmatism sets about a Socratic inductive inquiry as to the things we call

  ‘true’ and ‘false’. These words, to begin with, are applied to beliefs, and

  are applied only when a question has arisen. Concerning the ordinary facts

  of perception, we do not ask questions until we have become philosophers;

  we do not apply either of the words ‘true’ and ‘false’ to such unquestioned

  matters. But when once the question has arisen concerning some actual

  belief,  ‘Is  it  a  true  or  a  false  belief?’  how  do  we  in  fact  decide  the

  question?  The  answer  of  pragmatism  is  that  if  the  belief  furthers  the

  purpose which led us to ask the question it is regarded as a ‘true’ belief; if

  it  fails  to  further  the  purpose  it  is  regarded  as  a  ‘false’  belief.  This,

  therefore, according to pragmatism, is the meaning of the words ‘true’ and

  ‘false’. ‘True’ means ‘furthering the purpose which led to the question’.

  Or, more explicitly: When, in pursuing any purpose, a belief is entertained

  which  is  relevant  to  the  purpose,  the  belief  is  ‘true’  if  it  furthers  the

  achievement of the purpose, and ‘false’ if it does not do so.

  A  few  quotations  will  serve  to  amplify  and  elucidate  the  above  brief

  statement. After explaining recent changes in the methodology of science,

  James says:

  Riding now on the front of this wave of scientific logic, Messrs Schiller

  and  Dewey  appear  with  their  pragmatistic  account  of  what  truth

  everywhere signifies. Everywhere, these teachers say, ‘truth’ in our ideas

  and beliefs means the same thing that it means in science. It means, they

  say, nothing but this, that ideas (which themselves are but parts of our

  experience)  become  true  just  in  so  far  as  they  help  us  to  get  into

  satisfactory relations with other parts of our experience.

  Again:

  I am well aware how odd it must seem to some of you to hear me say that

  an idea is ‘true’ so long as to believe it is profitable to our lives. That it is

  good, for as much as it profits, you will gladly admit. … But is it not a

  strange misuse of the word ‘truth’, you will say, to call ideas also ‘true’ for

  this reason? … You touch here upon the very central point of Messrs

  Schiller’s, Dewey’s and my own doctrine of truth. … Let me now say only

  this, that truth is one species of good, and not, as is usually supposed, a

  category distinct from good, and co-ordinate with it. The true is the name

  of whatever proves itself to be good in the way of belief, and good, too, for

  definite assignable reasons.  The sixth of William James’s lectures on pragmatism is concerned wholly

  with the notion of truth. He begins by assenting to the dictionary definition

  that ‘truth’ means ‘the agreement’ of our ideas with ‘reality’. But, as he

  justly observes, this definition does not take us very far, unless we know

  what  we  mean  by  ‘agreement’  and  what  we  mean  by  ‘reality’.  The

  pragmatist holds that different sorts of ‘agreement’ and different sorts of

  ‘reality’ are concerned in different cases. The popular notion that a true

  idea must copy its reality holds good, he says, of sensible things, but goes

  wrong as soon as we come to abstractions. The idea of the elasticity of a

  spring, for example, cannot, according to him, be a copy of a reality—

  presumably  on  the  ground  that  an  elasticity  is  not  an  actually  existing

  thing. The question is, then, what sort of agreement with reality is possible

  in such cases? ‘The great assumption of the intellectualists’, he says, ‘is

  that truth means essentially an inert static relation.’ An intellectualist, by

  the way, is anyone who is not a pragmatist. He proceeds:

  Pragmatism, on the other hand, asks its usual question. ‘Grant an idea or

  belief to be true,’ it says, ‘what concrete difference will its being true

  make  in  anyone’s  actual  life?  How  will  the  truth  be  realized?  What

  experiences will be different from those which would obtain if the belief

  were false? What, in short, is the truth’s cash-value in experiential terms?’

  The moment pragmatism asks this question it sees the answer: True ideas

  are those that we can assimilate, validate, corroborate and verify. False

  ideas are those that we cannot. …

  The truth of an idea is not a stagnant property inherent in it. Truth happens

  to an idea. It becomes true, is made true by events. Its verity is in fact an

  event, a process: the process namely of its verifying itself, its veri-fication.

  Its validity is the process of its valid-ation.

  Recurring to the definition of ‘truth’ as ‘agreement with reality’, James

  sums up by distinguishing three kinds of reality: (1) concrete facts, (2)

  ‘abstract kinds of things and relations perceived intuitively between them’,

  (3) truths already in our possession. ‘Agreement’ he defines as follows:

  To ‘agree’ in the widest sense with a reality can only mean to be guided

  either straight up to it or into its surroundings, or to be put into such

  working touch with it as to handle either it or something connected with it

  better than if we disagreed. (p. 212.)

  Two  further  quotations  will  complete  the  material  required  for

  understanding James’s account of truth.  ‘The true’, to put it very briefly, is only the expedient in the way of our

  thinking,  just  as  ‘the  right’  is  only  the  expedient  in  the  way  of  our

  behaving. Expedient in almost any fashion; and expedient in the long run

  and on the whole of course. (p. 222.)

  Our account of truth is an account of truths in the plural, of processes of

  leading, realized in rebus, and having only this quality in common, that

  they pay. (p. 218.)

  Before  proceeding  further,  it  will  be  as  well  to  clear  up  a

    misunderstanding, from which the pragmatists themselves appear not to be

  exempt. When it is said that truth is ‘one species of good’, it is natural to

  suppose  that  ethical  considerations  are  involved,  and  that  logic  will

  become  dependent  upon  ethics.  This  view  is,  in  fact,  adopted  in  Dr

  Schiller’s  essay  on  ‘the  ethical  basis  of  metaphysics’.  But  a  closer

  examination shows that pragmatists mean by the word ‘good’ whatever

  satisfies desire. So far as we know, they have nowhere justified this use of

  the word, but that is not our present concern. What concerns us at present

  is  to  observe  that,  in  virtue  of  this  definition,  only  psychological

  considerations  are  relevant  where,  to  judge  from  the  language,  ethical

  considerations might seem to be involved. In order to judge whether a

  belief  is  true,  it  is  only  necessary  to  discover  whether  it  tends  to  the

  satisfaction  of  desire.  The  nature  of  the  desire  to  be  satisfied  is  only

  relevant  in  so  far  as  it  may  involve  conflict  with  other  desires.  Thus

  psychology  is  paramount,  not  only  over  logic  and  the  theory  of

  knowledge, but also over ethics. In order to discover what is good, we

  have only to inquire how people are to get what they want; and ‘true’

  beliefs are those which help in this process. This is the pragmatist theory

  of truth; and its consequences, as might be supposed, are far-reaching.

  Before considering the metaphysic which Dr Schiller has deduced from

  the pragmatist theory of truth, let us examine the grounds upon which that

  theory  is  based.  Most  philosophies  are  determined  by  their  initial

  questions, and by the facts which habitually fill the imagination of the

  philosopher. The initial question of pragmatism is: What characteristics of

  beliefs do in fact lead men to regard some as true, others as false? The

  answer  to  this  question—so  pragmatism  assumes—will  give  us  the

  meaning of truth and falsehood. The facts which fill the imaginations of

  pragmatists  are  psychical  facts:  where  others  might  think  of  the  starry

  heavens, pragmatists think of the perception of the starry heavens; where  others might think of God, pragmatists think of the belief in God, and so

  on. In discussing the sciences, they never think, like scientific specialists,

  about the facts upon which scientific theories are based: they think about

  the  theories  themselves.  Thus  their  initial  question  and  their  habitual

  imaginative background are both psychological. In order to arrive at an

  external world, they have to prove that the belief in an external world has

  the marks which (according to them) distinguish a true belief. Hence they

  infer that there is an external world. And a similar process is necessary as

  regards all other facts which transcend the Ego.

  One  of  the  approaches  to  pragmatism  is  through  the  consideration  of

  induction  and  scientific  method.  The  old  inductive philosophy,  as

  exemplified in Mill’s logic, conceived the nature and scope of induction

  far too narrowly, and pragmatism deserves credit for having remedied this

  defect. Induction, though it cannot give complete certainty, underlies all

  the sciences, even pure mathematics. In any science, we have a collection

  of facts bound together (as far as possible) by general laws. The facts

  appear, in the formal exposition, as deductions from the laws; this, at least,

  holds for the most advanced sciences, such as mathematics and physics.

  But in reality the laws are inductions from the facts. We cannot say that

  this or that fact proves this or that law: the whole body of facts proves (or,

  rather, renders probable) the whole body of laws. It might be thought that,

  in an experimentum crucis, a single fact establishes a single law; but this is

  only the case so long as the other laws of the science are taken for granted.

  If other facts should lead us to doubt the other laws, the interpretation of

  our experimentum crucis might be wholly changed. Thus the justification

  of a science is that it fits all the known facts, and that no alternative system

  of  hypotheses  is  known  which  fits  the  facts  equally  well.  We  may

  therefore say truly that scientific theories are adopted simply because they

  work,  i.e.  because  their  consequences  are  satisfactory.  Thus  it  would

  appear as though a right analysis of scientific induction led us straight to

  the pragmatic test of truth.

  Certain  objections  to  this  conclusion,  however,  at  once  suggest

  themselves. In the first place, scientific induction assumes certain data, the

  ‘facts’ with which our theories have to agree. That the heavenly bodies

  have the apparent positions, in the sky, which we perceive them to have, is

  not  proved  by  astronomy,  but  is  assumed  as  the  datum  upon  which

  astronomy proceeds. It would seem, therefore, that there are truths of fact  which are prior to the whole inductive procedure, and that these truths of

  fact  must  be  ‘true’  in  some  other  sense  than  that  the  consequences  of

  supposing them true are satisfactory. To this argument pragmatists reply

  that what really is ‘fact’ is neither true nor false, but prior to the whole

  antithesis of truth and falsehood. ‘Day follows day, and its contents are

  simply added. The new contents themselves are not true, they simply come

  and are. Truth is what we say about them, and when we say that they have

  come,  truth  is  satisfied  by  the  plain  additive  formula.’  Pragmatists

  contend, therefore, that the mere recognition of facts is the simplest case

  of the application of their formula. If all ‘truth’ were of this simple nature,

  the  pragmatist  doctrine  would  be  unnecessary,  though  there  would  be

  nothing to show that it was false. But the ‘truths’ which do not consist in

  the  mere  recognition  of  facts  cannot,  according  to  pragmatism,  be

  explained in this simple way; hence we are forced to adopt a theory of

  truth not derived from the exclusive consideration of this simplest case.

  For the moment let us allow this answer to pass. We shall return to the

  subject of ‘facts’ in connection with Dr Schiller’s doctrine of the making

  of reality.

  A  more  serious  objection  to  the  argument  from  the  procedure  of  the

  sciences is derived from the ambiguity of the conception of ‘working’.

  What  science  requires  of  a  working  hypothesis  is  that  it  shall  work

  theoretically,  i.e.  that  all  its  verifiable  consequences  shall  be true, and

  none false. The law of gravitation enables us to calculate the motions of

  the heavenly bodies: so far as these motions can be observed, they are

  found to agree with our calculations. It is true that the heavenly bodies

  have such and such apparent positions at such and such times, and the law

  of gravitation agrees with this truth. This is what we mean when we say

  that  the  law  ‘works’.  We  do  not  mean  that  it  gives  us  emotional

  satisfaction, that it satisfies our aspirations, that it is a help in navigation,

  or that it facilitates a virtuous life. Any or all of these may be true, but they

  are  irrelevant;  if  they  were  all  false,  we  should  still  say  that  the  law

  ‘works’, because it agrees with observed facts. Thus the kind of ‘working’

  which science desiderates is a very different thing from the kind which

  pragmatism considers to be the essence of truth.

  To this, as to our previous objection, pragmatists reply that the ‘truth’

  concerned is a particular species of ‘truth’, and that scientific working is a

  particular species of their general conception of working. Our purpose,  they  say,  in  asking  the  question  to  which  the  law  of  gravitation  is  an

  answer, is to be able to calculate the motions of the heavenly bodies. The

  law  of  gravitation  furthers  this  purpose,  and  is  therefore  true  in  the

  pragmatic sense. This answer shows that the procedure of science, so far,

  has not been shown to contradict pragmatism; but it does not show that

  the  procedure  of  science  positively  supports  pragmatism.  Where,  as  in

  science, our purpose is to discover truth, an answer which furthers our

  purpose  will  be  true.  But  from  this  truism  it  cannot  be  inferred  (as

  pragmatists pretend) that if we had had some quite different purpose, an

  answer which furthered it would still have been true. Another objection to

  the argument from ‘working hypotheses’ is that by men of science these

  are  explicitly  contrasted  with  established  truths.  An  hypothesis,  as

  experience shows, may explain all known relevant facts admirably, and

  yet may at any moment be rendered inadequate by new facts. For this

  reason,  prudent  men  give  only  a  very  provisional  assent  to  a  working

  hypothesis. Thus the cases from which pragmatism endeavours to discover

  the nature of truth are the very cases in which we have least assurance that

  truth is present at all. This is certainly a curious and not very hopeful

  mode of procedure. It may be said, however, that what leads us to feel

  doubtful about a working hypothesis is merely that it has not yet been

  shown to work over a sufficiently wide field; the more it works, the more

  we believe in it. But to this again it may be rejoined that the more it works

  the less probability is there that any other hypothesis would also work. To

  pursue  this  topic,  however,  would  require  a  discussion  of  the  laws  of

  probability, for which this is not the place.

  From what has been said it results that the utmost that pragmatism can

  derive  from  science  is  that  the  scientific  conception of  working  is  not

  incompatible with the pragmatist conception, since the scientific working

  may be regarded as a species of the pragmatic working. It is, however, a

  species  whose differentia  adds  just  those  elements  which  other

  philosophies declare to be necessary to truth, while pragmatism declares

  them to be unnecessary. The essential novelty of pragmatism is that it

  admits, as a ground of belief, any kind of satisfaction to be derived from

  entertaining  the  belief,  not  merely  the  theoretic  satisfaction  which  is

  sought by science. For this contention no support whatever is to be found

  in science. Let us see whether any support is to be found elsewhere.

  Pragmatists are never weary of inveighing against those who say that our  beliefs ought  not  to  be  influenced  by  considerations  which  in  fact  do

  influence them. They point triumphantly to the influence of desire upon

  belief, and boast that their theory alone is based upon a true psychological

  account of how belief arises. With this account we have no quarrel; what

  we deny is its relevance to the question: What is meant by ‘truth’ and

  ‘falsehood’?  At  first  sight  it  might  seem  a  perfectly  proper  inductive

  proceeding to inquire what properties a belief must have in order that we

  may call it true, and to infer that those properties constitute the meaning of

  ‘truth’. There is, however, a fallacy in this method of inquiry; and this

  fallacy,  in  our  opinion,  is  at  the  bottom  of  the  whole  pragmatist

  philosophy.

  There is, in the first place, an ambiguity in the word ‘meaning’. We may

  say  ‘that  cloud  means  rain’,  or  we  may  say  ‘pluie  means  rain’.  It  is

  obvious that these two senses of ‘meaning’ are wholly different. What

  they have in common is that in each case we have one thing which points

  to another. The cloud is a sign that rain is coming; the word pluie is a sign

  which signifies rain. But beyond this, the two senses of ‘meaning’ have

  little in common. In the first sense, one thing ‘means’ another when the

  existence (past, present, or future) of the other can be inferred from the

  one, i.e. when there is a causal connection between them. In the second

  sense ‘meaning’ is confined to symbols, i.e. to words, and whatever other

  ways may be employed for communicating our thoughts. It is this second

  sense of ‘meaning’ which we expect a dictionary to give us. When we ask

  ‘What does such and such a word mean?’ what we want to know is ‘What

  is in the mind of a person using the word?’ A confusion of the two senses

  of ‘meaning’ is not uncommon in philosophy; and, if we are not mistaken,

  pragmatism has confused them in its inquiry as to the ‘meaning’ of truth.

  It  has  discovered  something  which  has  a  causal  connection  with  our

  beliefs  that  things  are  true,  and  which,  therefore,  in  the  first  sense  of

  ‘meaning’,  may  be  taken  to  be  what  these  beliefs  ‘mean’.  It  has  then

  supposed that this is what is ‘meant’, in the second sense, by ‘truth’, i.e.

  what we have in mind (or should have in mind?) when we use the word

  ‘truth’.

  This  confusion  between  the  two  senses  of  ‘meaning’  seems  to  be

  necessarily involved in the method adopted by pragmatists, namely, the

  method which inquires into the causes of our judging things to be true, in

  the hope of thereby discovering what ‘truth’ means. Let us grant to the  pragmatists, in order to avoid disputes concerning what is unimportant,

  that what causes people to judge that a belief, about which a doubt has

  arisen, is true is the fact that this belief is found to further the purposes

  which led us to inquire into its truth. Then to judge that a belief is true

  ‘means’ that this belief furthers our purposes, in the sense in which the

  cloud ‘means’ rain, i.e. there is a causal connection between them. But

  truth is not the same thing as furthering our purposes any more than the

  cloud is the same thing as rain. When we say that a belief is true, the

  thought we wish to convey is not the same thought as when we say that

  the belief furthers our purposes; thus ‘true’ does not mean ‘furthering our

  purposes’ in the sense in which ‘pluie’ means rain. Thus pragmatism does

  not  answer  the  question:  What  is  in  our  minds  when  we  judge  that  a

  certain belief is true?

  We find pragmatists, when pressed, willing to admit this fact. Thus Dr

  Schiller says:

  In  a  sense,  therefore,  the  predications  of  ‘good’  and  ‘bad’,  ‘true’  and

  ‘false’, etc., may take rank with the experiences of ‘sweet’, ‘red’, ‘loud’,

  ‘hard’, etc., as ultimate facts which need be analysed no further.

  To which he adds, in a footnote:

  The purport of this remark is to confute the notion, which seems dimly to

  underlie some intellectualist criticisms, that the specific character of the

    truth-predication is ignored in pragmatist quarters.

  This  fundamental  meaning  of  ‘truth’  is  treated  by  Dr  Schiller  as

  unimportant because it does not enable us to distinguish the cases in which

  we  have  rightly  predicted  truth  from  those  in  which  we  have  done  so

  wrongly. The pragmatist test, he maintains, enables us to distinguish the

  truly true from the falsely true. An untested predication of truth he calls

  ‘truth as claim’; a predication which is subsequent to the application of the

  pragmatist test he calls ‘truth validated’. The distinction between the two

  is  treated  at  length  in  his  essay  on  ‘the  ambiguity  of  truth’.  This

  ‘ambiguity’  appears  to  us  to  be  wholly  non-existent.  The  distinction

  involved is the distinction between what is true and what is thought to be

  true. The reader who will, throughout this essay on the ambiguity of truth,

  substitute ‘butter’ for ‘truth’ and ‘margarine’ for ‘falsehood’, will find that

  the point involved is one which has no special relevance to the nature of

  truth. There is ‘butter as claim’, i.e. whatever the grocer calls butter; this,

  we will suppose, includes margarine. There is ‘butter validated’, which is  butter that, after the usual tests, has been found not to be margarine. But

  there is no ambiguity in the word ‘butter’. When the grocer, pointing to

  the margarine, says ‘this is butter’, he means by ‘butter’ precisely what the

  customer  means  when  he  says  ‘this  is  not  butter’.  To  argue  from  the

  grocer’s language that ‘butter’ has two meanings, one of which includes

  margarine, while the other does not, would be obviously absurd. Similarly

  when the rash man, without applying any tests, affirms ‘this belief is true’,

  while the prudent man, after applying suitable tests, judges ‘this belief is

  not true’, the two men mean the same thing by the word ‘true’, only one of

  them  applies  it  wrongly.  Thus  Dr  Schiller’s  reasons  for  regarding  ‘the

  specific character of the truth-predication’ as unimportant are not valid.

  We must now return to the two senses of ‘meaning’, and show how they

  are relevant to our problem. It is evident that, in the sense in which the

  meaning of a word is ‘what is in our minds when we use the word’, the

  meaning of the word ‘truth’ is just that ‘specific character of the truth-

  predication’ which, as Dr Schiller confesses, is something quite other than

  ‘furthering our purposes’. His contention is that the beliefs of which we

  can predicate truth truly are those which further our purposes. And his

  reason for saying this is that the beliefs which further our purposes are

  those which we persist in calling true after reflection. But that only proves

  that these are the beliefs which we continue to think true, not that these are

  the beliefs which are true. Owing, however, to confusion of the two senses

  of ‘meaning’, he is led to argue that usefulness gives the meaning of truth,

  and that therefore when a belief is useful it must be true. All that really

  follows,  if  we  grant  the  whole  of  the  psychological  argument,  is  that

  beliefs which are found to be useful will continue to be thought to be true.

  This is an entirely different proposition, and one which, by itself, throws

  no light whatever either upon the nature of truth or upon what beliefs are

  in fact true. It may well be that beliefs which fulfil certain purposes are

  true, while beliefs which fulfil others are not true; or, again, that there is

  no  connection  whatever  between  truth  and  usefulness.  Dr  Schiller’s

  argument (and William James’s, for the two are practically identical on

  this point) involves a variety of the very assumption which he criticizes in

  others, namely, the assumption that all our beliefs are true. In pragmatism

  the assumption is that the beliefs which we persist in holding must be true.

  It is then pointed out how very unreasonable our grounds often are for

  persisting in a belief, and this fact, instead of being used to throw doubt on  the belief, is used to discredit reasonableness. Thus we are brought back to

  the standpoint of ‘The Will to Believe’, and we find that the precepts of

  that essay really underlie the whole pragmatist theory of truth. But the

  superstructure is so vast that pragmatists appear to be no longer aware of

  the foundations upon which their edifice is reared.

  We may now restate the pragmatist theory of truth in bald outline, giving

  due prominence to presuppositions of which pragmatists themselves are

  perhaps not fully conscious. Their major premiss is: Beliefs which persist

  after a doubt has been raised are true. Their minor premiss is: Beliefs

  which are found to be serviceable persist after a doubt has been raised.

  Hence it follows that such beliefs are true. The pragmatist then turns round

  and exhorts us to cherish such beliefs, on the ground that they are true. But

  if his psychology was right the exhortation is needless, since, by his minor

  premiss, we certainly shall cherish such beliefs. His major premiss should

  be: ‘Beliefs which we cherish after you have raised a doubt are true.’ But

  those  who  have  raised  the  doubt  can  hardly  be  expected  to  be  much

  impressed by this premiss. The argument is a form of the old refutation of

  an opponent by the contention that the whole human race thinks as you do,

  which is a somewhat unsuccessful weapon against a human being who

  does not think as you do.

  It is now time to turn our attention to the metaphysic which Dr Schiller has

  based upon the pragmatist theory of truth. Pragmatism as such professes to

  be only a method; the metaphysical doctrine which Dr Schiller derives

  from  it  he  calls Humanism.  In regard  to  metaphysics,  pragmatism

  professes to be a kind of universal provider, willing and able to suit all

  tastes. As William James puts it:

  Against  rationalism  as  a  pretension  and  a  method  pragmatism  is  fully

  armed and militant. But, at the outset, at least, it stands for no particular

  results. It has no dogmas, and no doctrines save its method. As the young

  Italian pragmatist Papini has well said, it lies in the midst of our theories,

  like a corridor in a hotel. Innumerable chambers open out of it. In one you

  may find a man writing an atheistic volume; in the next someone on his

  knees praying for faith and strength; in a third a chemist investigating a

  body’s properties. In a fourth a system of idealistic metaphysics is being

  excogitated; in a fifth the impossibility of metaphysics is being shown. But

  they  all  own  the  corridor,  and  all  must  pass  through  it  if  they  want  a

  practicable way of getting into or out of their respective rooms.  In spite of this catholicity, however, we agree with Dr Schiller in thinking

  that his metaphysic is the one which naturally results from pragmatism. It

  will  be  remembered  that,  in  considering  induction,  we  pointed  to  the

  dependence of inductive verification upon an appeal to ‘facts’. Humanism,

  as a metaphysic, results from the application of the pragmatic method to

  the question: What is a ‘fact’? This subject has been treated by Dr Schiller

  in his essay on ‘the making of reality’.

  The main purpose of humanist metaphysics is to emphasize the primacy of

  the Will. The Will, it is true, requires a datum of ‘fact’ to which to apply

  its operations, but this datum is itself the product of previous volitions, and

  although we cannot quite deny some original  which has been moulded

  by will, yet this is remote and unimportant, and has been transformed into

  genuine reality by the agency of human beings and other beings more or

  less  resembling  them.  Nothing  that  can  be  known, nothing  that  can

  properly be called ‘real’, is independent of the knower. There is no such

  thing as ‘mere’ knowing, in which we passively apprehend the nature of a

  merely ‘given’ object. All knowing is bound up with doing and everything

  that we know has been in some degree altered by our agency. This, Dr

  Schiller says, is obvious in the case of our acquaintances, who plainly are

  more or less affected by the fact that we are acquainted with them. When

  we  say  that  something  is  ‘independent’  of  our  knowing,  we  mean,

  according to him, that the thing is not aware that we know it. But, as a

  matter of fact, everything we know, even a stone, is aware of us in its own

  way. To the charge that this is Hylozoism, Dr Schiller replies by admitting

  it.

  The grounds for these opinions are not set forth quite so clearly as could

  be wished, but we may gather them from a complimentary allusion to

  Hegel’s dialectic at the beginning of the essay. Imagine some ‘fact’ in

  regard to which we entertain a belief. The belief leads to action, and the

  action alters the ‘fact’. If it alters it into harmony with our wishes the

  belief is proved to have been what pragmatists call ‘true’, since it has

  proved successful in action. In this case, since the belief in the fact is true,

  it follows that the fact is real. Thus the belief has made the fact. But if the

  outcome of the belief is a ‘fact’ which, though in harmony with the wishes

  which originally led us to concern ourselves with the matter, is in conflict

  with others of our wishes, the belief is not ‘true’ as regards these other

  wishes; hence we shall have to change our belief, and take fresh action on  the  new  belief,  and  so  bring  the  ‘fact’  into  harmony  with  these  new

  wishes. In this way, so long as we have any unsatisfied wishes, we are led

  on in a cycle of beliefs and actions, the beliefs becoming gradually ‘truer’,

  and the ‘facts’ with which the beliefs are concerned becoming gradually

  more ‘real’ as greater harmony is established between the ‘facts’ and our

  wishes. The motive power of this whole development is the pragmatic

  definition of truth. For if we believe A to be a fact, that belief is true if it is

  successful  as  a  means  to  satisfying  our  wishes;  hence  so  long  as  our

  wishes  are  not  completely  satisfied,  the  belief  that  A  is  a  fact  is  not

  completely true, and therefore A is not completely a fact. Thus complete

  truth and complete reality go hand in hand, and both are only to be found

  at the end of the road which leads to the complete satisfaction of all our

  wishes.

  The similarity of the above process to the Hegelian dialectic is emphasized

  by Dr Schiller: with his inveterate love of a pun, he has christened his

  process ‘trialectic’. He does not seem, however, to have observed that his

  process,  like  Hegel’s,  introduces  a  distinction  between  appearance  and

  reality; that appearance embraces the whole of the world as we know it,

  and that it is only to reality that the pragmatic test of truth applies. The

  ‘facts’ which he can accept as real must be such as not to thwart our

  purposes; the ‘facts’ which appear are very often such as to thwart our

  purposes. If a fact is such as to thwart our purposes, the pragmatist test of

  truth is not fully applicable to it; for by believing that it will thwart our

  purposes,  we  do  not  prevent  it  from  doing  so,  and  our  belief,  though

  possibly  preferable  pragmatically  to  any  other,  does  not  secure  the

  satisfaction of our desires. If, on the other hand, we believe that the fact is

  not such as to thwart our purposes, we believe what, ex hypothesi, is not

  the  case.  Hence  it  follows  that  such  facts  cannot  be  real.  Since  many

  apparent facts thwart our purposes, we are led to distinguish between real

  and apparent facts. Hence it is not here on earth that pragmatism applies,

  but only in Dr Schiller’s heaven, just as it is only in Mr Bradley’s heaven

  that  Mr  Bradley’s  metaphysic  applies.  The  whole  doctrine,  therefore,

  reduces itself to the proposition that it would be heavenly to live in a

  world where one’s philosophy was true, and this is a proposition which we

  have no desire to controvert.

  The distinction between appearance and reality is one which Dr Schiller is

  never weary of attacking; indeed, a very large proportion of his writings is  directed against it. His complete reality, he holds, is being progressively

  realized, and is not, like the Absolute, something wholly unconnected with

  our actual world of appearance. But his only reason for supposing that his

  complete reality is being progressively realized is a tacit assumption of co-

  operation among the agents composing the universe. He assumes, that is,

  that the various desires which (according to him) form the motive power

  of all that occurs in the universe are not such as to countract each other:

  the world’s activities are not to be conceived as a tug-of-war. For this view

  there is, we fancy, no argument except the pragmatic argument, that it is

  pleasant and cannot be conclusively disproved.

  Thus the whole humanist metaphysic rests upon the pragmatic theory of

  truth,  and  falls  with  that  theory.  Moreover,  it  introduces,  in  a  slightly

  modified form, the old distinction of appearance and reality, of which the

  difficulties have been admirably set forth by Dr Schiller himself. Since the

  distinction,  and  therefore  the  difficulties,  result  inevitably  from  the

  pragmatic theory of truth, they afford a new argument against that theory;

  for they show that the theory is applicable, not to our actual world, but to

  an ideal world where all the hopes of pragmatists have been realized.

  Although, for the reasons alleged above, we do not ourselves accept the

  pragmatist philosophy, we nevertheless believe that it is likely to achieve

  widespread popularity, because it embodies some of the main intellectual

  and political tendencies of our time. This aspect of pragmatism deserves

  consideration, since the influence of a doctrine (as pragmatists have very

  prudently pointed out) is by no means proportional to its intellectual value.

  On the intellectual side, pragmatism embodies scepticism, evolution, and

  the new insight into the nature and scope of scientific induction. On the

  political side, it embodies democracy, the increased belief in human power

  which  has  come  from  the  progress  of  mechanical  invention,  and  the

  Bismarckian belief in force.

  The  scepticism  embodied  in  pragmatism  is  that  which  says,  ‘Since  all

  beliefs are absurd, we may as well believe what is most convenient.’ This

  is by no means a new contention; in England it has been popularized by

  Mr Balfour’s Foundations  of  Belief  and Notes  on  Insular  Free  Trade.

  Scepticism is of the very essence of the pragmatic philosophy: nothing is

  certain, everything is liable to revision, and the attainment of any truth in

  which we can rest securely is impossible. It is, therefore, not worth while

  to trouble our heads about what really is true; what is thought to be true is  all that need concern us. Instead of the old distinction between ‘true’ and

  ‘false’, we adopt the more useful distinction between what we persist in

  thinking true, and what merely seems true at first sight. Later on, the old

  meanings of ‘true’ and ‘false’ may slip back unnoticed, and we may come

  to think that what is true in the pragmatic sense is true in the old sense

  also;  this  happens  especially  in  regard  to  religion.  But  on  pragmatist

  principles, there is no reason to regret this; for the ‘true’ is what it is useful

  to believe, and therefore it is useful to believe what pragmatism declares

  to be true. Scepticism, therefore, though necessary at the start, must be

  banished later on if we are to get the full benefits of pragmatism. In this

  there is no great psychological difficulty, since, as Hume confessed, the

  sceptical attitude is one not easily maintained in practice.

  The  philosophy  of  evolution  has  also  had  its  share  in  generating  the

  pragmatic tone of mind. It has led people to regard everything as fluid and

  in  process  of  development,  everything  as  passing  by  imperceptible

  gradations into everything else. Some biologists, it is true, have begun to

  regard  development  as  discontinuous,  proceeding  by  the  sudden

  appearance of freaks; but philosophers and the general public have not

  been influenced by this change. Hence it has come to be felt that all sharp

  antitheses, such as that of true and false, must be blurred, and all finality

  must be avoided. We must always build a road by which everything can

  pass into everything else at a leisurely pace and with small steps. Instead

  of ‘the true’ we shall have ‘the more true’, or ‘the most true up to date’.

  And between different claimants for truth, we must provide a struggle for

  existence, leading to the survival of the strongest. All this is admirably

  effected by the pragmatic theory of truth. M. Bergson, whom pragmatists

  claim as an ally, may be regarded as embodying this tendency.

  The influence of modern theories of scientific induction has probably been

  more restricted, in point of numbers, than the influence of scepticism or of

  evolution, but the men influenced have been important by their scientific

  eminence. We may take as their protagonist M. Poincaré, who, while not

  extending  the  pragmatist  doctrine  to  particular  facts,  has  dealt  in  a

  thoroughly  pragmatic  spirit  with  the  general  hypotheses  of  logic,

  mathematics, and physics, showing that what leads to the acceptance of a

  scientific  hypothesis  is  its convenience.  Such  general  assumptions  as

  causality, the existence of an external world, etc., cannot be supported by

  Mill’s  canons  of  induction,  but  require  a  far  more  comprehensive  treatment of the whole organized body of accepted scientific doctrine. It is

  in such treatment that the pragmatic method is seen at its best; and among

  men  of  science  its  apparent  success  in  this  direction  has  doubtless

  contributed greatly to its acceptance.

  The influence of democracy in promoting pragmatism is visible in almost

  every  page  of  William  James’s  writing.  There  is  an  impatience  of

  authority, an unwillingness to condemn widespread prejudices, a tendency

  to  decide  philosophical  questions  by  putting  them  to  the  vote,  which

  contrast curiously with the usual dictatorial tone of philosophic writings.

  Dr Schiller at one time set to work to elucidate the question of a future life

  by taking a poll. William James claims for the pragmatist temper ‘the open

  air  and  possibilities  of  nature,  as  against  dogma,  artificiality,  and  the

  pretence of finality in truth’. A thing which simply is true, whether you

  like it or not, is to him as hateful as a Russian autocracy; he feels that he is

  escaping from a prison, made not by stone walls but by ‘hard facts’, when

  he has humanized truth, and made it, like the police force in a democracy,

  the servant of the people instead of their master. The democratic temper

  pervades even the religion of the pragmatists: they have the religion they

  have chosen, and the traditional reverence is changed into satisfaction with

  their own handiwork. ‘The prince of darkness’, James says, ‘may be a

  gentleman, as we are told he is, but whatever the God of earth and heaven

  is, he can surely be no gentleman.’ He is rather, we should say, conceived

  by pragmatists as an elected president, to whom we give a respect which is

  really a tribute to the wisdom of our own choice. A government in which

  we have no voice is repugnant to the democratic temper. William James

  carries up to heaven the revolt of his New England ancestors: the Power to

  which he can yield respect must be a George Washington rather than a

  George III.

  Closely connected with this democratic spirit is the belief in human power,

  which is one of the dominant notes of pragmatism. By the progress of

  mechanical invention, the possibilities of our command over nature have

  been shown to be much greater than they were formerly supposed to be,

  and no definite limits can be set to them. Hence has arisen—especially in

  America,  where  the  economic  conditions  are  favourable,  and  the  chief

  concern of most people is with those matters in which recent advances

  have  been  greatest—a  general  feeling  that  by  energy  and  hope  all

  obstacles  can  be  overcome,  and  that  it  is  a  mark  of  laziness  or    pusillanimity  to  admit  that  anything  is  impossible.  The  habit  of  mind

  which believes that there are no essential impossibilities has been fostered

  by  the  doctrine  of  evolution,  with  its  literary  corollary  of  the

  Uebermensch.  Hence  have  arisen  a  self-confidence  and  a  pride  of  life

  which in many ways remind one of the Renaissance, and establish some

  affinity between historical humanism and its modern namesake. For the

  modern humanism is essentially the philosophy which is appropriate, as

  Dr Schiller himself has said, to ‘the young, the strong, the virile’. The

  inventor,  the  financier,  the  advertiser,  the  successful  men  of  action

  generally, can find in pragmatism an expression of their instinctive view

  of the world. Such men, both for good and evil, expect the world to be

  malleable  to  their  wishes,  and  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  find  their

  expectation justified by success. Hence arises a disbelief in those ‘hard

  facts’  which  pragmatists  tend  to  deny,  and  a  confidence  of  victory  in

  contests with the outer world, whether these contests be cognitive or more

  directly practical. An Italian pragmatist has expressed this confidence in

  victory as follows:

  Dio è perfetto perchè è onnipossente. Sostituiamo dunque al misticismo

  della rinunzia, dell’ Imitazione di Cristo, il misticismo della conquista,

  dell’ Imitazione di Dio.

  Other  pragmatists  have  been  less  explicit  than  this  modern  Thomas  à

  Kempis, but he has correctly expressed the spirit of their philosophy.

  From the confidence of victory in contests it is an easy passage to the love

  of contest. For this pragmatism provides full scope. The many different

  ‘truths as claim’ must fight it out among themselves, and the victor will

  become ‘truth validated’. Dr Schiller on one occasion implicitly confesses

  that, with his theory of truth, persecution can actually make a doctrine true

  which would otherwise be false, since it can make a doctrine ‘useful to our

  lives’. In the absence of any standard of truth other than success, it seems

  evident that the familiar methods of the struggle for existence must be

  applied to the elucidation of difficult questions, and that ironclads and

  Maxim guns must be the ultimate arbiters of metaphysical truth.

  The worship of force, as we find it in Nietzsche, is not to be found in the

  same form in William James, who, though he lauds the will and the life of

  action, does not wish action to be bellicose. Nevertheless, the excessive

  individualism of the pragmatic theory of truth is inherently connected with

  the appeal to force. If there is a non-human truth, which one man may  know, while another does not, there is a standard outside the disputants, to

  which, we may urge, the dispute ought to be submitted; hence a pacific

  and judicial settlement of disputes is at least theoretically possible. If, on

  the contrary, the only way of discovering which of the disputants is in the

  right is to wait and see which of them is successful, there is no longer any

  principle except force by which the issue can be decided. It is true, of

  course,  that  in  a  private  dispute  the  public  opinion  of  the  community,

  especially  as  embodied  in  the  law,  will  usually  compel  a  peaceful

  decision. But this public opinion is formed (at least in theory) upon an

  objective estimate of the rights and wrongs of the case; in place of this, if

  pragmatism were the accepted creed, public opinion would have to be

  guided  by  the  interests  of  the  community.  To  this  there  would  be  no

  objection  if,  as  would  commonly  be  done,  the  maintenance  of  justice

  could  be  taken  as  one  of  the  ends  which  it  is  in  the  interest  of  the

  community  to  pursue.  But  in  a  pragmatist  community  this  would  be

  impossible, since justice is derivative from the interests of the community,

  and  not  an  independent  constituent  of  those  interests.  In  international

  matters, owing to the fact that the disputants are often strong enough to be

  independent  of  outside  control,  these  considerations  become  more

  important. If the pragmatist urges that always and everywhere the only

  ultimate arbiter in a dispute must be force, the reply is that, although this is

  true, at the actual moment of the battle, it is yet not true in a wider sense,

  since it ignores the motives which generate the force on either side. The

  hopes  of  international  peace,  like  the  achievement  of  internal  peace,

  depend upon the creation of an effective force of public opinion formed

  upon an estimate of the rights and wrongs of disputes. Thus it would be

  misleading to say that the dispute is decided by force, without adding that

  force  is  dependent  upon  justice.  But  the  possibility  of  such  a  public

  opinion depends upon the possibility of a standard of justice which is a

  cause, not an effect, of the wishes of the community; and such a standard

  of  justice  seems  incompatible  with  the  pragmatist  philosophy.  This

  philosophy,  therefore,  although  it  begins  with  liberty  and  toleration,

  develops,  by  inherent  necessity,  into  the  appeal  to  force  and  the

  arbitrament of the big battalions. By this development it becomes equally

  adapted  to  democracy  at  home  and  to  imperialism  abroad.  Thus  here,

  again, it is more delicately adjusted to the requirements of the time than

  any other philosophy which has hitherto been invented.  To sum up: Pragmatism appeals to the temper of mind which finds on the

  surface of this planet the whole of its imaginative material; which feels

  confident of progress, and unaware of non-human limitations to human

  power; which loves battle, with all the attendant risks, because it has no

  real doubt that it will achieve victory; which desires religion, as it desires

  railways and electric light, as a comfort and a help in the affairs of this

  world,  not  as  providing  non-human  objects  to  satisfy  the  hunger  for

  perfection and for something to be worshipped without reserve. But for

  those who feel that life on this planet would be a life in prison if it were

  not for the windows into a greater world beyond; for those to whom a

  belief in man’s omnipotence seems arrogant, who desire rather the Stoic

  freedom  that  comes  of  mastery  over  the  passions  than  the  Napoleonic

  domination that sees the kingdoms of this world at its feet—in a word, to

  men  who  do  not  find  Man  an  adequate  object  of  their  worship,  the

  pragmatist’s world will seem narrow and petty, robbing life of all that

  gives it value, and making Man himself smaller by depriving the universe

  which he contemplates of all its splendour.                                              5

        WILLIAM JAMES’S CONCEPTION OF TRUTH

  ‘The history of philosophy’, as William James observes, ‘is to a great

  extent that of a certain clash of human temperaments.’ In dealing with a

  temperament of such charm as his, it is not pleasant to think of a ‘clash’;

  one  does  not  willingly  differ,  or  meet  so  much  urbanity  by  churlish

  criticisms. Fortunately, a very large part of his book is concerned with the

  advocacy  of  positions  which  pragmatism  shares  with  other  forms  of

  empiricism; with all this part of his book, I, as an empiricist, find myself,

  broadly speaking, in agreement. I might instance the lecture devoted to a

  problem  which  he  considers  ‘the  most  central  of  all  philosophic

  problems’,  namely,  that  of  the  One  and  the  Many.  In  this  lecture  he

  declares himself on the whole a pluralist, after a discussion of the kinds

  and degrees of unity to be found in the world to which any empiricist may

  wholly assent. Throughout the book, the distinctive tenets of pragmatism

  only  make  their  appearance  now  and  again,  after  the  ground  has  been

  carefully  prepared.  James  speaks  somewhere  of  Dr  Schiller’s ‘butt-end

  foremost statement of the humanist position’. His own statement is the

  very  reverse  of  ‘butt-end  foremost’;  it  is  insinuating,  gradual,

  imperceptible.

  A good illustration of his insinuating method is afforded by his lecture on

  common sense. The categories of common sense, as he points out, and as

  we may all agree, embody discoveries of our remote ancestors; but these

  discoveries cannot be regarded as final, because science, and still more

  philosophy,  finds  common-sense  notions  inadequate  in  many  ways.

  Common sense, science, and philosophy, we are told, are all insufficiently

  true in some respect; and to this again we may agree. But he adds: ‘It is

  evident that the conflict of these so widely differing systems obliges us to

  overhaul the very idea of truth, for at present we have no definite notion of

  what the word may mean’ (p. 192). Here, as I think, we have a mere non

  sequitur.  A  damsontart,  a  plum-tart,  and  a  gooseberry-tart  may  all  be

  insufficiently sweet; but does that oblige us to overhaul the very notion of

  sweetness,  or  show  that  we  have  no  definite  notion  of  what  the  word

  ‘sweetness’  may  mean?  It  seems  to  me,  on  the  contrary,  that  if  we

  perceive that they are insufficiently sweet, that shows that we do know

  what ‘sweetness’ is; and the same surely applies to truth. But this remark

  is merely by the way.  James, like most philosophers, represents his views as mediating between

  two opposing schools. He begins by distinguishing two philosophic types

  called  respectively  the  ‘tender-minded’  and  the  ‘tough-minded’.  The

  ‘tender-minded’  are  ‘rationalistic,  intellectualistic,  idealistic,  optimistic,

  religious,  free-willist,  monistic,  dogmatical’.  The  ‘tough-minded’  are

  ‘empiricist,  sensationalistic,  materialistic,  pessimistic,  irreligious,

  fatalistic, pluralistic, sceptical’. Traditionally, German philosophy was on

  the whole ‘tenderminded’, British philosophy was on the whole ‘tough-

  minded’. It will clear the ground for me to confess at once that I belong,

  with  some  reserves,  to  the  ‘tough-minded’  type.  Pragmatism,  William

  James avers, ‘can satisfy both kinds of demand. It can remain religious

  like the rationalisms, but at the same time, like the empiricisms, it can

  preserve the richest intimacy with facts’. This reconciliation, to my mind,

  is  illusory;  I  find  myself  agreeing  with  the  ‘toughminded’  half  of

  pragmatism and totally disagreeing with the ‘tender-minded’ half. But the

  disentagling of the two halves must be postponed till we have seen how

  the reconciliation professes to be effected. Pragmatism represents, on the

  one hand, a method and habit of mind, on the other, a certain theory as to

  what constitutes truth. The latter is more nearly what Dr Schiller calls

  humanism; but this name is not adopted by James. We must, therefore,

  distinguish the pragmatic method and the pragmatic theory of truth. The

  former, up to a point, is involved in all induction, and is certainly largely

  commendable.  The  latter  is  the  essential  novelty  and  the  point  of  real

  importance. But let us first consider the pragmatic method.

  ‘Pragmatism’,  says  James,  ‘represents  a  perfectly  familiar  attitude  in

  philosophy, the empiricist attitude, but it represents it, as it seems to me,

  both in a more radical and in a less objectionable form than it has ever yet

  assumed. A pragmatist turns his back resolutely and once for all upon a lot

  of inveterate habits dear to professional philosophers. He turns away from

  abstraction  and  insufficiency,  from  verbal  solutions,  from  bad a priori

  reasons, from fixed principles, closed systems, and pretended absolutes

  and origins. He turns towards concreteness and adequacy towards facts,

  towards  action  and  towards  power.  That  means  the  empiricist  temper

  regnant and the rationalist temper sincerely given up. It means the open air

  and possibilities of nature, as against dogma, artificiality, and the pretence

  of finality in truth’ (p. 51).

  The temper of mind here described is one with which I, for my part, in the  main cordially sympathize. But I think there is an impression in the mind

  of William James, as of some other pragmatists, that pragmatism involves

  a more open mind than its opposite. As regards scientific questions, or

  even the less important questions of philosophy, this is no doubt more or

  less the case. But as regards the fundamental questions of philosophy—

  especially as regards what I consider the fundamental question, namely,

  the nature of truth—pragmatism is absolutely dogmatic. The hypothesis

  that pragmatism is erroneous is not allowed to enter for the pragmatic

  competition; however well it may work, it is not to be entertained. To

  ‘turn your back resolutely and once for all’ upon the philosophy of others

  may be heroic or praise-worthy, but it is not undogmatic or open-minded.

  A modest shrinking from self-assertion, a sense that all our theories are

  provisional,  a  constant  realization  that  after  all  the  hypothesis  of  our

  opponents may be the right one—these characterize the truly empirical

  temper, but I do not observe that they invariably characterize the writings

  of pragmatists. Dogmatism in fundamentals is more or less unavoidable in

  philosophy,  and  I  do  not  blame  pragmatists  for  what  could  not  be

  otherwise; but I demur to their claim to a greater open-mindedness than is

  or may be possessed by their critics.

  William James, however, it must be admitted, is about as little pontifical

  as a philosopher well can be. And his complete absence of unction is most

  refreshing. ‘In this real world of sweat and dirt’, he says, ‘it seems to me

  that when a view of things is “noble”, that ought to count as a presumption

  against its truth and as a philosophic disqualification’ (p.72). Accordingly

  his contentions are never supported by ‘fine writing’; he brings them into

  the market-place, and is not afraid to be homely, untechnical, and slangy.

  All this makes his books refreshing to read, and shows that they contain

  what  he  really  lives  by,  not  merely  what  he  holds  in  his  professional

  capacity.

  But it is time to return to the pragmatic method.

  ‘The pragmatic method’, we are told, ‘is primarily a method of settling

    metaphysical disputes that otherwise might be interminable. Is the world

  one or many?—fated or free?—material or spiritual?—here are notions

  either of which may or may not hold good of the world; and disputes over

  such notions are unending. The pragmatic method in such cases is to try to

  interpret  each  notion  by  tracing  its  respective  practical  consequences.

  What difference would it practically make to anyone if this notion rather  than  that  notion  were  true?  If  no  practical  difference  whatever  can  be

  traced,  then  the  alternatives  mean  practically  the  same  thing,  and  all

  dispute is idle. Whenever a dispute is serious, we ought to be able to show

  some practical difference that must follow from one side or the other’s

  being right.’ And again: ‘To attain perfect clearness in our thoughts of an

  object, then, we need only consider what conceivable effects of a practical

  kind the object may involve—what sensations we are to expect from it,

  and  what  reactions  we  must  prepare.  Our  conception  of  these  effects,

  whether immediate or remote, is then for us the whole of our conception

  of the object, so far as that conception has positive significance at all’ (pp.

  45–7).

  To this method, applied within limits and to suitable topics, there is no

  ground for objecting. On the contrary, it is wholesome to keep in touch

  with  concrete  facts,  as  far  as  possible,  by  remembering  to  bring  our

  theories  constantly  into  connection  with  them.  The  method,  however,

  involves more than is stated in the extract which I quoted just now. It

  involves also the suggestion of the pragmatic criterion of truth: a belief is

  to be judged true in so far as the practical consequences of its adoption are

  good. Some pragmatists, for example, Le Roy (who has lately suffered

  Papal condemnation), regard the pragmatic test as giving only a criterion;

  others, notably Dr Schiller, regard it as giving the actual meaning of truth.

  William James agrees on this point with Dr Schiller, though, like him, he

  does not enter into the question of criterion versus meaning.

  The pragmatic theory of truth is the central doctrine of pragmatism, and

  we must consider it at some length. William James states it in various

  ways, some of which I shall now quote. He says: ‘Ideas (which themselves

  are but parts of our experience) become true just in so far as they help us

  to get into satisfactory relation with other parts of our experience’ (p. 58).

  Again: ‘Truth is one species of good, and not, as is usually supposed, a

  category distinct from good, and coordinate with it. The true is the name

  of whatever proves itself to be good in the way of belief, and good, too, for

  definite, assignable reasons’ (p. 75). That truth means ‘agreement with

  reality’ may be said by a pragmatist as well as by anyone else, but the

  pragmatist differs from others as to what is meant by ‘agreement’, and

  also (it would seem) as to what is meant by ‘reality’. William James gives

  the following definition of ‘agreement’: ‘To “agree” in the widest sense

  with a reality can only mean to be guided either straight up to it or into its    surroundings, or to be put into such working touch with it as to handle

  either it or something connected with it better than if we disagreed’ (p.

  212). This language is rather metaphorical, and a little puzzling; it is plain,

  however,  that  ‘agreement’  is  regarded  as  practical,  not  as  merely

  intellectual. This emphasis on practice is, of course, one of the leading

  features of pragmatism.

  In order to understand the pragmatic notion of truth, we have to be clear as

  to the basis of fact upon which truths are supposed to rest. Immediate

  sensible experience, for example, does not come under the alternative of

  true and false. ‘Day follows day’, says James, ‘and its contents are simply

  added. The new contents themselves are not true, they simply come and

  are. Truth is what we say about them’ (p. 62). Thus when we are merely

  aware of sensible objects, we are not to be regarded as knowing any truth,

  although we have a certain kind of contact with reality. It is important to

  realize  that  the facts  which  thus  lie  outside  the  scope  of  truth  and

  falsehood  supply  the  material  which  is  presupposed  by  the  pragmatic

  theory. Our beliefs have to agree with matters of fact: it is an essential part

  of their ‘satisfactoriness’ that they should do so. James also mentions what

  he calls ‘relations among purely mental ideas’ as part of our stock-in-trade

  with which pragmatism starts. He mentions as instances ‘1 and 1 make 2’,

  ‘white differs less from grey than it does from black’, and so on. All such

  propositions as these, then, we are supposed to know for certain before we

  can  get  under  way.  As  James  puts  it:  ‘Between  the  coercions  of  the

  sensible  order  and  those  of  the  ideal  order,  our  mind  is  thus  wedged

  tightly. Our ideas must agree with realities, be such realities concrete or

  abstract,  be  they  facts  or  be  they  principles,  under  penalty  of  endless

  inconsistency  and  frustration’  (p.  211).  Thus  it  is  only  when  we  pass

  beyond plain matters of fact and a priori truisms that the pragmatic notion

  of truth comes in. It is, in short, the notion to be applied to doubtful cases,

  but it is not the notion to be applied to cases about which there can be no

  doubt.  And  that  there  are  cases  about  which  there  can  be  no  doubt  is

  presupposed in the very statement of the pragmatist position. ‘Our account

  of truth’, James tells us, ‘is an account … of processes of leading, realized

  in rebus, and having only this quality in common, that they pay’ (p. 218).

  We may thus sum up the philosophy in the following definition: ‘A truth

  is anything which it pays to believe.’ Now, if this definition is to be useful,

  as pragmatism intends it to be, it must be possible to know that it pays to  believe something without knowing anything that pragmatism would call a

  truth. Hence the knowledge that a certain belief pays must be classed as

  knowledge of a sensible fact or of a ‘relation among purely mental ideas’,

  or as some compound of the two, and must be so easy to discover as not to

  be worthy of having the pragmatic test applied to it. There is, however,

  some difficulty in this view. Let us consider for a moment what it means

  to  say  that  a  belief  ‘pays’.  We  must  suppose  that  this  means  that  the

  consequences of entertaining the belief are better than those of rejecting it.

  In  order  to  know  this,  we  must  know  what  are  the  consequences  of

  entertaining it, and what are the consequences of rejecting it; we must

  know also what consequences are good, what bad, what consequences are

  better, and what worse. Take, say, belief in the Roman Catholic Faith.

  This, we may agree, causes a certain amount of happiness at the expense

  of a certain amount of stupidity and priestly domination. Such a view is

  disputable and disputed, but we will let that pass. But then comes the

  question whether, admitting the effects to be such, they are to be classed

  as on the whole good or on the whole bad; and this question is one which

  is so difficult that our test of truth becomes practically useless. It is far

  easier, it seems to me, to settle the plain question of fact: ‘Have Popes

  been always infallible?’ than to settle the question whether the effects of

  thinking them infallible are on the whole good. Yet this question, of the

  truth of Roman Catholicism, is just the sort of question that pragmatists

  consider specially suitable to their method.

  The notion that it is quite easy to know when the consequences of a belief

  are good, so easy, in fact, that a theory of knowledge need take no account

  of anything so simple—this notion, I must say, seems to me one of the

  strangest  assumptions  for  a  theory  of  knowledge  to  make.  Let  us  take

  another  illustration.  Many  of  the  men  of  the  French  Revolution  were

  disciples of Rousseau, and their belief in his doctrines had far-reaching

  effects,  which  make  Europe  at  this  day  a  different  place  from  what  it

  would have been without that belief. If, on the whole, the effects of their

  belief have been good, we shall have to say that their belief was true; if

  bad, that it was false. But how are we to strike the balance? It is almost

  impossible to disentangle what the effects have been; and even if we could

  ascertain them, our judgment as to whether they have been good or bad

  would  depend  upon  our  political  opinions.  It  is  surely  far  easier  to

  discover by direct investigation that the Contrat Social is a myth than to  decide whether belief in it has done harm or good on the whole.

  Another  difficulty  which  I  feel  in  regard  to  the  pragmatic  meaning  of

  ‘truth’ may be stated as follows: Suppose I accept the pragmatic criterion,

  and suppose you persuade me that a certain belief is useful. Suppose I

  thereupon conclude that the belief is true. Is it not obvious that there is a

  transition  in  my  mind  from  seeing  that  the  belief  is  useful  to  actually

  holding that the belief is true? Yet this could not be so if the pragmatic

  account of truth were valid. Take, say, the belief that other people exist.

  According to the pragmatists, to say ‘it is true that other people exist’

  means ‘it is useful to believe that other people exist’. But if so, then these

  two phrases are merely different words for the same proposition; therefore

  when I believe the one I believe the other. If this were so, there could be

  no transition from the one to the other, as plainly there is. This shows that

  the word ‘true’ represents for us a different idea from that represented by

  the phrase ‘useful to believe’, and that, therefore, the pragmatic definition

  of truth ignores, without destroying, the meaning commonly given to the

  word ‘true’, which meaning, in my opinion, is of fundamental importance,

  and can only be ignored at the cost of hopeless inadequacy.

  This brings me to the difference between criterion and meaning—a point

  on which neither James nor Dr Schiller is very clear. I may best explain

  the difference, to begin with, by an instance. If you wish to know whether

  a certain book is in a library, you consult the catalogue: books mentioned

  in the catalogue are presumably in the library, books not mentioned in it

  are presumably not in the library. Thus the catalogue affords a criterion of

  whether a book is in the library or not. But even supposing the catalogue

  perfect, it is obvious that when you say the book is in the library you do

  not mean that it is mentioned in the catalogue. You mean that the actual

  book is to be found somewhere in the shelves. It therefore remains an

  intelligible hypothesis that there are books in the library which are not yet

  catalogued, or that there are books catalogued which have been lost and

  are  no  longer  in  the  library.  And  it  remains  an  inference  from  the

  discovery that a book is mentioned in the catalogue to the conclusion that

  the book is in the library. Speaking abstractly, we may say that a property

  A is a criterion of a property B when the same objects possess both; and A

  is  a useful  criterion  of  B  if  it  is  easier  to  discover  whether  an  object

  possesses the property A than whether it possesses the property B. Thus

  being  mentioned  in  the  catalogue  is  a useful  criterion  of  being  in  the  library, because it is easier to consult the catalogue than to hunt through

  the shelves.

  Now if pragmatists only affirmed that utility is a criterion of truth, there

  would be much less to be said against their view. For there certainly seem

  to be few cases, if any, in which it is clearly useful to believe what is false.

  The chief criticism one would then have to make of pragmatism would be

  to deny that utility is a useful criterion, because it is so often harder to

  determine whether a belief is useful than whether it is true. The arguments

  of  pragmatists  are  almost  wholly  directed  to  proving  that  utility  is  a

  criterion; that utility is the meaning of truth is then supposed to follow.

  But, to return to our illustration of the library, suppose we had conceded

  that  there  are  no  mistakes  in  the  British  Museum  catalogue:  would  it

  follow that the catalogue would do without the books? We can imagine

  some person long engaged in a comparative study of libraries, and having,

  in  the  process,  naturally  lost  all  taste  for  reading,  declaring  that  the

  catalogue is the only important thing—as for the books, they are useless

  lumber; no one ever wants them, and the principle of economy should lead

  us to be content with the catalogue. Indeed, if you consider the matter with

  an open mind, you will see that the catalogue is the library, for it tells you

  everything you can possibly wish to know about the library. Let us, then,

  save the taxpayers’ money by destroying the books: allow free access to

  the catalogue, but condemn the desire to read as involving an exploded

  dogmatic realism.

  This analogy of the library is not, to my mind, fantastic or unjust, but as

  close and exact an analogy as I have been able to think of. The point I am

  trying to make clear is concealed from pragmatists, I think, by the fact that

  their theories start very often from such things as the general hypotheses

  of science—ether, atoms, and the like. In such cases, we take little interest

  in the hypotheses themselves, which, as we well know, are liable to rapid

  change. What we care about are the inferences as to sensible phenomena

  which the hypotheses enable us to make. All we ask of the hypotheses is

  that  they  should  ‘work’—though  it  should  be  observed  that  what

  constitutes ‘working’ is not the general agreeableness of their results, but

  the conformity of these results with observed phenomena. But in the case

  of these general scientific hypotheses, no sensible man believes that they

  are true as they stand. They are believed to be true in part, and to work

  because of the part that is true; but it is expected that in time some element  of falsehood will be discovered, and some truer theory will be substituted.

  Thus  pragmatism  would  seem  to  derive  its  notion  of  what  constitutes

  belief  from  cases  in  which,  properly  speaking,  belief  is  absent,  and  in

  which—what is pragmatically important—there is but a slender interest in

  truth or falsehood as compared to the interest in what ‘works’.

  But when this method is extended to cases in which the proposition in

  question  has  an  emotional  interest  on  its  own  account,  apart  from  its

  working, the pragmatic account becomes less satisfactory. This point has

  been well brought out by Professor Stout in Mind, and what I have to say

  is mostly contained in his remarks. Take the question whether other people

  exist. It seems perfectly possible to suppose that the hypothesis that they

  exist will always work, even if they do not in fact exist. It is plain, also,

  that it makes for happiness to believe that they exist—for even the greatest

  misanthropist would not wish to be deprived of the objects of his hate.

  Hence the belief that other people exist is, pragmatically, a true belief. But

  if I am troubled by solipsism, the discovery that a belief in the existence of

  others is ‘true’ in the pragmatist’s sense is not enough to allay my sense of

  loneliness: the perception that I should profit by rejecting solipsism is not

  alone sufficient to make me reject it. For what I desire is not that the belief

  in solipsism should be false in the pragmatic sense, but that other people

  should in fact exist. And with the pragmatist’s meaning of truth, these two

  do not necessarily go together. The belief in solipsism might be false even

  if I were the only person or thing in the universe.

  This  paradoxical  consequence  would,  I  presume,  not  be  admitted  by

  pragmatists. Yet it is an inevitable outcome of the divorce which they

  make between fact and truth. Returning to our illustration, we may say

  that ‘facts’ are represented by the books, and ‘truths’ by the entries in the

  catalogue. So long as you do not wish to read the books, the ‘truths’ will

  do in place of the ‘facts’, and the imperfections of your library can be

  remedied by simply making new entries in the catalogue. But as soon as

  you actually wish to read a book, the ‘truths’ become inadequate, and the

  ‘facts’ become all-important. The pragmatic account of truth assumes, so

  it seems to me, that no one takes any interest in facts, and that the truth of

  the proposition that your friend exists is an adequate substitute for the fact

  of his existence. ‘Facts’, they tell us, are neither true nor false, therefore

  truth cannot be concerned with them. But the truth ‘A exists’, if it is a

  truth, is concerned with A, who in that case is a fact; and to say that ‘A  exists’ may be true even if A does not exist is to give a meaning to ‘truth’

  which robs it of all interest. Dr Schiller is fond of attacking the view that

  truth must correspond with reality; we may conciliate him by agreeing that

  his truth, at any rate, need not correspond with reality. But we shall have

  to add that reality is to us more interesting than such truth.

  I am, of course, aware that pragmatists minimize the basis of ‘fact’, and

  speak of the ‘making of reality’ as proceeding pari passu with the ‘making

  of truth’. It is easy to criticize the claim to ‘make reality’ except within

  obvious  limits.  But  when  such  criticisms  are  met  by  pointing  to  the

  pragmatist’s admission that, after all, there must be a basis of ‘fact’ for our

  creative activity to work upon, then the opposite line of criticism comes

  into play. Dr Schiller, in his essay on ‘the making of reality’, minimizes

  the importance of the basis of ‘fact’, on the ground (it would seem) that

  ‘facts’ will not submit to pragmatic treatment, and that, if pragmatism is

  true, they are unknowable. Hence, on pragmatistic principles, it is useless

  to think about facts. We therefore return to fictions with a sigh of relief,

  and soothe our scruples by calling them ‘realities’. But it seems something

  of a petitio principii to condemn ‘facts’ because pragmatism, though it

  finds them necessary, is unable to deal with them. And William James, it

  should be said, makes less attempt than Dr Schiller does to minimize facts.

  In  this  essay,  therefore,  I  have  considered  the  difficulties  which

  pragmatism  has  to  face  if  it  admits  ‘facts’  rather  than  those  (no  less

  serious) which it has to face if it denies them.

  It is chiefly in regard to religion that the pragmatist use of ‘truth’ seems to

  me  misleading.  Pragmatists  boast  much  of  their  ability  to  reconcile

  religion and science, and William James, as we saw, professes to have

  discovered  a  position  combining  the  merits  of  tender-mindedness  and

  tough-mindedness.  The  combination  is  really  effected,  if  I  am  not

  mistaken, in a way of which pragmatists are not themselves thoroughly

  aware. For their position, if they fully realized it, would, I think, be this:

  ‘We cannot know whether, in fact, there is a God or a future life, but we

  can know that the belief in God and a future life is true.’ This position, it is

  to be feared, would not afford much comfort to the religious if it were

  understood, and I cannot but feel some sympathy with the Pope in his

  condemnation of it.

  ‘On pragmatic principles’, James says, ‘we cannot reject any hypothesis if

  consequences useful to life flow from it’ (p. 273). He proceeds to point out  that consequences useful to life flow from the hypothesis of the Absolute,

  which is therefore so far a true hypothesis. But it should be observed that

  these useful consequences flow from the hypothesis that the Absolute is a

  fact, not from the hypothesis that useful consequences flow from belief in

  the Absolute. But we cannot believe the hypothesis that the Absolute is a

  fact merely because we perceive that useful consequences flow from this

  hypothesis. What we can believe on such grounds is that this hypothesis is

  what pragmatists call ‘true’, i.e. that it is useful; but it is not from this

  belief that the useful consequences flow, and the grounds alleged do not

  make us believe that the Absolute is a fact, which is the useful belief. In

  other words, the useful belief is that the Absolute is a fact, and pragmatism

  shows that this belief is what it calls ‘true’. Thus pragmatism persuades us

  that  belief  in  the  Absolute  is  ‘true’,  but  does  not  persuade  us  that  the

  Absolute is a fact. The belief which it persuades us to adopt is therefore

  not the one which is useful. In ordinary logic, if the belief in the Absolute

  is true, it follows that the Absolute is a fact. But with the pragmatist’s

  meaning of ‘true’ this does not follow; hence the proposition which he

  proves is not, as he thinks, the one from which comforting consequences

  flow.

  In another place James says: ‘On pragmatistic principles, if the hypothesis

  of God works satisfactorily in the widest sense of the word, it is true’ (p.

  299). This proposition is, in reality, a mere tautology. For we have laid

  down the definition: ‘The word “true” means “working satisfactorily in the

  widest  sense  of  the  word”.’  Hence  the  proposition  stated  by  James  is

  merely a verbal variant on the following: ‘On pragmatistic principles, if

  the hypothesis of God works satisfactorily in the widest sense of the word,

  then it works satisfactorily in the widest sense of the word.’ This would

  hold  even  on  other  than  pragmatistic  principles;  presumably  what  is

  peculiar to pragmatism is the belief that this is an important contribution to

  the philosophy of religion. The advantage of the pragmatic method is that

  it  decides  the  question  of  the  truth  of  the  existence  of  God  by  purely

  mundane arguments, namely, by the effects of belief in His existence upon

  our  life  in  this  world.  But  unfortunately  this  gives  a  merely  mundane

  conclusion, namely, that belief in God is true, i.e. useful, whereas what

  religion desires is the conclusion that God exists, which pragmatism never

  even  approaches.  I  infer,  therefore,  that  the  pragmatic  philosophy  of

  religion, like most philosophies whose conclusions are interesting, turns  on an unconscious play upon words. A common word—in this case, the

  word  ‘true’—is  taken  at  the  outset  in  an  uncommon  sense,  but  as  the

  argument proceeds, the usual sense of the word gradually slips back, and

  the conclusions arrived at seem, therefore, quite different from what they

  would be seen to be if the initial definition had been remembered.

  The point is, of course, that, so soon as it is admitted that there are things

  that exist, it is impossible to avoid recognizing a distinction, to which we

  may give what name we please, between believing in the existence of

  something that exists and believing in the existence of something that does

  not exist. It is common to call the one belief true, the other false. But if,

  with the pragmatists, we prefer to give a different meaning to the words

  ‘true’ and ‘false’, that does not prevent the distinction commonly called

  the distinction of ‘true’ and ‘false’ from persisting. The pragmatist attempt

  to ignore this distinction fails, as it seems to me, because a basis of fact

  cannot be avoided by pragmatism, and this basis of fact demands the usual

  antithesis of ‘true’ and ‘false’. It is hardly to be supposed that pragmatists

  will admit this conclusion. But it may be hoped that they will tell us in

  more detail how they propose to avoid it.

  Pragmatism,  if  I  have  not  misunderstood  it,  is  largely  a  generalization

  from the procedure of the inductive sciences. In so far as it lays stress

  upon the importances of induction, I find myself in agreement with it; and

  as to the nature of induction also, I think it is far more nearly right than are

  most  of  the  traditional  accounts.  But  on  fundamental  questions  of

  philosophy  I  find  myself  wholly  opposed  to  it,  and  unable  to  see  that

  inductive procedure gives any warrant for its conclusions. To make this

  clear, I will very briefly explain how I conceive the nature and scope of

  induction.

  When we survey our beliefs, we find that we hold different beliefs with

  very different degrees of conviction. Some—such as the belief that I am

  sitting in a chair, or that 2 + 2 = 4—can be doubted by few except those

  who  have  had  a  long  training  in  philosophy.  Such  beliefs  are  held  so

  firmly that non-philosophers who deny them are put into lunatic asylums.

  Other beliefs, such as the facts of history, are held rather less firmly, but

  still in the main without much doubt where they are well authenticated.

  Beliefs about the future, as that the sun will rise tomorrow and that the

  trains will run approximately as in Bradshaw, may be held with almost as

  great conviction as beliefs about the past. Scientific laws are generally  believed less firmly, and there is a gradation among them from such as

  seem  nearly  certain  to  such  as  have  only  a  slight  probability  in  their

  favour. Philosophical beliefs, finally, will, with most people, take a still

  lower place, since the opposite beliefs of others can hardly fail to induce

  doubt. Belief, therefore, is a matter of degree. To speak of belief, disbelief,

  doubt, and suspense of judgment as the only possibilities is as if, from the

  writing on the thermometer, we were to suppose that blood heat, summer

  heat,  temperate,  and  freezing  were  the  only  temperatures.  There  is  a

  continuous gradation in belief, and the more firmly we believe anything,

  the less willing we are to abandon it in case of conflict.

  Besides  the  degree  of  our  belief,  there  is  another  important  respect  in

  which a belief may vary, namely, in the extent to which it is spontaneous

  or derivative. A belief obtained by inference may be called derivative; one

  not so obtained, spontaneous. When we do not need any outside evidence

  to make us entertain a belief, we may say that what we believe is obvious.

  Our belief in the existence of sensible objects is of this nature: ‘seeing is

  believing’,  and  we  demand  no  further  evidence.  The  same  applies  to

  certain  logical  principles,  e.g.  that  whatever  follows  from  a  true

  proposition must be true. A proposition may be obvious in very varying

  degrees.  For  example,  in  matters  of  æsthetic  taste  we  have  to  judge

  immediately whether a work of art is beautiful or not, but the degree of

  obviousness  involved  is  probably  small,  so  that  we  feel  no  very  great

  confidence  in  our  judgment.  Thus  our  spontaneous  beliefs  are  not

  necessarily stronger than derivative beliefs. Moreover, few beliefs, if any,

  are wholly  spontaneous  in  an  educated  man.  The  more  a  man  has

  organized his knowledge, the more his beliefs will be interdependent, and

  the more will obvious truths be reinforced by their connection with other

  obvious truths. In spite of this fact, however, obviousness remains always

  the  ultimate  source  of  our  beliefs;  for  what  is  called  verification  or

  deduction consists always in being brought into relation with one or more

  obvious propositions. This process of verification is necessary even for

  propositions which seem obvious, since it appears on examination that two

  apparently  obvious  propositions  may  be  inconsistent,  and  hence  that

  apparent obviousness is not a sufficient guarantee of truth. We therefore

  have to subject our beliefs to a process of organization, making groups of

  such  as  are  mutually  consistent,  and  when  two  such  groups  are  not

  consistent  with  each  other,  selecting  that  group  which  seems  to  us  to  contain  the  most  evidence,  account  being  taken  both  of  the  degree  of

  obviousness  of  the  propositions  it  contains  and  of  the  number  of  such

  propositions. It is as the result of such a process, for example, that we are

  led, if we are led, to conclude that colours are not objective properties of

  things. Induction, in a broad sense, may be described as the process of

  selecting  hypotheses  which  will  organize  our  spontaneous  beliefs,

  preserving  as  many  of  them  as  possible,  and  interconnecting  them  by

  general propositions which, as is said, ‘explain’ them, i.e. give a ground

  from which they can be deduced. In this sense, all knowledge is inductive

  as soon as it is reflective and organized. In any science, there is a greater

  or less degree of obviousness about many of its propositions: those that are

  obvious are called data; other propositions are only accepted because of

  their connection with the data. This connection itself may be of two kinds,

  either that the propositions in question can be deduced from the data, or

  that the data can be deduced from the propositions in question, and we

  know of no way of deducing the data without assuming the propositions in

  question. The latter is the case of working hypotheses, which covers all the

  general laws of science and all the metaphysics both of common sense and

  of professed philosophy. It is, apparently, by generalizing the conception

  of ‘working hypothesis’ that pragmatism has arisen. But three points seem

  to  me  to  have  been  overlooked  in  this  generalization.  First,  working

  hypotheses  are  only  a  small  part  of  our  beliefs,  not  the  whole,  as

  pragmatism  seems  to  think.  Secondly,  prudent  people  give  only  a  low

  degree of belief to working hypotheses; it is therefore a curious procedure

  to select them as the very types of beliefs in general. Thirdly, pragmatism

  seems to confound two very different conceptions of ‘working’. When

  science says that a hypothesis works, it means that from this hypothesis

  we can deduce a number of propositions which are verifiable, i.e. obvious

  under suitable circumstances, and that we cannot deduce any propositions

  of which the contradictories are verifiable. But when pragmatism says that

  a  hypothesis  works,  it  means  that  the  effects  of  believing  it  are  good,

  including among the effects not only the beliefs which we deduce from it,

  but also the emotions entailed by it or its perceived consequences, and the

  actions to which we are prompted by it or its perceived consequences.

  This is a totally different conception of ‘working’, and one for which the

  authority of scientific procedure cannot be invoked. I infer, therefore, that

  induction, rightly analysed, does not lead us to pragmatism, and that the  inductive results which pragmatism takes as the very type of truth are

  precisely those among our beliefs which should be held with most caution

  and least conviction.

  To sum up: while agreeing with the empirical temper of pragmatism, with

  its readiness to treat all philosophical tenets as ‘working hypotheses’, we

  cannot  agree  that  when  we  say  a  belief  is  true  we  mean  that  it  is  a

  hypothesis which ‘works’, especially if we mean by this to take account of

  the  excellence  of  its  effects,  and  not  merely  of  the  truth  of  its

  consequences. If, to avoid disputes about words, we agree to accept the

  pragmatic definition of the word ‘truth’, we find that the belief that A

  exists may be ‘true’ even when A does not exist. This shows that the

  conclusions arrived at by pragmatism in the sphere of religion do not have

  the meaning which they appear to have, and are incapable, when rightly

  understood,  of  yielding  us  the  satisfaction  which  they  promise.  The

  attempt to get rid of ‘fact’ turns out to be a failure, and thus the old notion

  of truth reappears. And if the pragmatist states that utility is to be merely a

  criterion  of  truth,  we  shall  reply  first,  that  it  is  not  a  useful  criterion,

  because it is usually harder to discover whether a belief is useful than

  whether it is true; secondly, that since no a priori reason is shown why

  truth and utility should always go together, utility can only be shown to be

  a criterion at all by showing inductively that it accompanies truth in all

  known instances, which requires that we should already know in many

  instances what things are true. Finally, therefore, the pragmatist theory of

  truth is to be condemned on the ground that it does not ‘work’.                                              6

              THE MONISTIC THEORY OF TRUTH

                                              I

  In  any  inquiry  into  the  nature  of  truth,  two  questions  meet  us  on  the

  threshold: (1) In what sense, if any, is truth dependent upon mind? (2) Are

  there  many  different  truths,  or  is  there  only the  Truth?  These  two

  questions  are  largely  interconnected,  and  it  is  more  or  less  optional

  whether we begin with the first or with the second. But, on the whole, the

  second, namely, the question whether we ought to speak of truths or of the

  Truth, seems the more fundamental, and the bulk of the present essay will

  be occupied with this question. The view that truth is one may be called

  ‘logical  monism’;  it  is,  of  course,  closely  connected  with  ontological

  monism, i.e. the doctrine that Reality is one. The following essay will

  consist of two parts. In the first I shall state the monistic theory of truth,

  sketching  the  philosophy  with  which  it  is  bound  up,  and  shall  then

  consider certain internal difficulties of this philosophy, which suggests a

  doubt as to the axioms upon which the philosophy is based. In the second

  part I shall consider the chief of these axioms, namely, the axiom that

  relations are always grounded in the natures of their terms, and I shall try

  to  show  that  there  are  no  reasons  in  favour  of  this  axiom  and  strong

  reasons against it.

  ‘That the truth itself ’, Mr Joachim says, ‘is one, and whole, and complete,

  and that all thinking and all experience move within its recognition and

  subject to its manifest authority; this I have never doubted’ (p. 178).

  This doctrine, which is one of the foundation-stones of monistic idealism,

  has a sweep which might not be obvious at once. It means that nothing is

  wholly  true  except  the  whole  truth,  and  that  what  seem  to  be  isolated

  truths, such as 2 + 2 = 4, are really only true in the sense that they form

  part of the system which is the whole truth. And even in this sense isolated

  truths are only more or less true; for when artificially isolated they are

  bereft of aspects and relations which make them parts of the whole truth,

  and are thus altered from what they are in the system. If account were

  taken of all the relations of a certain partial truth to other partial truths, we

  should be brought to the whole system of truth, and thus the partial truth

  from which we started would have developed into the one absolute truth.

  The truth that a certain partial truth is part of the whole is a partial truth,  and thus only partially true; hence we can never say with perfect truth ‘this

  is  part  of  the  Truth’.  Hence  there  can  be  no  sense  of  truth  which  is

  completely applicable to a partial truth, because everything that can be

  said about a partial truth is only a partial truth.

  The whole of truth, or indeed whatever is genuinely a whole, is an organic

  unity or significant whole, i.e. it is ‘such that all its constituent elements

  reciprocally involve one another, or reciprocally determine one another’s

  being as contributory features in a single concrete meaning’ (Joachim, p.

  66). This is an obvious consequence of the view that only the whole of

  truth is quite true; for, if this is the case, the truth about any part of the

  whole must be the same as the whole truth; thus the complete truth about

  any part is the same as the complete truth about any other part, since each

  is the whole of truth.

  The position which I have been trying to represent is always considered,

  by those who hold it, a very difficult one to apprehend; so much so that the

  word ‘crude’ has been consecrated to those arguments and philosophies

  which do not accept this position. As I believe that the more ‘crude’ a

  philosophy is, the nearer it comes to being true, I cannot hope to persuade

  idealists that I have understood their position; I can only assure them that I

  have done my best.

  There  are  in  the  above  theory—so  it  seems  to  me—certain  intrinsic

  difficulties  which  ought  to  make  us  suspicious  of  the  premisses  from

  which it follows. The first of these difficulties—and it is one which is very

  candidly faced by Mr Joachim—is that, if no partial truth is quite true, it

  cannot be quite true that no partial truth is quite true; unless indeed the

  whole of truth is contained in the proposition ‘no partial truth is quite

  true’, which is too sceptical a view for the philosophy we are considering.

  Connected with this is the difficulty that human beings can never know

  anything quite true, because their knowledge is not of the whole of truth.

  Thus the philosophy with which the view in question is bound up cannot

  be quite true, since, if it were, it could not be known to idealists. And it

  may be that the elements in their knowledge which require correction are

  just those which are essential to establishing their view of truth; so long as

  our premisses are more or less faulty, we cannot know that, if corrected,

  they would give the results we have deduced from them. But this objection

  —that truth, if it is as alleged, must remain unknowable to us—is met by

  challenging the distinction between finite minds and Mind. A distinction is  necessarily a partial truth; hence, if we distinguish a and b, we are only

  partly right: in another aspect, a and b are identical. Thus, although in a

  sense we may distinguish our finite knowledge from absolute knowledge,

  yet in another sense we may say that our knowledge is only real in so far

  as it is not finite; for the reality of what is finite is the whole of which it is

  a constituent. Thus we, so far as we are real, do really know all truth; but

  only idealists know that they know all truth.

  The objections we have just been considering are based upon the difficulty

  as to what monism means by a whole, and in what sense it conceives that a

  whole has parts. The uninitiated might imagine that a whole is made up of

  parts,  each  of  which  is  a  genuine  constituent  of  the  whole,  and  is

  something on its own account. But this view is ‘crude’. The parts of a

  whole are not self-subsistent, and have no being except as parts. We can

  never enumerate parts a, b, c,…of a whole W; for the proposition ‘a is part

  of W’ is only a partial truth, and therefore not quite true. Not only is this

  proposition not quite true, but the past a is not quite real. Thus W is a

  whole of parts all of which are not quite real. It follows that W is not quite

  really a whole of parts. If it is not quite true that W has parts, it cannot be

  quite true that W is a whole. In short, the diversity which modern monism

  tries to synthesise with identity vanishes, leaving reality wholly without

  structure or complexity of any kind. For though it is essential to its being a

  whole that it should have parts, it is essential to its being a significant

  whole  that  its  parts  should  not  quite  truly  be  its  parts,  since  every

  statement about them, including the statement that they are its parts, must

  be more or less untrue.

  A connected difficulty is the following: In a ‘significant whole’, each part,

  since it involves the whole and every other part, is just as complex as the

  whole; the parts of a part, in turn, are just as complex as the part, and

  therefore  just  as  complex  as  the  whole.  Since,  moreover,  the  whole  is

  constitutive of the nature of each part, just as much as each part is of the

  whole,  we  may  say  that  the  whole  is  part  of  each  part.  In  these

  circumstances it becomes perfectly arbitrary to say that a is part of W

  rather than that W is part of a. If we are to say this, we shall have to

  supplement the monist’s notion of whole and part by a more commonplace

  notion,  which  I  think  is  really  present,  though  unconsciously,  in  all

  monistic  thinking;  for  otherwise  the  distinction  of  whole  and  part

  evaporates, and with it the entire notion of a ‘significant whole’.  Another difficulty of the monistic theory of truth is as to error. Every

  separate proposition, on the monistic theory, expresses a partial truth: no

  proposition expresses something quite true, and none expresses something

  quite  false.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  distinctive  characteristic  of

  error cannot lie in the judgment affirmed, since every possible judgment is

  partially true and partially false. Mr Joachim, who has considered very

  carefully the whole question of error, comes to the conclusion—which

  seems  the  only  possible  one  for  a  monistic  theory  of  truth—that  the

  essential characteristic of error is the claim to express truth unqualified (p.

  143). He says: ‘The erring subject’s confident belief in the truth of his

  knowledge  distinctively  characterizes  error,  and  converts  a  partial

  apprehension of the truth into falsity’ (p. 162). Now this view has one

  great  merit,  namely,  that  it  makes  error  consist  wholly  and  solely  in

  rejection of the monistic theory of truth. As long as this theory is accepted,

  no judgment is an error; as soon as it is rejected, every judgment is an

  error. But there are some objections to be urged against this comfortable

  conclusion.  If  I  affirm,  with  a  ‘confident  belief  in  the  truth  of  my

  knowledge’, that Bishop Stubbs used to wear episcopal gaiters, that is an

  error; if a monistic philosopher, remembering that all finite truth is only

  partially true, affirms that Bishop Stubbs was hanged for murder, that is

  not an error. Thus it seems plain that Mr Joachim’s criterion does not

  distinguish between right and wrong judgments as ordinarily understood,

  and that its inability to make such a distinction is a mark of defect. If a

  jury, for example, has to decide whether a man has committed a crime, Mr

  Joachim’s criterion gives no means of distinguishing between a right and a

  wrong  verdict.  If  the  jury  remember  the  monistic  philosophy,  either

  verdict is right; if they forget it, either is wrong. What I wish to make plain

  is, that there is a sense in which such a proposition as ‘A murdered B’ is

  true or false; and that in this sense the proposition in question does not

  depend, for its truth or falsehood, upon whether it is regarded as a partial

  truth or not. And this sense, it seems to me, is presupposed in constructing

  the whole of truth; for the whole of truth is composed of propositions

  which  are  true  in  this  sense,  since  it  is  impossible  to  believe  that  the

  proposition ‘Bishop Stubbs was hanged for murder’ is part of the whole of

  truth.

  The  adherent  of  the  monistic  theory  of  truth  may  reply  that  one  who

  remembers this theory will not assert that Bishop Stubbs was hanged for  murder,  since  he  will  realize  that  such  an  assertion  would  clash  with

  known facts, and would be incapable of fitting into the coherent whole of

  truth. Now it might be enough to reply that the supposed immunity from

  errors of fact is not secured by the theory that truth is coherence; since, for

  example, Hegel was mistaken as to the number of the planets. But this

  would be an inadequate reply. The true reply is, that we are concerned

  with the question, not how far a belief in the coherence-theory is a cause

  of avoidance of error, but how far this theory is able to explain what we

  mean by error. And the objection to the coherence-theory lies in this, that

  it  presupposes  a  more  usual  meaning  of  truth  and  falsehood  in

  constructing its coherent whole, and that this more usual meaning, though

  indispensable to the theory, cannot be explained by means of the theory.

  The proposition ‘Bishop Stubbs was hanged for murder’ is, we are told,

  not coherent with the whole of truth or with experience. But that means,

  when we examine it, that something is known which is inconsistent with

  this proposition. Thus what is inconsistent with the proposition must be

  something true: it may be perfectly possible to construct a coherent whole

  of false propositions in which ‘Bishop Stubbs was hanged for murder’

  would find a place. In a word, the partial truths of which the whole of truth

  is composed must be such propositions as would commonly be called true,

  not such as would commonly be called false; there is no explanation, on

  the coherence-theory, of the distinction commonly expressed by the words

  ‘true’  and  ‘false’,  and  no  evidence  that  a  system  of  false  propositions

  might not, as in a good novel, be just as coherent as the system which is

  the whole of truth.

  The answer to this possibility of several coherent systems is an appeal to

  ‘experience’. Mr Joachim says (p. 78): ‘Truth, we said, was the systematic

  coherence which characterized a significant whole. And we proceeded to

  identify a significant whole with “an organized individual experience, self-

  fulfilling  and  self-fulfilled”.  Now  there  can  be  one and only one  such

  experience: or only one significant whole, the significance of which is

  self-contained  in  the  sense  required.  For  it  is absolute  self-fulfilment,

  absolutely self-contained significance, that is postulated; and nothing short

  of absolute  individuality—nothing  short  of the  completely  whole

    experience—can  satisfy  this  postulate.  And  human  knowledge—not

  merely my knowledge or yours, but the best and fullest knowledge in the

  world at any stage of its development—is clearly not a significant whole  in  this  ideally  complete  sense.  Hence  the  truth,  which  our  sketch

  described, is—from the point of view of human intelligence—an Ideal, and

  an Ideal which can never, as such, or in its completeness, be actual as

  human experience.’

  This passage introduces two aspects of the monistic theory which we have

  not yet considered, namely, its appeal to what it calls ‘experience’ and its

  use of the deus ex machina. Of these, the first, at least, deserves some

  discussion.

  The distinction between knowing something and the something which we

    know—between, for example, knowing that the pavements are wet and the

  actual  wetness  of  the  pavements—cannot  be  accepted  by  the  monistic

  theory  of  truth,  for  this theory,  as  we  said,  is  compelled  to  regard all

  distinctions as only partially valid. According to this theory, the wetness

  of the pavements and my knowledge of this wetness, like every other pair

  of apparently distinct objects, really exhibit a combination of identity in

  difference. Thus knowledge is in a sense different from its object, but is

  also in a sense identical with its object. The sense in which it is identical

  may be further defined as whatever sense is necessary to refute those who

  reject the monistic theory of truth.

  I will not now consider the main question of the dependence of truth upon

  experience, which cannot well be discussed except in connection with the

  theory of relations. I am content for the present to point out an ambiguity

  in the notion of ‘experience’. The proposition ‘Bishop Stubbs was hanged

  for murder’ consists of parts given in experience, and put together in a

  manner which, in other cases, is unfortunately also given in experience.

  And it is possible to apprehend the proposition, so that in one sense the

  proposition can be experienced. That is to say, we can have an experience

  which consists of realizing what the proposition is: we can see a picture of

  Bishop Stubbs dangling from the gallows. Such are the experiences in

  novel-reading: we do not believe what we read, we merely apprehend it.

  Thus experience may consist in merely apprehending, not in believing.

  When  we  apprehend  the  proposition  ‘Bishop  Stubbs  was  hanged  for

  murder’, this proposition is, in a sense, a part of our experience; but in

  another sense, which is that relevant in constructing the whole of truth, we

  do not experience this proposition, since we are not led to believe it. This

  distinction shows that experience, in the sense required by Mr Joachim,

  consists of apprehension of truth, and that there is much apprehension  which, though experience in one sense, is experience in a sense in which

  what is false can also be experienced. Thus here, again, experience, as

  used in establishing the monistic theory of truth, is a notion involving a

  conception of truth other than that which the monistic theory declares to

  be alone legitimate. For experience is either no help towards constructing

  the whole of truth, or it is apprehension of the truth of single propositions,

  which are true in a sense in which their contradictories are not true. But

  this conclusion, if sound, is fatal to the monistic theory of truth.

  As for the deus ex machina, the ideal experience in which the whole of

  truth is actualized, I will merely observe that he is in general somewhat

  discredited, and that idealists themselves are rather ashamed of him, as

  appears by the fact that they never mention him when they can help it, and

  that  when  they  do,  they  introduce  him  with  apologetic  words,  such  as

  ‘what  is  true in  the  end’—as  though  what  is  true  ‘in  the  end’  were

  anything different from what is true.

  We have thus the following objections to the monistic theory of truth: (1)

  If no partial truth is quite true, this must apply to the partial truths which

  embody  the  monistic  philosophy.  But  if  these  are  not  quite  true,  any

  deductions we may make from them may depend upon their false aspect

  rather  than  their  true  one,  and  may  therefore  be  erroneous.  (2)  It  is  a

  consequence of the monistic theory that the parts of a whole are not really

  its parts. Hence there cannot be any genuine whole on this theory, since

  nothing can be really a whole unless it really has parts. (3) The theory is

  unable to explain in what sense one partial judgment is said to be true and

  another false, though both are equally partial. (4) In order to prove that

  there can be only one coherent whole, the theory is compelled to appeal to

  ‘experience’, which must consist in knowing particular truths, and thus

  requires a notion of truth that the monistic theory cannot admit.

  But each of these arguments is of the nature of a reductio ad absurdum.

  We must now turn to what I believe to be the fundamental assumption of

  the whole monistic theory, namely, its doctrine as to relations. If we can

  show  that  this  doctrine  is  groundless  and  untenable,  we  shall  thereby

  complete the refutation of the monistic theory. 

                                            II

  The doctrines we have been considering may all be deduced from one

  central logical doctrine, which may be expressed thus: ‘Every relation is

  grounded in the natures of the related terms.’ Let us call this the axiom of

  internal relations. If this axiom holds, the fact that two objects have a

  certain  relation  implies  complexity  in  each  of  the  two  objects,  i.e.  it

  implies something in the ‘natures’ of the two objects, in virtue of which

  they have the relation in question. According to the opposite view, which

  is the one that I advocate, there are such facts as that one object has a

  certain relation to another, and such facts cannot in general be reduced to,

  or inferred from, a fact about the one object only together with a fact about

  the other object only: they do not imply that the two objects have any

  complexity, or any intrinsic property distinguishing them from two objects

  which do not have the relation in question.

  Before  examining  the  arguments  for  and  against  the  axiom  of  internal

  relations, let us consider some of its consequences. It follows at once from

  this axiom that the whole of reality or of truth must be a significant whole

  in Mr Joachim’s sense. For each part will have a nature which exhibits its

  relations to every other part and to the whole; hence, if the nature of any

  one part were completely known, the nature of the whole and of every

  other part would also be completely known; while conversely, if the nature

  of the whole were completely known, that would involve knowledge of its

  relations to each part, and therefore of the relations of each part to each

  other part, and therefore of the nature of each part. It is also evident that, if

  reality or truth is a significant whole in Mr Joachim’s sense, the axiom of

  internal  relations  must  be  true.  Hence  the  axiom  is  equivalent  to  the

  monistic theory of truth.

  Further, assuming that we are not to distinguish between a thing and its

  ‘nature’, it follows from the axiom that nothing can be considered quite

  truly except in relation to the whole. For if we consider ‘A is related to B’,

  the A and the B are also related to everything else, and to say what the A

  and the B are would involve referring to everything else in the universe.

  When we consider merely that part of A’s nature in virtue of which A is

  related to B, we are said to be considering A qua related to B; but this is

  an abstract and only partially true way of considering A, for A’s nature,

  which  is  the  same  thing  as  A,  contains  the  grounds  of  its  relations  to  everything else as well as to B. Thus nothing quite true can be said about

  A short of taking account of the whole universe; and then what is said

  about A will be the same as what would be said about anything else, since

  the natures of different things must, like those of Leibniz’s monads, all

  express the same system of relations.

  Let us now consider more closely the meaning of the axiom of internal

  relations and the grounds for and against it. We have, to begin with, two

  possible  meanings,  according  as  it  is  held  that  every  relation  is  really

  constituted  by  the  natures  of  the  terms  or  of  the  whole  which  they

  compose, or merely that every relation has a ground in these natures. I do

  not observe that idealists distinguish these two meanings; indeed, speaking

  generally, they tend to identify a proposition with its consequences, thus

  embodying one of the distinctive tenets of pragmatism. The distinction of

  the two meanings is, however, less important than it would otherwise be,

  owing to the fact that both meanings lead, as we shall see, to the view that

  there are no relations at all.

  The axiom of internal relations in either form involves, as Mr Bradley has

  justly urged, the conclusion that there are no relations and that there are

  not many things, but only one thing. (Idealists would add: in the end. But

  that only means that the consequence is one which it is often convenient to

  forget.) This conclusion is reached by considering the relation of diversity.

  For  if  there  really  are  two  things,  A  and  B,  which  are  diverse,  it  is

  impossible to reduce this diversity wholly to adjectives of A and B. It will

  be  necessary  that  A  and  B  should  have different  adjectives,  and  the

  diversity  of  these  adjectives  cannot,  on  pain  of  an  endless  regress,  be

  interpreted as meaning that they in turn have different adjectives. For if we

  say that A and B differ when A has the adjective ‘different from B’ and B

  has  the  adjective  ‘different  from  A’,  we  must  suppose  that  these  two

  adjectives  differ.  Then  ‘different  from  A’  must  have  the  adjective

  ‘different  from  “different  from  B”’,  which  must  differ  from  ‘different

  from  “different  from  A”’,  and  so  on ad  infinitum.  We  cannot  take

  ‘different from B’ as an adjective requiring no further reduction, since we

  must ask what is meant by ‘different’ in this phrase, which, as it stands,

  derives an adjective from a relation, not a relation from an adjective. Thus,

  if there is to be any diversity, there must be a diversity not reducible to

  difference of adjectives, i.e. not grounded in the ‘natures’ of the diverse

  terms. Consequently, if the axiom of internal relations is true, it follows  that there is no diversity, and that there is only one thing. Thus the axiom

  of internal relations is equivalent to the assumption of ontological monism

  and to the denial that there are any relations. Wherever we seem to have a

  relation, this is really an adjective of the whole composed of the terms of

  the supposed relation.

  The axiom of internal relations is thus equivalent to the assumption that

  every proposition has one subject and one predicate. For a proposition

  which asserts a relation must always be reduced to a subject-predicate

  proposition concerning the whole composed of the terms of the relation.

  Proceeding in this way to larger and larger wholes, we gradually correct

  our first crude abstract judgments, and approximate more and more to the

  one truth about the whole. The one final and complete truth must consist

  of a proposition with one subject, namely the whole, and one predicate.

  But since this involves distinguishing subject from predicate, as though

  they could be diverse, even this is not quite true. The best we can say of it

  is, that it is not ‘intellectually corrigible’, i.e. it is as true as any truth can

  be; but even absolute truth persists in being not quite true.

  If we ask ourselves what are the grounds in favour of the axiom of internal

  relations, we are left in doubt by those who believe in it. Mr Joachim, for

  example, assumes it throughout, and advances no argument in its favour.

  So far as one can discover the grounds, they seem to be two, though these

  are perhaps really indistinguishable. There is first the law of sufficient

  reason, according to which nothing can be just a brute fact, but must have

  some reason for being thus and not otherwise. Secondly, there is the fact

  that, if two terms have a certain relation, they cannot but have it, and if

  they did not have it they would be different; which seems to show that

  there  is  something  in  the  terms  themselves  which  leads  to  their  being

  related as they are.

  The  law  of  sufficient  reason  is  hard  to  formulate  precisely.  It  cannot

  merely mean that every true proposition is logically deducible from some

  other true proposition, for this is an obvious truth which does not yield the

  consequences  demanded  of  the  law.  For  example,  2  +  2  =  4  can  be

  deduced from 4 + 4 = 8, but it would be absurd to regard 4 + 4 = 8 as a

  reason for 2 + 2 = 4. The reason for a proposition is always expected to be

  one or more simpler propositions. Thus the law of sufficient reason should

  mean that every proposition can be deduced from simpler propositions.

  This  seems  obviously  false,  but  in  any  case  it  cannot  be  relevant  in  considering idealism, which holds propositions to be less and less true the

  simpler  they  are,  so  that  it  would  be  absurd  to  insist  on  starting  from

  simple propositions. I conclude, therefore, that, if any form of the law of

  sufficient reason is relevant, it is rather to be discovered by examining the

  second of the grounds in favour of the axiom of internal relations, namely,

  that related terms cannot but be related as they are.

  The force of this argument depends in the main, I think, upon a fallacious

  form of statement. ‘If A and B are related in a certain way’, it may be said,

  ‘you must admit that if they were not so related they would be other than

  they are, and that consequently there must be something in them which is

  essential to their being related as they are.’ Now if two terms are related in

  a certain way, it follows that, if they were not so related, every imaginable

  consequence would ensue. For, if they are so related, the hypothesis that

  they are not so related is false, and from a false hypothesis anything can be

  deduced. Thus the above form of statement must be altered. We may say:

  ‘If A and B are related in a certain way, then anything not so related must

  be other than A and B, hence, etc.’ But this only proves that what is not

  related as A and B are must be numerically diverse from A and B; it will

  not prove difference of adjectives, unless we assume the axiom of internal

  relations.  Hence  the  argument  has  only  a  rhetorical  force,  and  cannot

  prove its conclusion without a vicious circle.

  It  remains  to  ask  whether  there  are  any  grounds against  the  axiom  of

  internal relations. The first argument that naturally occurs to an opponent

  of this axiom is the difficulty of actually carrying it out. We have had one

  instance of this already as regards diversity: in many other instances the

  difficulty is even more obvious. Suppose, for example, that one volume is

  greater than another. We may reduce the relation ‘greater than’ between

  the volumes to adjectives of the volumes, by saying that one is of such and

  such a size and the other of such and such another size. But then the one

  size  must  be  greater  than  the  other  size.  If  we  try  to  reduce  this  new

  relation to adjectives of the two sizes, the adjectives must still have a

  relation  corresponding  to  ‘greater  than’,  and  so  on.  Hence  we  cannot,

  without an endless regress, refuse to admit that sooner or later we come to

  a relation not reducible to adjectives of the related terms. This argument

  applies especially to all asymmetrical relations, i.e. to such as, when they

  hold between A and B, do not hold between B and A.

  A  more  searching  argument  against  the  axiom  of  internal  relations  is  derived from a consideration of what is meant by the ‘nature’ of a term. Is

  this the same as the term itself, or is it different? If it is different, it must

  be  related  to  the  term,  and  the  relation  of  a  term  to  its  nature  cannot

  without an endless regress be reduced to something other than a relation.

  Thus if the axiom is to be adhered to, we must suppose that a term is not

  other  than  its  nature.  In  that  case,  every  true  proposition  attributing  a

  predicate to a subject is purely analytic, since the subject is its own whole

  nature, and the predicate is part of that nature. But in that case, what is the

  bond  that  unites  predicates  into  predicates  of  one  subject?  Any  casual

  collection  of  predicates  might  be  supposed  to  compose  a  subject,  if

  subjects  are  not  other  than  the  system  of  their  own  predicates.  If  the

  ‘nature’ of a term is to consist of predicates, and at the same time to be the

  same as the term itself, it seems impossible to understand what we mean

  when we ask whether S has the predicate P. For this cannot mean: ‘Is P

  one of the predicates enumerated in explaining what we mean by S?’ and

  it is hard to see what else, on the view in question, it could mean. We

  cannot attempt to introduce a relation of coherence between predicates, in

  virtue  of  which  they  may  be  called  predicates  of  one  subject;  for  this

  would base predication upon a relation, instead of reducing relations to

  predications. Thus we get into equal difficulties whether we affirm or deny

  that a subject is other than its ‘nature’.

  Again, the axiom of internal relation is incompatible with all complexity.

  For this axiom leads, as we saw, to a rigid monism. There is only one

  thing and only one proposition. The one proposition (which is not merely

  the only true proposition, but the only proposition) attributes a predicate to

  the  one  subject.  But  this  one  proposition  is  not  quite  true,  because  it

  involves distinguishing the predicate from the subject. But then arises the

  difficulty:  if  predication  involves  difference  of  the  predicate  from  the

  subject, and if the one predicate is not distinct from the one subject, there

  cannot, even, one would suppose, be a false proposition attributing the one

  predicate to the one subject. We  shall  have  to  suppose,  therefore,  that

  predication does not involve difference of the predicate from the subject,

  and  that  the  one  predicate  is  identical  with  the  one  subject.  But  it  is

  essential to the philosophy we are examining to deny absolute identity and

  retain ‘identity in difference’. The apparent multiplicity of the real world

  is otherwise inexplicable. The difficulty is that ‘identity in difference’ is

  impossible,  if  we  adhere  to  strict  monism.  For  ‘identity  in  difference’  involves many partial truths, which combine, by a kind of mutual give and

  take, into the one whole of truth. But the partial truths, in a strict monism,

  are not merely not quite true: they do not subsist at all. If there were such

  propositions, whether true or false, that would give plurality. In short, the

  whole  conception  of  ‘identity  in  difference’  is  incompatible  with  the

  axiom of internal relations; yet without this conception monism can give

  no account of the world, which suddenly collapses like an opera-hat. I

  conclude that the axiom is false, and that those parts of idealism which

  depend upon it are therefore groundless.

  There would seem, therefore, to be reasons against the axiom that relations

  are necessarily grounded in the ‘nature’ of their terms or of the whole

  composed of the terms, and there would seem to be no reason in favour of

  this axiom. When the axiom is rejected, it becomes meaningless to speak

  of the ‘nature’ of the terms of a relation: relatedness is no longer a proof of

  complexity, a given relation may hold between many different pairs of

  terms, and a given term may have many different relations to different

  terms.  ‘Identity  in  difference’  disappears:  there  is  identity  and  there  is

  difference, and complexes may have some elements identical and some

  different, but we are no longer obliged to say of any pair of objects that

  may be mentioned that they are both identical and different—‘in a sense’,

  this  ‘sense’  being  something  which  it  is  vitally  necessary  to  leave

  undefined. We thus get a world of many things, with relations which are

  not to be deduced from a supposed ‘nature’ or scholastic essence of the

  related things. In this world, whatever is complex is composed of related

  simple things, and analysis is no longer confronted at every step by an

  endless regress. Assuming this kind of world, it remains to ask what we

  are to say concerning the nature of truth. This question is considered in the

  following essay.                                              7

      ON THE NATURE OF TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD

  The question ‘What is Truth?’ is one which may be understood in several

  different ways, and before beginning our search for an answer, it will be

  well to be quite clear as to the sense in which we are asking the question.

  We may mean to ask what things are true: is science true? is revealed

  religion  true?  and  so  on.  But  before  we  can  answer  such  questions  as

  these, we ought to be able to say what these questions mean: what is it,

  exactly,  that  we  are  asking  when  we  say,  ‘is  science  true?’  It  is  this

  preliminary question that I wish to discuss. The question whether this or

  that is true is to be settled, if at all, by considerations concerning this or

  that, not by general considerations as to what ‘truth’ means; but those who

  ask the question presumably have in their minds already some idea as to

  what ‘truth’ means, otherwise the question and its answer could have no

  definite meaning to them.

  When, however, we have agreed that the question we are concerned with

  is ‘What does “truth” mean?’ we have by no means come to an end of

  possible  ambiguities.  There  is  the  question ‘How  is  the  word  “truth”

  properly used?’ This is a question for the dictionary, not for philosophy.

  Moreover, the word has some perfectly proper uses which are obviously

  irrelevant to our inquiry: a ‘true’ man, a ‘true’ poet, are ‘true’ in a different

  sense from that with which we are concerned. Again, there is the question

  ‘What do people usually have in mind when they use the word “truth”?’

  This question comes nearer to the question we have to ask, but is still

  different from it. The question what idea people have when they use a

  word is a question of psychology; moreover, there is very little in common

  between the ideas which two different people in fact attach to the same

  word, though there would often be more agreement as to the ideas which

  they would consider it proper to attach to the word.

  The question we have to discuss may be explained by pointing out that, in

  the  case  of  such  a  word  as  ‘truth’,  we  all  feel  that  some  fundamental

  concept,  of  great  philosophical  importance,  is  involved,  though  it  is

  difficult to be clear as to what this concept is. What we wish to do is to

  detach this concept from the mass of irrelevancies in which, when we use

  it,  it  is  normally  embedded,  and  to  bring  clearly  before  the  mind  the

  abstract opposition upon which our distinction of true and false depends.

  The process to be gone through is essentially one of analysis: we have  various complex and more or less confused beliefs about the true and the

  false, and we have to reduce these to forms which are simple and clear,

  without causing any avoidable conflict between our initial complex and

  confused  beliefs  and  our  final  simple  and  clear  assertions.  These  final

  assertions are to be tested partly by their intrinsic evidence, partly by their

  power of accounting for the ‘data’; and the ‘data’, in such a problem, are

  the complex and confused beliefs with which we start. These beliefs must

  necessarily suffer a change in becoming clear, but the change should not

  be greater than is warranted by their initial confusion.

  Although the question what things are true rather than false does not form

  part of our inquiry, yet it will be useful to consider for a moment the

  nature  of  the  things  to  which  we  attribute  either  truth  or  falsehood.

  Broadly speaking, the things that are true or false, in the sense with which

  we are concerned, are statements, and beliefs or judgments. When, for

  example,  we  see  the  sun  shining,  the  sun  itself  is  not  ‘true’,  but  the

  judgment ‘the sun is shining’ is true. The truth or falsehood of statements

  can be defined in terms of the truth or falsehoods of beliefs. A statement is

  true when a person who believes it believes truly, and false when a person

  who believes it believes falsely. Thus in considering the nature of truth we

  may confine ourselves to the truth of beliefs, since the truth of statements

  is a notion derived from that of beliefs. The question we have to discuss is

  therefore: What is the difference between a true belief and a false belief?

  By this I mean, What is the difference which actually constitutes the truth

  or falsehood of a belief? I am not asking for what is called a criterion of

  truth, i.e. for some quality, other than truth, which belongs to whatever is

  true and to nothing else. This distinction between the nature of truth and a

  criterion  of  truth  is  important,  and  has  not  always  been  sufficiently

  emphasized by philosophers. A criterion is a sort of trade-mark, i.e some

  comparatively obvious characteristic which is a guarantee of genuineness.

  ‘None genuine without the label’: thus the label is what assures us that

  such and such a firm made the article. But when we say that such and such

  a firm made the article we do not mean that the article has the right label;

  thus there is a difference between meaning and criterion. Indeed, it is just

  this difference which makes a criterion useful. Now I do not believe that

  truth has, universally, any such trade-mark: I do not believe that there is

  any one label by which we can always know that a judgment is true rather

  than false. But this is not the question which I wish to discuss: I wish to  discuss what truth and falsehood actually are, not what extraneous marks

  they have by which we can recognize them.

  The first point upon which it is important to be clear is the relation of truth

  and falsehood to the mind. If we were right in saying that the things that

  are true or false are always judgments, then it is plain that there can be no

  truth or falsehood unless there are minds to judge. Nevertheless it is plain,

  also, that the truth or falsehood of a given judgment depends in no way

  upon the person judging, but solely upon the facts about which he judges.

  If I judge that Charles I died in his bed, I judge falsely, not because of

  anything to do with me, but because in fact he did not die in his bed.

  Similarly, if I judge that he died on the scaffold, I judge truly, because of

  an event which in fact occurred 260 years ago. Thus the truth or falsehood

  of a judgment always has an objective ground, and it is natural to ask

  whether  there  are  not  objective  truths  and  falsehoods  which  are  the

  objects, respectively, of true and false judgments. As regards truths, this

  view is highly plausible. But as regards falsehoods, it is the very reverse of

  plausible; yet, as we shall see, it is hard to maintain it with regard to truths

  without being forced to maintain it also as regards falsehoods.

  In  all  cognitive  acts,  such  as  believing,  doubting,  disbelieving,

  apprehending, perceiving, imagining, the mind has objects other than itself

  to which it stands in some one of these various relations. In such a case as

  perception this is sufficiently obvious: the thing perceived is necessarily

  something different from the act of perceiving it, and the perceiving is a

  relation between the person perceiving and the thing perceived. The same

  thing  holds,  though  less  obviously,  with  regard  to  imagination.  If  I

  imagine, say, a certain colour, the colour is an object before my mind just

  as truly as if I perceived the colour, though the relation to my mind is

  different from what it would be if I perceived the colour, and does not lead

  me  to  suppose  that  the  colour  exists  in  the  place  where  I  imagine  it.

  Judgments, also, consist of relations of the mind to objects. But here a

  distinction has to be made between two different theories as to the relation

  which constitutes judgment. If I judge (say) that Charles I died on the

  scaffold, is that a relation between me and a single ‘fact’, namely, Charles

  I’s death on the scaffold, or ‘that Charles I died on the scaffold’, or is it a

  relation between me and Charles I and dying and the scaffold? We shall

  find that the possibility of false judgments compels us to adopt the latter

  view. But let us first examine the view that a judgment has a single object.  If every judgment, whether true or false, consists in a certain relation,

  called ‘judging’ or ‘believing’, to a single object, which is what we judge

  or believe, then the distinction of true and false as applied to judgments is

  derivative from the distinction of true and false as applied to the objects of

  judgments.  Assuming  that  there  are  such  objects,  let  us,  following

  Meinong, give them the name ‘Objectives’. Then every judgment has an

  objective, and true judgments have true objectives, while false judgments

  have  false  objectives.  Thus  the  question  of  the  meaning  of  truth  and

  falsehood will have to be considered first with regard to objectives, and

  we shall have to find some way of dividing objectives into those that are

  true and those that are false. In this, however, there is great difficulty. So

  long  as  we  only  consider  true  judgments,  the  view  that  they  have

  objectives is plausible: the actual event which we describe as ‘Charles I’s

  death on the scaffold’ may be regarded as the objective of the judgment

  ‘Charles I died on the scaffold’. But what is the objective of the judgment

  ‘Charles I died in his bed’? There was no event such as ‘Charles I’s death

  in his bed’. To say that there ever was such a thing as ‘Charles I’s death in

  his bed’ is merely another way of saying that Charles I died in his bed.

  Thus, if there is an objective, it must be something other than ‘Charles I’s

  death in his bed’. We may take it to be ‘that Charles I died in his bed’. We

  shall  then  have  to  say  the  same  of  true  judgments:  the  objective  of

  ‘Charles  I  died  on  the  scaffold’  will  be  ‘that  Charles  I  died  on  the

  scaffold’.

  To  this  view  there  are,  however,  two  objections.  The  first  is  that  it  is

  difficult to believe that there are such objects as ‘that Charles I died in his

  bed’, or even ‘that Charles I died on the scaffold’. It seems evident that the

  phrase ‘that so and so’ has no complete meaning by itself, which would

  enable it to denote a definite object as (e.g.) the word ‘Socrates’ does. We

  feel that the phrase ‘that so and so’ is essentially incomplete, and only

  acquires  full  significance  when  words  are  added  so  as  to  express  a

  judgment, e.g. ‘I believe that so and so’, ‘I deny that so and so’, ‘I hope

  that so and so’. Thus, if we can avoid regarding ‘that so and so’ as an

  independent  entity,  we  shall  escape  a  paradox.  This  argument  is  not

  decisive, but it must be allowed a certain weight. The second objection is

  more fatal, and more germane to the consideration of truth and falsehood.

  If we allow that all judgments have objectives, we shall have to allow that

  there  are  objectives  which  are  false.  Thus  there  will  be  in  the  world  entities, not dependent upon the existence of judgments, which can be

  described as objective falsehoods. This is in itself almost incredible: we

  feel  that  there  could  be  no  falsehood  if  there  were  no  minds  to  make

  mistakes.  But  it  has  the  further  drawback  that  it  leaves  the  difference

  between  truth  and  falsehood  quite  inexplicable.  We  feel  that  when  we

  judge truly some entity ‘corresponding’ in some way to our judgment is to

  be found outside our judgment, while when we judge falsely there is no

  such ‘corresponding’ entity. It is true we cannot take as this entity simply

  the grammatical subject of our judgment: if we judge, e.g., ‘Homer did not

  exist’, it is obvious that Homer is not the entity which is to be found if our

  judgment  is  true,  but  not  if  it  is  false.  Nevertheless  it  is  difficult  to

  abandon the view that, in some way, the truth or falsehood of a judgment

  depends upon the presence or absence of a ‘corresponding’ entity of some

  sort. And if we do abandon this view, and adhere to the opinion that there

  are both true and false objectives, we shall be compelled to regard it as an

  ultimate and not further explicable fact that objectives are of two sorts, the

  true  and  the  false.  This  view,  though  not  logically  impossible,  is

  unsatisfactory, and we shall do better, if we can, to find some view which

  leaves the difference between truth and falsehood less of a mystery.

  It might be thought that we could say simply that true judgments have

  objectives while false ones do not. With a new definition of objectives this

  view might become tenable, but it is not tenable so long as we hold to the

  view that judgment actually is a relation of the mind to an objective. For

  this  view  compels  us,  since  there  certainly  are  false  judgments,  and  a

  relation cannot be a relation to nothing, to admit that false judgments as

  well as true ones have objectives. We must therefore abandon the view

  that judgments consist in a relation to a single object. We cannot maintain

  this view with regard to true judgments while rejecting it with regard to

  false ones, for that would make an intrinsic difference between true and

  false judgments, and enable us (what is obviously impossible) to discover

  the truth or falsehood of a judgment merely by examining the intrinsic

  nature of the judgment. Thus we must turn to the theory that no judgment

  consists in a relation to a single object.

  The difficulty of the view we have been hitherto considering was that it

  compelled us either to admit objective falsehoods, or to admit that when

  we judge falsely there is nothing that we are judging. The way out of the

  difficulty consists in maintaining that, whether we judge truly or whether  we judge falsely, there is no one thing that we are judging. When we judge

  that Charles I died on the scaffold, we have before us, not one object, but

  several objects, namely, Charles I and dying and the scaffold. Similarly,

  when  we  judge  that  Charles  I  died  in  his  bed,  we  have  before  us  the

  objects Charles I, dying, and his bed. These objects are not fictions: they

  are just as good as the objects of the true judgment. We therefore escape

  the necessity of admitting objective falsehoods, or of admitting that in

  judging  falsely  we  have  nothing  before  the  mind.  Thus  in  this  view

  judgment is a relation of the mind to several other terms: when these other

  terms have inter se a ‘corresponding’ relation, the judgment is true; when

  not, it is false. This view, which I believe to be the correct one, must now

  be further expanded and explained.

  In saying that judgment is a relation of the mind to several things, e.g. to

  Charles I and the scaffold and dying, I do not mean that the mind has a

  certain relation to Charles I and also has this relation to the scaffold and

  also has it to dying. I do not, however, wish to deny that, when we are

  judging, we have a relation to each of the constituents of our judgment

  separately, for it would seem that we must be in some way conscious of

  these constituents, so that during any judgment we must have, to each

  constituent  of  the  judgment,  that  relation  which  we  may  call  ‘being

  conscious of it’. This is a very important fact, but it does not give the

  essence of judgment. Nothing that concerns Charles I and dying and the

  scaffold separately and severally will give the judgment ‘Charles I died on

  the scaffold’. In order to obtain this judgment, we must have one single

  unity of the mind and Charles I and dying and the scaffold, i.e. we must

  have,  not  several  instances  of  a  relation  between  two  terms,  but  one

  instance of a relation between more than two terms. Such relations, though

  familiar to mathematicians, have been unduly ignored by philosophers.

  Since they appear to me to give the key to many puzzles about truth, I

  shall make a short digression to show that they are common and ought to

  be familiar.

  One of the commonest ways in which relations between more than two

  terms occur is in propositions about what happened at some particular

  time. Take such a proposition as ‘A loved B in May and hated him in

  June’, and let us suppose this to be true. Then we cannot say that, apart

  from dates, A has to B either the relation of loving or that of hating. This

  necessity  for  a  date  does  not  arise  with all  ordinary  relationships;  for  example, if A is the brother of B, no date is required: the relationship

  holds always or never, or (more strictly) holds or does not hold without

  regard to time. But love and hate are ‘time’s fool’: they are not relations

  which hold without regard to date. ‘A loved B in May’ is a relation, not

  between A and B simply, but between A and B and May. This relation

  between A and B and May cannot be analysed into relations between A

  and B, A and May, B and May: it is a single unity. It is partly the failure to

  perceive  that  the  date  is  one  of  the  terms  in  such  relations  which  has

  caused such difficulty in the philosophy of time and change.

  As another illustration, take the relation of jealousy. Time comes in here

  exactly as it did with love and hate, but we will for the moment ignore

  time, because the point to be noticed about jealousy is that it involves

  three people. The simplest possible proposition asserting jealousy is such

  as ‘A is jealous of B’s love for C’, or ‘A is jealous of B on account of C’.

  It might be thought that ‘B’s love for C’ was one term, and A the other

  term. But this interpretation will not apply to cases of mistaken jealousy: if

  A  is  Othello,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  ‘B’s  love  for  C’.  Thus  this

  interpretation is impossible, and we are compelled to regard jealousy as a

  relation of three persons, i.e. as having for its unit a relation which is what

  we may call ‘triangular’. If we further take into account the necessity for a

  date,  the  relation  becomes  ‘quadrangular’,  i.e.  the  simplest  possible

  proposition involving the relation will be one which concerns four terms,

  namely, three people and a date.

  We will give the name ‘multiple relations’ to such as require more than

  two terms. Thus a relation is ‘multiple’ if the simplest propositions in

  which  it  occurs  are  propositions  involving  more  than  two  terms  (not

  counting the relation). From what has been said it is obvious that multiple

  relations  are  common,  and  that  many  matters  cannot  be  understood

  without  their  help.  Relations  which  have  only  two  terms  we  shall  call

  ‘dual relations’.

  The theory of judgment which I am advocating is, that judgment is not a

  dual relation of the mind to a single objective, but a multiple relation of

  the mind to the various other terms with which the judgment is concerned.

  Thus if I judge that A loves B, that is not a relation of me to ‘A’s love for

  B’, but a relation between me and A and love and B. If it were a relation

  of me to ‘A’s love for B’, it would be impossible unless there were such a

  thing as ‘A’s love for B’, i.e. unless A loved B, i.e. unless the judgment  were true; but in fact false judgments are possible. When the judgment is

  taken as a relation between me and A and love and B, the mere fact that

  the judgment occurs does not involve any relation between its objects A

  and love and B; thus the possibility of false judgments is fully allowed for.

  When the judgment is true, A loves B; thus in this case there is a relation

  between  the  objects  of  the  judgment.  We  may  therefore  state  the

  difference between truth and falsehood as follows: Every judgment is a

  relation  of  a  mind  to  several  objects,  one  of  which  is  a  relation;  the

  judgment is true when the relation which is one of the objects relates the

  other objects, otherwise it is false. Thus in the above illustration, love,

  which is a relation, is one of the objects of the judgment, and the judgment

  is  true  if  love  relates  A  and  B.  The  above  statement  requires  certain

  additions which will be made later; for the present, it is to be taken as a

  first approximation.

  One of the merits of the above theory is that it explains the difference

  between judgment and perception, and the reason why perception is not

  liable to error as judgment is. When we were considering the theory that

  judgment is a dual relation of the mind to a single objective, we found that

  so far as true judgments were concerned this theory worked admirably, but

  that it would not account for false judgments. Now this difficulty will not

  apply against a corresponding theory of perception. It is true that there are

  cases  where  perception appears  to  be  at  fault,  such  as  dreams  and

  hallucinations. But I believe that in all these cases the perception itself is

  correct, and what is wrong is a judgment based upon the perception. It

  would  take  us  too  far  from  our  subject  to  develop  this  theme,  which

  requires a discussion of the relation between sense-data (i.e. the things we

  immediately perceive) and what we may call physical reality, i.e. what is

  there independently of us and our perceptions. Assuming the result of this

  discussion,  I  shall  take  it  as  agreed  that  perception,  as  opposed  to

  judgment, is never in error, i.e. that, whenever we perceive anything, what

  we perceive exists, at least so long as we are perceiving it.

  If the infallibility of perception is admitted, we may apply to perception

  the  theory  of  the  single  objective  which  we  found  inapplicable  to

  judgment. Take, for example, such a case as spatial relations. Suppose I

  see simultaneously on my table a knife and a book, the knife being to the

  left of the book. Perception presents me with a complex object, consisting

  of the knife and the book in certain relative positions (as well as other  objects,  which  we  may  ignore).  If  I  attend  to  this  complex  object  and

  analyse it, I can arrive at the judgment ‘the knife is to the left of the book’.

  Here the knife and the book and their spatial relation are severally before

  my mind; but in the perception I had the single whole ‘knife-to-left-of-

  book’. Thus in perception I perceive a single complex object, while in a

  judgment based upon the perception I have the parts of the complex object

  separately  though  simultaneously  before  me.  In  order  to  perceive  a

  complex  object,  such  as  ‘knife-to-left-of-book’,  there  must  be  such  an

  object,  since  otherwise  my  perception  would  have  no  object,  i.e.  there

  would not be any perceiving, since the relation of perception requires the

  two terms, the perceiver and the thing perceived. But if there is such an

  object as ‘knife-to-left-of-book’, then the knife must be to the left of the

  book; hence the judgment ‘the knife is to the left of the book’ must be

  true.  Thus  any  judgment  of  perception,  i.e.  any  judgment  derived

  immediately from perception by mere analysis, must be true. (This does

  not enable us, in any given case, to be quite certain that such and such a

  judgment is true, since we may inadvertently have failed merely to analyse

  what was given in perception.) We see that in the case of the judgment of

  perception  there  is,  corresponding  to  the  judgment,  a  certain  complex

  object which is perceived, as one complex, in the perception upon which

  the judgment is based. It is because there is such a complex object that the

  judgment is true. This complex object, in the cases where it is perceived, is

  the objective of the perception. Where it is not perceived, it is still the

  necessary and sufficient condition of the truth of the judgment. There was

  such a complex event as ‘Charles I’s death on the scaffold’; hence the

  judgment ‘Charles I died on the scaffold’ is true. There never was such a

  complex event as ‘Charles I’s death in his bed’; hence ‘Charles I died in

  his bed’ is false. If A loves B, there is such a complex object as ‘A’s love

  for B’, and vice versa; thus the existence of this complex object gives the

  condition for the truth of the judgment ‘A loves B’. And the same holds in

  all other cases.

  We  may  now  attempt  an  exact  account  of  the  ‘correspondence’  which

  constitutes truth. Let us take the judgment ‘A loves B’. This consists of a

  relation of the person judging to A and love and B, i.e. to the two terms A

  and B and the relation ‘love’. But the judgment is not the same as the

  judgment ‘B loves A’; thus the relation must not be abstractly before the

  mind, but must be before it as proceeding from A to B rather than from B  to A. The ‘corresponding’ complex object which is required to make our

  judgment true consists of A related to B by the relation which was before

  us  in  our  judgment.  We  may  distinguish  two  ‘senses’  of  a  relation

  according as it goes from A to B or from B to A. Then the relation as it

  enters into the judgment must have a ‘sense’, and in the corresponding

  complex it must have the same ‘sense’. Thus the judgment that two terms

  have a certain relation R is a relation of the mind to the two terms and the

  relation  R  with  the  appropriate  sense:  the  ‘corresponding’  complex

  consists of the two terms related by the relation R with the same sense.

  The judgment is true when there is such a complex, and false when there

  is  not.  The  same  account, mutatis  mutandis,  will  apply  to  any  other

  judgment. This gives the definition of truth and falsehood.

  We  see  that,  according  to  the  above  account,  truth  and  falsehood  are

  primarily properties of judgments, and therefore there would be no truth or

  falsehood if there were no minds. Nevertheless, the truth or falsehood of a

  given judgment does not depend upon the person making it or the time

  when it is made, since the ‘corresponding’ complex, upon which its truth

  or falsehood depends, does not contain the person judging as a constituent

  (except, of course, when the judgment happens to be about oneself). Thus

  the mixture of dependence upon mind and independence of mind, which

  we noticed as a characteristic of truth, is fully preserved by our theory.

  The  questions  what  things  are  true  and  what  false,  whether  we  know

  anything,  and  if  so,  how  we  come  to  know  it,  are  subsequent  to  the

  question ‘What is truth?’ and except briefly in the case of the judgment of

  perception, I have avoided such questions in the above discussion, not

  because they are of less interest, but in order to avoid confusing the issue.

  It  is  one  of  the  reasons  for  the  slow  progress  of  philosophy  that  its

  fundamental questions are not, to most people, the most interesting, and

  therefore there is a tendency to hurry on before the foundations are secure.

  In order to check this tendency, it is necessary to isolate the fundamental

  questions,  and  consider  them  without  too  much  regard  to  the  later

  developments; and this is what, in respect of one such question, I have

  tried to do in the foregoing pages.                      The Problems of Philosophy

                                       Contents

 

PREFACE

CHAPTER I. APPEARANCE AND REALITY

CHAPTER II. THE EXISTENCE OF MATTER

CHAPTER III. THE NATURE OF MATTER

CHAPTER IV. IDEALISM

CHAPTER V. KNOWLEDGE BY ACQUAINTANCE AND KNOWLEDGE

BY DESCRIPTION

CHAPTER VI. ON INDUCTION

CHAPTER VII. ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF GENERAL PRINCIPLES

CHAPTER VIII. HOW A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE IS POSSIBLE

CHAPTER IX. THE WORLD OF UNIVERSALS

CHAPTER X. ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF UNIVERSALS

CHAPTER XI. ON INTUITIVE KNOWLEDGE

CHAPTER XII. TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD

CHAPTER XIII. KNOWLEDGE, ERROR, AND PROBABLE OPINION

CHAPTER XIV. THE LIMITS OF PHILOSOPHICAL KNOWLEDGE

CHAPTER XV. THE VALUE OF PHILOSOPHY

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

 
 

                                         PREFACE

  In  the  following  pages  I  have  confined  myself  in  the  main  to  those

problems  of  philosophy  in  regard  to  which  I  thought  it  possible  to  say

something positive and constructive, since merely negative criticism seemed

out of place. For this reason, theory of knowledge occupies a larger space

than metaphysics in the present volume, and some topics much discussed by

philosophers are treated very briefly, if at all.

  I  have  derived  valuable  assistance  from  unpublished  writings  of  G.  E.

Moore and J. M. Keynes: from the former, as regards the relations of sense-

data  to  physical  objects,  and  from  the  latter  as  regards  probability  and

induction. I have also profited greatly by the criticisms and suggestions of

Professor Gilbert Murray.

  1912    





               CHAPTER I. APPEARANCE AND REALITY

  Is there any knowledge in the world which is so certain that no reasonable

man  could  doubt  it?  This  question,  which  at  first  sight  might  not  seem

difficult, is really one of the most difficult that can be asked. When we have

realized the obstacles in the way of a straightforward and confident answer,

we shall be well launched on the study of philosophy—for philosophy is

merely  the  attempt  to  answer  such  ultimate  questions,  not  carelessly  and

dogmatically, as we do in ordinary life and even in the sciences, but critically,

after exploring all that makes such questions puzzling, and after realizing all

the vagueness and confusion that underlie our ordinary ideas.

  In daily life, we assume as certain many things which, on a closer scrutiny,

are found to be so full of apparent contradictions that only a great amount of

thought enables us to know what it is that we really may believe. In the

search for certainty, it is natural to begin with our present experiences, and in

some  sense,  no  doubt,  knowledge  is  to  be  derived  from  them.  But  any

statement as to what it is that our immediate experiences make us know is

very likely to be wrong. It seems to me that I am now sitting in a chair, at a

table of a certain shape, on which I see sheets of paper with writing or print.

By turning my head I see out of the window buildings and clouds and the

sun. I believe that the sun is about ninety-three million miles from the earth;

that it is a hot globe many times bigger than the earth; that, owing to the

earth's rotation, it rises every morning, and will continue to do so for an

indefinite time in the future. I believe that, if any other normal person comes

into my room, he will see the same chairs and tables and books and papers as

I see, and that the table which I see is the same as the table which I feel

pressing against my arm. All this seems to be so evident as to be hardly worth

stating, except in answer to a man who doubts whether I know anything. Yet

all  this  may  be  reasonably  doubted,  and  all  of  it  requires  much  careful

discussion before we can be sure that we have stated it in a form that is

wholly true.

  To make our difficulties plain, let us concentrate attention on the table. To

the eye it is oblong, brown and shiny, to the touch it is smooth and cool and

hard; when I tap it, it gives out a wooden sound. Any one else who sees and

feels and hears the table will agree with this description, so that it might seem

as if no difficulty would arise; but as soon as we try to be more precise ourtroubles begin. Although I believe that the table is 'really' of the same colour

all over, the parts that reflect the light look much brighter than the other parts,

and some parts look white because of reflected light. I know that, if I move,

the  parts  that  reflect  the  light  will  be  different,  so  that  the  apparent

distribution  of  colours  on  the  table  will  change.  It  follows  that  if  several

people are looking at the table at the same moment, no two of them will see

exactly  the  same  distribution  of  colours,  because  no  two  can  see  it  from

exactly the same point of view, and any change in the point of view makes

some change in the way the light is reflected.

  For most practical purposes these differences are unimportant, but to the

painter they are all-important: the painter has to unlearn the habit of thinking

that things seem to have the colour which common sense says they 'really'

have, and to learn the habit of seeing things as they appear. Here we have

already the beginning of one of the distinctions that cause most trouble in

philosophy—the distinction between 'appearance' and 'reality', between what

things seem to be and what they are. The painter wants to know what things

seem to be, the practical man and the philosopher want to know what they

are; but the philosopher's wish to know this is stronger than the practical

man's, and is more troubled by knowledge as to the difficulties of answering

the question.

  To return to the table. It is evident from what we have found, that there is

no colour which pre-eminently appears to be the colour of the table, or even

of any one particular part of the table—it appears to be of different colours

from different points of view, and there is no reason for regarding some of

these as more really its colour than others. And we know that even from a

given point of view the colour will seem different by artificial light, or to a

colour-blind man, or to a man wearing blue spectacles, while in the dark there

will  be  no  colour  at  all,  though  to  touch  and  hearing  the  table  will  be

unchanged. This colour is not something which is inherent in the table, but

something depending upon the table and the spectator and the way the light

falls on the table. When, in ordinary life, we speak of the colour of the table,

we only mean the sort of colour which it will seem to have to a normal

spectator from an ordinary point of view under usual conditions of light. But

the other colours which appear under other conditions have just as good a

right  to  be  considered  real;  and  therefore,  to  avoid  favouritism,  we  are

compelled to deny that, in itself, the table has any one particular colour.  The same thing applies to the texture. With the naked eye one can see the

grain,  but  otherwise  the  table  looks  smooth  and  even.  If  we  looked  at  it

through a microscope, we should see roughnesses and hills and valleys, and

all sorts of differences that are imperceptible to the naked eye. Which of these

is the 'real' table? We are naturally tempted to say that what we see through

the microscope is more real, but that in turn would be changed by a still more

powerful microscope. If, then, we cannot trust what we see with the naked

eye, why should we trust what we see through a microscope? Thus, again, the

confidence in our senses with which we began deserts us.

  The shape of the table is no better. We are all in the habit of judging as to

the 'real' shapes of things, and we do this so unreflectingly that we come to

think we actually see the real shapes. But, in fact, as we all have to learn if we

try to draw, a given thing looks different in shape from every different point

of view. If our table is 'really' rectangular, it will look, from almost all points

of view, as if it had two acute angles and two obtuse angles. If opposite sides

are parallel, they will look as if they converged to a point away from the

spectator; if they are of equal length, they will look as if the nearer side were

longer.  All  these  things  are  not  commonly  noticed  in  looking  at  a  table,

because  experience  has  taught  us  to  construct  the  'real'  shape  from  the

apparent shape, and the 'real' shape is what interests us as practical men. But

the 'real' shape is not what we see; it is something inferred from what we see.

And what we see is constantly changing in shape as we move about the room;

so that here again the senses seem not to give us the truth about the table

itself, but only about the appearance of the table.

  Similar difficulties arise when we consider the sense of touch. It is true

that the table always gives us a sensation of hardness, and we feel that it

resists pressure. But the sensation we obtain depends upon how hard we press

the table and also upon what part of the body we press with; thus the various

sensations due to various pressures or various parts of the body cannot be

supposed to reveal directly any definite property of the table, but at most to

be signs of some property which perhaps causes all the sensations, but is not

actually apparent in any of them. And the same applies still more obviously

to the sounds which can be elicited by rapping the table.

  Thus it becomes evident that the real table, if there is one, is not the same

as what we immediately experience by sight or touch or hearing. The real

table, if there is one, is not immediately known to us at all, but must be aninference  from  what  is  immediately  known.  Hence,  two  very  difficult

questions at once arise; namely, (1) Is there a real table at all? (2) If so, what

sort of object can it be?

  It will help us in considering these questions to have a few simple terms of

which the meaning is definite and clear. Let us give the name of 'sense-data'

to the things that are immediately known in sensation: such things as colours,

sounds, smells, hardnesses, roughnesses, and so on. We shall give the name

'sensation'  to  the  experience  of  being  immediately  aware  of  these  things.

Thus, whenever we see a colour, we have a sensation of the colour, but the

colour itself is a sense-datum, not a sensation. The colour is that of which we

are immediately aware, and the awareness itself is the sensation. It is plain

that if we are to know anything about the table, it must be by means of the

sense-data—brown  colour,  oblong  shape,  smoothness,  etc.—which  we

associate  with  the  table;  but,  for  the  reasons  which  have  been  given,  we

cannot say that the table is the sense-data, or even that the sense-data are

directly properties of the table. Thus a problem arises as to the relation of the

sense-data to the real table, supposing there is such a thing.

  The real table, if it exists, we will call a 'physical object'. Thus we have to

consider the relation of sense-data to physical objects. The collection of all

physical objects is called 'matter'. Thus our two questions may be re-stated as

follows: (1) Is there any such thing as matter? (2) If so, what is its nature?

  The philosopher who first brought prominently forward the reasons for

regarding the immediate objects of our senses as not existing independently

of us was Bishop Berkeley (1685-1753). His Three Dialogues between Hylas

and Philonous, in Opposition to Sceptics and Atheists, undertake to prove

that there is no such thing as matter at all, and that the world consists of

nothing but minds and their ideas. Hylas has hitherto believed in matter, but

he is no match for Philonous, who mercilessly drives him into contradictions

and paradoxes, and makes his own denial of matter seem, in the end, as if it

were almost common sense. The arguments employed are of very different

value: some are important and sound, others are confused or quibbling. But

Berkeley retains the merit of having shown that the existence of matter is

capable of being denied without absurdity, and that if there are any things

that exist independently of us they cannot be the immediate objects of our

sensations.

  There are two different questions involved when we ask whether matterexists, and it is important to keep them clear. We commonly mean by 'matter'

something  which  is  opposed  to  'mind',  something  which  we  think  of  as

occupying  space  and  as  radically  incapable  of  any  sort  of  thought  or

consciousness. It is chiefly in this sense that Berkeley denies matter; that is to

say, he does not deny that the sense-data which we commonly take as signs

of the existence of the table are really signs of the existence of something

independent of us, but he does deny that this something is non-mental, that it

is neither mind nor ideas entertained by some mind. He admits that there

must be something which continues to exist when we go out of the room or

shut our eyes, and that what we call seeing the table does really give us

reason for believing in something which persists even when we are not seeing

it. But he thinks that this something cannot be radically different in nature

from what we see, and cannot be independent of seeing altogether, though it

must be independent of our seeing. He is thus led to regard the 'real' table as

an idea in the mind of God. Such an idea has the required permanence and

independence of ourselves, without being—as matter would otherwise be—

something quite unknowable, in the sense that we can only infer it, and can

never be directly and immediately aware of it.

  Other philosophers since Berkeley have also held that, although the table

does not depend for its existence upon being seen by me, it does depend upon

being  seen  (or  otherwise  apprehended  in  sensation)  by some  mind—not

necessarily the mind of God, but more often the whole collective mind of the

universe. This they hold, as Berkeley does, chiefly because they think there

can be nothing real—or at any rate nothing known to be real except minds

and their thoughts and feelings. We might state the argument by which they

support their view in some such way as this: 'Whatever can be thought of is

an idea in the mind of the person thinking of it; therefore nothing can be

thought of except ideas in minds; therefore anything else is inconceivable,

and what is inconceivable cannot exist.'

  Such an argument, in my opinion, is fallacious; and of course those who

advance it do not put it so shortly or so crudely. But whether valid or not, the

argument has been very widely advanced in one form or another; and very

many philosophers, perhaps a majority, have held that there is nothing real

except minds and their ideas. Such philosophers are called 'idealists'. When

they come to explaining matter, they either say, like Berkeley, that matter is

really nothing but a collection of ideas, or they say, like Leibniz (1646-1716),that what appears as matter is really a collection of more or less rudimentary

minds.

  But  these  philosophers,  though  they  deny  matter  as  opposed  to  mind,

nevertheless, in another sense, admit matter. It will be remembered that we

asked two questions; namely, (1) Is there a real table at all? (2) If so, what

sort of object can it be? Now both Berkeley and Leibniz admit that there is a

real  table,  but  Berkeley  says  it  is  certain  ideas  in  the  mind  of  God,  and

Leibniz  says  it  is  a  colony  of  souls.  Thus  both  of  them  answer  our  first

question  in  the  affirmative,  and  only  diverge  from  the  views  of  ordinary

mortals  in  their  answer  to  our  second  question.  In  fact,  almost  all

philosophers seem to be agreed that there is a real table: they almost all agree

that, however much our sense-data—colour, shape, smoothness, etc.—may

depend  upon  us,  yet  their  occurrence  is  a  sign  of  something  existing

independently  of  us,  something  differing,  perhaps,  completely  from  our

sense-data, and yet to be regarded as causing those sense-data whenever we

are in a suitable relation to the real table.

  Now obviously this point in which the philosophers are agreed—the view

that there is a real table, whatever its nature may be—is vitally important, and

it will be worth while to consider what reasons there are for accepting this

view before we go on to the further question as to the nature of the real table.

Our next chapter, therefore, will be concerned with the reasons for supposing

that there is a real table at all.

  Before we go farther it will be well to consider for a moment what it is

that we have discovered so far. It has appeared that, if we take any common

object of the sort that is supposed to be known by the senses, what the senses

immediately tell us is not the truth about the object as it is apart from us, but

only the truth about certain sense-data which, so far as we can see, depend

upon the relations between us and the object. Thus what we directly see and

feel is merely 'appearance', which we believe to be a sign of some 'reality'

behind. But if the reality is not what appears, have we any means of knowing

whether there is any reality at all? And if so, have we any means of finding

out what it is like?

  Such questions are bewildering, and it is difficult to know that even the

strangest hypotheses may not be true. Thus our familiar table, which has

roused but the slightest thoughts in us hitherto, has become a problem full of

surprising possibilities. The one thing we know about it is that it is not what itseems. Beyond this modest result, so far, we have the most complete liberty

of conjecture. Leibniz tells us it is a community of souls: Berkeley tells us it

is an idea in the mind of God; sober science, scarcely less wonderful, tells us

it is a vast collection of electric charges in violent motion.

  Among these surprising possibilities, doubt suggests that perhaps there is

no table at all. Philosophy, if it cannot answer so many questions as we could

wish, has at least the power of asking questions which increase the interest of

the world, and show the strangeness and wonder lying just below the surface

even in the commonest things of daily life.

   





             CHAPTER II. THE EXISTENCE OF MATTER

  In this chapter we have to ask ourselves whether, in any sense at all, there

is such a thing as matter. Is there a table which has a certain intrinsic nature,

and continues to exist when I am not looking, or is the table merely a product

of my imagination, a dream-table in a very prolonged dream? This question is

of  the  greatest  importance.  For  if  we  cannot  be  sure  of  the  independent

existence of objects, we cannot be sure of the independent existence of other

people's bodies, and therefore still less of other people's minds, since we have

no  grounds  for  believing  in  their  minds  except  such  as  are  derived  from

observing  their  bodies.  Thus  if  we  cannot  be  sure  of  the  independent

existence of objects, we shall be left alone in a desert—it may be that the

whole outer world is nothing but a dream, and that we alone exist. This is an

uncomfortable  possibility;  but  although  it  cannot  be  strictly  proved  to  be

false, there is not the slightest reason to suppose that it is true. In this chapter

we have to see why this is the case.

  Before we embark upon doubtful matters, let us try to find some more or

less fixed point from which to start. Although we are doubting the physical

existence of the table, we are not doubting the existence of the sense-data

which made us think there was a table; we are not doubting that, while we

look, a certain colour and shape appear to us, and while we press, a certain

sensation of hardness is experienced by us. All this, which is psychological,

we are not calling in question. In fact, whatever else may be doubtful, some

at least of our immediate experiences seem absolutely certain.

  Descartes  (1596-1650),  the  founder  of  modern  philosophy,  invented  a

method which may still be used with profit—the method of systematic doubt.

He determined that he would believe nothing which he did not see quite

clearly and distinctly to be true. Whatever he could bring himself to doubt, he

would doubt, until he saw reason for not doubting it. By applying this method

he gradually became convinced that the only existence of which he could be

quite certain was his own. He imagined a deceitful demon, who presented

unreal things to his senses in a perpetual phantasmagoria; it might be very

improbable that such a demon existed, but still it was possible, and therefore

doubt concerning things perceived by the senses was possible.

  But doubt concerning his own existence was not possible, for if he did not

exist, no demon could deceive him. If he doubted, he must exist; if he hadany experiences whatever, he must exist. Thus his own existence was an

absolute certainty to him. 'I think, therefore I am,' he said (Cogito, ergo sum);

and on the basis of this certainty he set to work to build up again the world of

knowledge which his doubt had laid in ruins. By inventing the method of

doubt, and by showing that subjective things are the most certain, Descartes

performed  a  great  service  to  philosophy,  and  one  which  makes  him  still

useful to all students of the subject.

  But some care is needed in using Descartes' argument. 'I think, therefore I

am' says rather more than is strictly certain. It might seem as though we were

quite sure of being the same person to-day as we were yesterday, and this is

no doubt true in some sense. But the real Self is as hard to arrive at as the real

table,  and  does  not  seem  to  have  that  absolute,  convincing  certainty  that

belongs to particular experiences. When I look at my table and see a certain

brown  colour,  what  is  quite  certain  at  once  is  not  'I  am  seeing  a  brown

colour', but rather, 'a brown colour is being seen'. This of course involves

something (or somebody) which (or who) sees the brown colour; but it does

not of itself involve that more or less permanent person whom we call 'I'. So

far as immediate certainty goes, it might be that the something which sees the

brown colour is quite momentary, and not the same as the something which

has some different experience the next moment.

  Thus it is our particular thoughts and feelings that have primitive certainty.

And  this  applies  to  dreams  and  hallucinations  as  well  as  to  normal

perceptions:  when  we  dream  or  see  a  ghost,  we  certainly  do  have  the

sensations  we  think  we  have,  but  for  various  reasons  it  is  held  that  no

physical object corresponds to these sensations. Thus the certainty of our

knowledge of our own experiences does not have to be limited in any way to

allow for exceptional cases. Here, therefore, we have, for what it is worth, a

solid basis from which to begin our pursuit of knowledge.

  The problem we have to consider is this: Granted that we are certain of our

own  sense-data,  have  we  any  reason  for  regarding  them  as  signs  of  the

existence of something else, which we can call the physical object? When we

have  enumerated  all  the  sense-data  which  we  should  naturally  regard  as

connected with the table, have we said all there is to say about the table, or is

there still something else—something not a sense-datum, something which

persists when we go out of the room? Common sense unhesitatingly answers

that there is. What can be bought and sold and pushed about and have a clothlaid on it, and so on, cannot be a mere collection of sense-data. If the cloth

completely hides the table, we shall derive no sense-data from the table, and

therefore, if the table were merely sense-data, it would have ceased to exist,

and the cloth would be suspended in empty air, resting, by a miracle, in the

place where the table formerly was. This seems plainly absurd; but whoever

wishes  to  become  a  philosopher  must  learn  not  to  be  frightened  by

absurdities.

  One great reason why it is felt that we must secure a physical object in

addition  to  the  sense-data,  is  that  we  want  the  same  object  for  different

people.  When  ten  people  are  sitting  round  a  dinner-table,  it  seems

preposterous to maintain that they are not seeing the same tablecloth, the

same knives and forks and spoons and glasses. But the sense-data are private

to each separate person; what is immediately present to the sight of one is not

immediately present to the sight of another: they all see things from slightly

different points of view, and therefore see them slightly differently. Thus, if

there are to be public neutral objects, which can be in some sense known to

many different people, there must be something over and above the private

and particular sense-data which appear to various people. What reason, then,

have we for believing that there are such public neutral objects?

  The first answer that naturally occurs to one is that, although different

people may see the table slightly differently, still they all see more or less

similar things when they look at the table, and the variations in what they see

follow the laws of perspective and reflection of light, so that it is easy to

arrive at a permanent object underlying all the different people's sense-data. I

bought my table from the former occupant of my room; I could not buy his

sense-data,  which  died  when  he  went  away,  but  I  could  and  did  buy  the

confident expectation of more or less similar sense-data. Thus it is the fact

that different people have similar sense-data, and that one person in a given

place at different times has similar sense-data, which makes us suppose that

over  and  above  the  sense-data  there  is  a  permanent  public  object  which

underlies or causes the sense-data of various people at various times.

  Now in so far as the above considerations depend upon supposing that

there are other people besides ourselves, they beg the very question at issue.

Other people are represented to me by certain sense-data, such as the sight of

them or the sound of their voices, and if I had no reason to believe that there

were physical objects independent of my sense-data, I should have no reasonto believe that other people exist except as part of my dream. Thus, when we

are trying to show that there must be objects independent of our own sense-

data, we cannot appeal to the testimony of other people, since this testimony

itself consists of sense-data, and does not reveal other people's experiences

unless our own sense-data are signs of things existing independently of us.

We must therefore, if possible, find, in our own purely private experiences,

characteristics which show, or tend to show, that there are in the world things

other than ourselves and our private experiences.

  In one sense it must be admitted that we can never prove the existence of

things other than ourselves and our experiences. No logical absurdity results

from the hypothesis that the world consists of myself and my thoughts and

feelings and sensations, and that everything else is mere fancy. In dreams a

very complicated world may seem to be present, and yet on waking we find it

was a delusion; that is to say, we find that the sense-data in the dream do not

appear  to  have  corresponded  with  such  physical  objects  as  we  should

naturally infer from our sense-data. (It is true that, when the physical world is

assumed, it is possible to find physical causes for the sense-data in dreams: a

door banging, for instance, may cause us to dream of a naval engagement.

But although, in this case, there is a physical cause for the sense-data, there is

not a physical object corresponding to the sense-data in the way in which an

actual naval battle would correspond.) There is no logical impossibility in the

supposition that the whole of life is a dream, in which we ourselves create all

the objects that come before us. But although this is not logically impossible,

there is no reason whatever to suppose that it is true; and it is, in fact, a less

simple hypothesis, viewed as a means of accounting for the facts of our own

life,  than  the  common-sense  hypothesis  that  there  really  are  objects

independent of us, whose action on us causes our sensations.

  The way in which simplicity comes in from supposing that there really are

physical objects is easily seen. If the cat appears at one moment in one part of

the room, and at another in another part, it is natural to suppose that it has

moved  from  the  one  to  the  other,  passing  over  a  series  of  intermediate

positions. But if it is merely a set of sense-data, it cannot have ever been in

any place where I did not see it; thus we shall have to suppose that it did not

exist at all while I was not looking, but suddenly sprang into being in a new

place. If the cat exists whether I see it or not, we can understand from our

own experience how it gets hungry between one meal and the next; but if itdoes not exist when I am not seeing it, it seems odd that appetite should grow

during non-existence as fast as during existence. And if the cat consists only

of sense-data, it cannot be hungry, since no hunger but my own can be a

sense-datum to me. Thus the behaviour of the sense-data which represent the

cat to me, though it seems quite natural when regarded as an expression of

hunger, becomes utterly inexplicable when regarded as mere movements and

changes of patches of colour, which are as incapable of hunger as a triangle is

of playing football.

  But  the  difficulty  in  the  case  of  the  cat  is  nothing  compared  to  the

difficulty in the case of human beings. When human beings speak—that is,

when  we  hear  certain  noises  which  we  associate  with  ideas,  and

simultaneously see certain motions of lips and expressions of face—it is very

difficult to suppose that what we hear is not the expression of a thought, as

we know it would be if we emitted the same sounds. Of course similar things

happen in dreams, where we are mistaken as to the existence of other people.

But dreams are more or less suggested by what we call waking life, and are

capable of being more or less accounted for on scientific principles if we

assume  that  there  really  is  a  physical  world.  Thus  every  principle  of

simplicity urges us to adopt the natural view, that there really are objects

other  than  ourselves  and  our  sense-data  which  have  an  existence  not

dependent upon our perceiving them.

  Of course it is not by argument that we originally come by our belief in an

independent external world. We find this belief ready in ourselves as soon as

we begin to reflect: it is what may be called an instinctive belief. We should

never have been led to question this belief but for the fact that, at any rate in

the  case  of  sight,  it  seems  as  if  the  sense-datum  itself  were  instinctively

believed  to  be  the  independent  object,  whereas  argument  shows  that  the

object cannot be identical with the sense-datum. This discovery, however—

which is not at all paradoxical in the case of taste and smell and sound, and

only slightly so in the case of touch—leaves undiminished our instinctive

belief that there are objects corresponding to our sense-data. Since this belief

does not lead to any difficulties, but on the contrary tends to simplify and

systematize our account of our experiences, there seems no good reason for

rejecting it. We may therefore admit—though with a slight doubt derived

from dreams—that the external world does really exist, and is not wholly

dependent for its existence upon our continuing to perceive it.  The argument which has led us to this conclusion is doubtless less strong

than we could wish, but it is typical of many philosophical arguments, and it

is therefore worth while to consider briefly its general character and validity.

All knowledge, we find, must be built up upon our instinctive beliefs, and if

these are rejected, nothing is left. But among our instinctive beliefs some are

much  stronger  than  others,  while  many  have,  by  habit  and  association,

become  entangled  with  other  beliefs,  not  really  instinctive,  but  falsely

supposed to be part of what is believed instinctively.

  Philosophy  should  show  us  the  hierarchy  of  our  instinctive  beliefs,

beginning with those we hold most strongly, and presenting each as much

isolated and as free from irrelevant additions as possible. It should take care

to show that, in the form in which they are finally set forth, our instinctive

beliefs do not clash, but form a harmonious system. There can never be any

reason for rejecting one instinctive belief except that it clashes with others;

thus, if they are found to harmonize, the whole system becomes worthy of

acceptance.

  It is of course possible that all or any of our beliefs may be mistaken, and

therefore all ought to be held with at least some slight element of doubt. But

we cannot have reason to reject a belief except on the ground of some other

belief. Hence, by organizing our instinctive beliefs and their consequences,

by considering which among them is most possible, if necessary, to modify

or abandon, we can arrive, on the basis of accepting as our sole data what we

instinctively believe, at an orderly systematic organization of our knowledge,

in which, though the possibility of error remains, its likelihood is diminished

by  the  interrelation  of  the  parts  and  by  the  critical  scrutiny  which  has

preceded acquiescence.

  This function, at least, philosophy can perform. Most philosophers, rightly

or wrongly, believe that philosophy can do much more than this—that it can

give us knowledge, not otherwise attainable, concerning the universe as a

whole, and concerning the nature of ultimate reality. Whether this be the case

or  not,  the  more  modest  function  we  have  spoken  of  can  certainly  be

performed by philosophy, and certainly suffices, for those who have once

begun to doubt the adequacy of common sense, to justify the arduous and

difficult labours that philosophical problems involve.

                  CHAPTER III. THE NATURE OF MATTER

  In the preceding chapter we agreed, though without being able to find

demonstrative reasons, that it is rational to believe that our sense-data—for

example, those which we regard as associated with my table—are really signs

of the existence of something independent of us and our perceptions. That is

to say, over and above the sensations of colour, hardness, noise, and so on,

which make up the appearance of the table to me, I assume that there is

something else, of which these things are appearances. The colour ceases to

exist if I shut my eyes, the sensation of hardness ceases to exist if I remove

my arm from contact with the table, the sound ceases to exist if I cease to rap

the table with my knuckles. But I do not believe that when all these things

cease the table ceases. On the contrary, I believe that it is because the table

exists continuously that all these sense-data will reappear when I open my

eyes, replace my arm, and begin again to rap with my knuckles. The question

we have to consider in this chapter is: What is the nature of this real table,

which persists independently of my perception of it?

  To this question physical science gives an answer, somewhat incomplete it

is true, and in part still very hypothetical, but yet deserving of respect so far

as it goes. Physical science, more or less unconsciously, has drifted into the

view that all natural phenomena ought to be reduced to motions. Light and

heat  and  sound  are  all  due  to  wave-motions,  which  travel  from  the  body

emitting them to the person who sees light or feels heat or hears sound. That

which has the wave-motion is either aether or 'gross matter', but in either case

is what the philosopher would call matter. The only properties which science

assigns to it are position in space, and the power of motion according to the

laws of motion. Science does not deny that it may have other properties; but

if so, such other properties are not useful to the man of science, and in no

way assist him in explaining the phenomena.

  It  is  sometimes  said  that  'light is  a  form  of  wave-motion',  but  this  is

misleading, for the light which we immediately see, which we know directly

by means of our senses, is not a form of wave-motion, but something quite

different—something  which  we  all  know  if  we  are  not  blind,  though  we

cannot describe it so as to convey our knowledge to a man who is blind. A

wave-motion, on the contrary, could quite well be described to a blind man,

since he can acquire a knowledge of space by the sense of touch; and he canexperience a wave-motion by a sea voyage almost as well as we can. But this,

which a blind man can understand, is not what we mean by light: we mean by

light just that which a blind man can never understand, and which we can

never describe to him.

  Now  this  something,  which  all  of  us  who  are  not  blind  know,  is  not,

according to science, really to be found in the outer world: it is something

caused by the action of certain waves upon the eyes and nerves and brain of

the person who sees the light. When it is said that light is waves, what is

really meant is that waves are the physical cause of our sensations of light.

But light itself, the thing which seeing people experience and blind people do

not,  is  not  supposed  by  science  to  form  any  part  of  the  world  that  is

independent of us and our senses. And very similar remarks would apply to

other kinds of sensations.

  It  is  not  only  colours  and  sounds  and  so  on  that  are  absent  from  the

scientific world of matter, but also space as we get it through sight or touch.

It is essential to science that its matter should be in a space, but the space in

which it is cannot be exactly the space we see or feel. To begin with, space as

we see it is not the same as space as we get it by the sense of touch; it is only

by experience in infancy that we learn how to touch things we see, or how to

get a sight of things which we feel touching us. But the space of science is

neutral as between touch and sight; thus it cannot be either the space of touch

or the space of sight.

  Again,  different  people  see  the  same  object  as  of  different  shapes,

according to their point of view. A circular coin, for example, though we

should always judge it to be circular, will look oval unless we are straight in

front of it. When we judge that it is circular, we are judging that it has a real

shape which is not its apparent shape, but belongs to it intrinsically apart

from its appearance. But this real shape, which is what concerns science,

must be in a real space, not the same as anybody's apparent space. The real

space is public, the apparent space is private to the percipient. In different

people's private spaces the same object seems to have different shapes; thus

the  real  space,  in  which  it  has  its  real  shape,  must  be  different  from  the

private spaces. The space of science, therefore, though connected with the

spaces we see and feel, is not identical with them, and the manner of its

connexion requires investigation.

  We  agreed  provisionally  that  physical  objects  cannot  be  quite  like  oursense-data, but may be regarded as causing our sensations. These physical

objects are in the space of science, which we may call 'physical' space. It is

important  to  notice  that,  if  our  sensations  are  to  be  caused  by  physical

objects,  there  must  be  a  physical  space  containing  these  objects  and  our

sense-organs  and  nerves  and  brain.  We  get  a  sensation  of  touch  from  an

object when we are in contact with it; that is to say, when some part of our

body occupies a place in physical space quite close to the space occupied by

the object. We see an object (roughly speaking) when no opaque body is

between the object and our eyes in physical space. Similarly, we only hear or

smell or taste an object when we are sufficiently near to it, or when it touches

the tongue, or has some suitable position in physical space relatively to our

body. We cannot begin to state what different sensations we shall derive from

a given object under different circumstances unless we regard the object and

our body as both in one physical space, for it is mainly the relative positions

of the object and our body that determine what sensations we shall derive

from the object.

  Now our sense-data are situated in our private spaces, either the space of

sight or the space of touch or such vaguer spaces as other senses may give us.

If, as science and common sense assume, there is one public all-embracing

physical space in which physical objects are, the relative positions of physical

objects  in  physical  space  must  more  or  less  correspond  to  the  relative

positions  of  sense-data  in  our  private  spaces.  There  is  no  difficulty  in

supposing this to be the case. If we see on a road one house nearer to us than

another, our other senses will bear out the view that it is nearer; for example,

it will be reached sooner if we walk along the road. Other people will agree

that the house which looks nearer to us is nearer; the ordnance map will take

the same view; and thus everything points to a spatial relation between the

houses corresponding to the relation between the sense-data which we see

when we look at the houses. Thus we may assume that there is a physical

space in which physical objects have spatial relations corresponding to those

which  the  corresponding  sense-data  have  in  our  private  spaces.  It  is  this

physical space which is dealt with in geometry and assumed in physics and

astronomy.

  Assuming that there is physical space, and that it does thus correspond to

private  spaces,  what  can  we  know  about  it?  We  can  know only  what  is

required in order to secure the correspondence. That is to say, we can knownothing of what it is like in itself, but we can know the sort of arrangement of

physical objects which results from their spatial relations. We can know, for

example, that the earth and moon and sun are in one straight line during an

eclipse, though we cannot know what a physical straight line is in itself, as

we know the look of a straight line in our visual space. Thus we come to

know  much  more  about  the relations  of  distances  in  physical  space  than

about the distances themselves; we may know that one distance is greater

than another, or that it is along the same straight line as the other, but we

cannot  have  that  immediate  acquaintance  with  physical  distances  that  we

have with distances in our private spaces, or with colours or sounds or other

sense-data. We can know all those things about physical space which a man

born blind might know through other people about the space of sight; but the

kind of things which a man born blind could never know about the space of

sight we also cannot know about physical space. We can know the properties

of the relations required to preserve the correspondence with sense-data, but

we cannot know the nature of the terms between which the relations hold.

  With regard to time, our feeling of duration or of the lapse of time is

notoriously an unsafe guide as to the time that has elapsed by the clock.

Times when we are bored or suffering pain pass slowly, times when we are

agreeably occupied pass quickly, and times when we are sleeping pass almost

as if they did not exist. Thus, in so far as time is constituted by duration, there

is the same necessity for distinguishing a public and a private time as there

was in the case of space. But in so far as time consists in an order of before

and after, there is no need to make such a distinction; the time-order which

events seem to have is, so far as we can see, the same as the time-order which

they do have. At any rate no reason can be given for supposing that the two

orders are not the same. The same is usually true of space: if a regiment of

men are marching along a road, the shape of the regiment will look different

from different points of view, but the men will appear arranged in the same

order from all points of view. Hence we regard the order as true also in

physical  space,  whereas  the  shape  is  only  supposed  to  correspond  to  the

physical space so far as is required for the preservation of the order.

  In saying that the time-order which events seem to have is the same as the

time-order which they really have, it is necessary to guard against a possible

misunderstanding. It must not be supposed that the various states of different

physical objects have the same time-order as the sense-data which constitutethe perceptions of those objects. Considered as physical objects, the thunder

and lightning are simultaneous; that is to say, the lightning is simultaneous

with the disturbance of the air in the place where the disturbance begins,

namely, where the lightning is. But the sense-datum which we call hearing

the thunder does not take place until the disturbance of the air has travelled as

far as to where we are. Similarly, it takes about eight minutes for the sun's

light to reach us; thus, when we see the sun we are seeing the sun of eight

minutes ago. So far as our sense-data afford evidence as to the physical sun

they  afford  evidence  as  to  the  physical  sun  of  eight  minutes  ago;  if  the

physical sun had ceased to exist within the last eight minutes, that would

make no difference to the sense-data which we call 'seeing the sun'. This

affords a fresh illustration of the necessity of distinguishing between sense-

data and physical objects.

  What we have found as regards space is much the same as what we find in

relation  to  the  correspondence  of  the  sense-data  with  their  physical

counterparts. If one object looks blue and another red, we may reasonably

presume that there is some corresponding difference between the physical

objects;  if  two  objects  both  look  blue,  we  may  presume  a  corresponding

similarity. But we cannot hope to be acquainted directly with the quality in

the physical object which makes it look blue or red. Science tells us that this

quality is a certain sort of wave-motion, and this sounds familiar, because we

think of wave-motions in the space we see. But the wave-motions must really

be in physical space, with which we have no direct acquaintance; thus the real

wave-motions have not that familiarity which we might have supposed them

to have. And what holds for colours is closely similar to what holds for other

sense-data. Thus we find that, although the relations of physical objects have

all sorts of knowable properties, derived from their correspondence with the

relations of sense-data, the physical objects themselves remain unknown in

their intrinsic nature, so far at least as can be discovered by means of the

senses.  The  question  remains  whether  there  is  any  other  method  of

discovering the intrinsic nature of physical objects.

  The most natural, though not ultimately the most defensible, hypothesis to

adopt in the first instance, at any rate as regards visual sense-data, would be

that,  though  physical  objects  cannot,  for  the  reasons  we  have  been

considering, be exactly like sense-data, yet they may be more or less like.

According  to  this  view,  physical  objects  will,  for  example,  really  havecolours, and we might, by good luck, see an object as of the colour it really

is. The colour which an object seems to have at any given moment will in

general  be  very  similar,  though  not  quite  the  same,  from  many  different

points of view; we might thus suppose the 'real' colour to be a sort of medium

colour,  intermediate  between  the  various  shades  which  appear  from  the

different points of view.

  Such a theory is perhaps not capable of being definitely refuted, but it can

be shown to be groundless. To begin with, it is plain that the colour we see

depends only upon the nature of the light-waves that strike the eye, and is

therefore modified by the medium intervening between us and the object, as

well  as  by  the  manner  in  which  light  is  reflected  from  the  object  in  the

direction of the eye. The intervening air alters colours unless it is perfectly

clear, and any strong reflection will alter them completely. Thus the colour

we see is a result of the ray as it reaches the eye, and not simply a property of

the object from which the ray comes. Hence, also, provided certain waves

reach the eye, we shall see a certain colour, whether the object from which

the waves start has any colour or not. Thus it is quite gratuitous to suppose

that physical objects have colours, and therefore there is no justification for

making such a supposition. Exactly similar arguments will apply to other

sense-data.

  It remains to ask whether there are any general philosophical arguments

enabling us to say that, if matter is real, it must be of such and such a nature.

As explained above, very many philosophers, perhaps most, have held that

whatever is real must be in some sense mental, or at any rate that whatever

we  can  know  anything  about  must  be  in  some  sense  mental.  Such

philosophers are called 'idealists'. Idealists tell us that what appears as matter

is really something mental; namely, either (as Leibniz held) more or less

rudimentary minds, or (as Berkeley contended) ideas in the minds which, as

we  should  commonly  say,  'perceive'  the  matter.  Thus  idealists  deny  the

existence of matter as something intrinsically different from mind, though

they do not deny that our sense-data are signs of something which exists

independently of our private sensations. In the following chapter we shall

consider  briefly  the  reasons—in  my  opinion  fallacious—which  idealists

advance in favour of their theory.

                               CHAPTER IV. IDEALISM

  The  word  'idealism'  is  used  by  different  philosophers  in  somewhat

different senses. We shall understand by it the doctrine that whatever exists,

or at any rate whatever can be known to exist, must be in some sense mental.

This doctrine, which is very widely held among philosophers, has several

forms,  and  is  advocated  on  several  different  grounds.  The  doctrine  is  so

widely  held,  and  so  interesting  in  itself,  that  even  the  briefest  survey  of

philosophy must give some account of it.

  Those who are unaccustomed to philosophical speculation may be inclined

to  dismiss  such  a  doctrine  as  obviously  absurd.  There  is  no  doubt  that

common sense regards tables and chairs and the sun and moon and material

objects  generally  as  something  radically  different  from  minds  and  the

contents of minds, and as having an existence which might continue if minds

ceased. We think of matter as having existed long before there were any

minds, and it is hard to think of it as a mere product of mental activity. But

whether true or false, idealism is not to be dismissed as obviously absurd.

  We  have  seen  that,  even  if  physical  objects  do  have  an  independent

existence, they must differ very widely from sense-data, and can only have a

correspondence with sense-data, in the same sort of way in which a catalogue

has  a  correspondence  with  the  things  catalogued.  Hence  common  sense

leaves us completely in the dark as to the true intrinsic nature of physical

objects, and if there were good reason to regard them as mental, we could not

legitimately reject this opinion merely because it strikes us as strange. The

truth about physical objects must be strange. It may be unattainable, but if

any philosopher believes that he has attained it, the fact that what he offers as

the truth is strange ought not to be made a ground of objection to his opinion.

  The grounds on which idealism is advocated are generally grounds derived

from  the  theory  of  knowledge,  that  is  to  say,  from  a  discussion  of  the

conditions which things must satisfy in order that we may be able to know

them. The first serious attempt to establish idealism on such grounds was that

of Bishop Berkeley. He proved first, by arguments which were largely valid,

that our sense-data cannot be supposed to have an existence independent of

us, but must be, in part at least, 'in' the mind, in the sense that their existence

would not continue if there were no seeing or hearing or touching or smelling

or tasting. So far, his contention was almost certainly valid, even if some ofhis arguments were not so. But he went on to argue that sense-data were the

only things of whose existence our perceptions could assure us; and that to be

known is to be 'in' a mind, and therefore to be mental. Hence he concluded

that  nothing  can  ever  be  known  except  what  is  in  some  mind,  and  that

whatever is known without being in my mind must be in some other mind.

  In order to understand his argument, it is necessary to understand his use

of the word 'idea'. He gives the name 'idea' to anything which is immediately

known,  as,  for  example,  sense-data  are  known.  Thus  a  particular  colour

which we see is an idea; so is a voice which we hear, and so on. But the term

is not wholly confined to sense-data. There will also be things remembered or

imagined, for with such things also we have immediate acquaintance at the

moment  of  remembering  or  imagining.  All  such  immediate  data  he  calls

'ideas'.

  He then proceeds to consider common objects, such as a tree, for instance.

He shows that all we know immediately when we 'perceive' the tree consists

of ideas in his sense of the word, and he argues that there is not the slightest

ground for supposing that there is anything real about the tree except what is

perceived. Its being, he says, consists in being perceived: in the Latin of the

schoolmen its 'esse' is 'percipi'. He fully admits that the tree must continue to

exist even when we shut our eyes or when no human being is near it. But this

continued existence, he says, is due to the fact that God continues to perceive

it; the 'real' tree, which corresponds to what we called the physical object,

consists of ideas in the mind of God, ideas more or less like those we have

when we see the tree, but differing in the fact that they are permanent in

God's  mind  so  long  as  the  tree  continues  to  exist.  All  our  perceptions,

according to him, consist in a partial participation in God's perceptions, and it

is because of this participation that different people see more or less the same

tree. Thus apart from minds and their ideas there is nothing in the world, nor

is  it  possible  that  anything  else  should  ever  be  known,  since  whatever  is

known is necessarily an idea.

  There  are  in  this  argument  a  good  many  fallacies  which  have  been

important in the history of philosophy, and which it will be as well to bring to

light. In the first place, there is a confusion engendered by the use of the word

'idea'. We think of an idea as essentially something in somebody's mind, and

thus when we are told that a tree consists entirely of ideas, it is natural to

suppose that, if so, the tree must be entirely in minds. But the notion of being'in'  the  mind  is  ambiguous.  We  speak  of  bearing  a  person  in  mind,  not

meaning that the person is in our minds, but that a thought of him is in our

minds. When a man says that some business he had to arrange went clean out

of his mind, he does not mean to imply that the business itself was ever in his

mind, but only that a thought of the business was formerly in his mind, but

afterwards ceased to be in his mind. And so when Berkeley says that the tree

must be in our minds if we can know it, all that he really has a right to say is

that a thought of the tree must be in our minds. To argue that the tree itself

must be in our minds is like arguing that a person whom we bear in mind is

himself in our minds. This confusion may seem too gross to have been really

committed  by  any  competent  philosopher,  but  various  attendant

circumstances rendered it possible. In order to see how it was possible, we

must go more deeply into the question as to the nature of ideas.

  Before taking up the general question of the nature of ideas, we must

disentangle two entirely separate questions which arise concerning sense-data

and physical objects. We saw that, for various reasons of detail, Berkeley was

right in treating the sense-data which constitute our perception of the tree as

more or less subjective, in the sense that they depend upon us as much as

upon the tree, and would not exist if the tree were not being perceived. But

this is an entirely different point from the one by which Berkeley seeks to

prove that whatever can be immediately known must be in a mind. For this

purpose arguments of detail as to the dependence of sense-data upon us are

useless. It is necessary to prove, generally, that by being known, things are

shown to be mental. This is what Berkeley believes himself to have done. It

is this question, and not our previous question as to the difference between

sense-data and the physical object, that must now concern us.

  Taking the word 'idea' in Berkeley's sense, there are two quite distinct

things to be considered whenever an idea is before the mind. There is on the

one hand the thing of which we are aware—say the colour of my table—and

on the other hand the actual awareness itself, the mental act of apprehending

the thing. The mental act is undoubtedly mental, but is there any reason to

suppose that the thing apprehended is in any sense mental? Our previous

arguments concerning the colour did not prove it to be mental; they only

proved that its existence depends upon the relation of our sense organs to the

physical object—in our case, the table. That is to say, they proved that a

certain colour will exist, in a certain light, if a normal eye is placed at acertain point relatively to the table. They did not prove that the colour is in

the mind of the percipient.

  Berkeley's view, that obviously the colour must be in the mind, seems to

depend for its plausibility upon confusing the thing apprehended with the act

of apprehension. Either of these might be called an 'idea'; probably either

would have been called an idea by Berkeley. The act is undoubtedly in the

mind; hence, when we are thinking of the act, we readily assent to the view

that ideas must be in the mind. Then, forgetting that this was only true when

ideas were taken as acts of apprehension, we transfer the proposition that

'ideas  are  in  the  mind'  to  ideas  in  the  other  sense,  i.e.  to  the  things

apprehended  by  our  acts  of  apprehension.  Thus,  by  an  unconscious

equivocation, we arrive at the conclusion that whatever we can apprehend

must  be  in  our  minds.  This  seems  to  be  the  true  analysis  of  Berkeley's

argument, and the ultimate fallacy upon which it rests.

  This  question  of  the  distinction  between  act  and  object  in  our

apprehending  of  things  is  vitally  important,  since  our  whole  power  of

acquiring knowledge is bound up with it. The faculty of being acquainted

with  things  other  than  itself  is  the  main  characteristic  of  a  mind.

Acquaintance with objects essentially consists in a relation between the mind

and something other than the mind; it is this that constitutes the mind's power

of knowing things. If we say that the things known must be in the mind, we

are either unduly limiting the mind's power of knowing, or we are uttering a

mere tautology. We are uttering a mere tautology if we mean by 'in the mind'

the same as by 'before the mind', i.e. if we mean merely being apprehended

by the mind. But if we mean this, we shall have to admit that what, in this

sense, is in the mind, may nevertheless be not mental. Thus when we realize

the  nature  of  knowledge,  Berkeley's  argument  is  seen  to  be  wrong  in

substance as well as in form, and his grounds for supposing that 'ideas'—i.e.

the  objects  apprehended—must  be  mental,  are  found  to  have  no  validity

whatever.  Hence  his  grounds  in  favour  of  idealism  may  be  dismissed.  It

remains to see whether there are any other grounds.

  It is often said, as though it were a self-evident truism, that we cannot

know that anything exists which we do not know. It is inferred that whatever

can in any way be relevant to our experience must be at least capable of being

known by us; whence it follows that if matter were essentially something

with which we could not become acquainted, matter would be somethingwhich  we  could  not  know  to  exist,  and  which  could  have  for  us  no

importance whatever. It is generally also implied, for reasons which remain

obscure, that what can have no importance for us cannot be real, and that

therefore  matter,  if  it  is  not  composed  of  minds  or  of  mental  ideas,  is

impossible and a mere chimaera.

  To go into this argument fully at our present stage would be impossible,

since  it  raises  points  requiring  a  considerable  preliminary  discussion;  but

certain reasons for rejecting the argument may be noticed at once. To begin at

the end: there is no reason why what cannot have any practical importance

for us should not be real. It is true that, if theoretical importance is included,

everything real is of some importance to us, since, as persons desirous of

knowing the truth about the universe, we have some interest in everything

that the universe contains. But if this sort of interest is included, it is not the

case that matter has no importance for us, provided it exists even if we cannot

know that it exists. We can, obviously, suspect that it may exist, and wonder

whether it does; hence it is connected with our desire for knowledge, and has

the importance of either satisfying or thwarting this desire.

  Again, it is by no means a truism, and is in fact false, that we cannot know

that anything exists which we do not know. The word 'know' is here used in

two  different  senses.  (1)  In  its  first  use  it  is  applicable  to  the  sort  of

knowledge which is opposed to error, the sense in which what we know is

true, the sense which applies to our beliefs and convictions, i.e. to what are

called judgements. In this sense of the word we know that something is the

case. This sort of knowledge may be described as knowledge of truths. (2) In

the second use of the word 'know' above, the word applies to our knowledge

of things, which we may call acquaintance. This is the sense in which we

know sense-data. (The distinction involved is roughly that between savoir

and connaître in French, or between wissen and kennen in German.)

  Thus the statement which seemed like a truism becomes, when re-stated,

the following: 'We can never truly judge that something with which we are

not acquainted exists.' This is by no means a truism, but on the contrary a

palpable falsehood. I have not the honour to be acquainted with the Emperor

of China, but I truly judge that he exists. It may be said, of course, that I

judge this because of other people's acquaintance with him. This, however,

would be an irrelevant retort, since, if the principle were true, I could not

know that any one else is acquainted with him. But further: there is no reasonwhy I should not know of the existence of something with which nobody is

acquainted. This point is important, and demands elucidation.

  If I am acquainted with a thing which exists, my acquaintance gives me

the knowledge that it exists. But it is not true that, conversely, whenever I can

know  that  a  thing  of  a  certain  sort  exists,  I  or  some  one  else  must  be

acquainted  with  the  thing.  What  happens,  in  cases  where  I  have  true

judgement  without  acquaintance,  is  that  the  thing  is  known  to  me  by

description, and that, in virtue of some general principle, the existence of a

thing  answering  to  this  description  can  be  inferred  from  the  existence  of

something  with  which  I  am  acquainted.  In  order  to  understand  this  point

fully, it will be well first to deal with the difference between knowledge by

acquaintance  and  knowledge  by  description,  and  then  to  consider  what

knowledge of general principles, if any, has the same kind of certainty as our

knowledge of the existence of our own experiences. These subjects will be

dealt with in the following chapters.

   





     CHAPTER V. KNOWLEDGE BY ACQUAINTANCE AND

                    KNOWLEDGE BY DESCRIPTION

  In the preceding chapter we saw that there are two sorts of knowledge:

knowledge of things, and knowledge of truths. In this chapter we shall be

concerned exclusively with knowledge of things, of which in turn we shall

have to distinguish two kinds. Knowledge of things, when it is of the kind we

call knowledge by acquaintance, is essentially simpler than any knowledge

of truths, and logically independent of knowledge of truths, though it would

be rash to assume that human beings ever, in fact, have acquaintance with

things without at the same time knowing some truth about them. Knowledge

of things by description, on the contrary, always involves, as we shall find in

the course of the present chapter, some knowledge of truths as its source and

ground. But first of all we must make clear what we mean by 'acquaintance'

and what we mean by 'description'.

  We shall say that we have acquaintance with anything of which we are

directly aware, without the intermediary of any process of inference or any

knowledge of truths. Thus in the presence of my table I am acquainted with

the sense-data that make up the appearance of my table—its colour, shape,

hardness, smoothness, etc.; all these are things of which I am immediately

conscious when I am seeing and touching my table. The particular shade of

colour that I am seeing may have many things said about it—I may say that it

is brown, that it is rather dark, and so on. But such statements, though they

make me know truths about the colour, do not make me know the colour

itself any better than I did before so far as concerns knowledge of the colour

itself, as opposed to knowledge of truths about it, I know the colour perfectly

and completely when I see it, and no further knowledge of it itself is even

theoretically possible. Thus the sense-data which make up the appearance of

my  table  are  things  with  which  I  have  acquaintance,  things  immediately

known to me just as they are.

  My knowledge of the table as a physical object, on the contrary, is not

direct knowledge. Such as it is, it is obtained through acquaintance with the

sense-data that make up the appearance of the table. We have seen that it is

possible, without absurdity, to doubt whether there is a table at all, whereas it

is not possible to doubt the sense-data. My knowledge of the table is of the

kind which we shall call 'knowledge by description'. The table is 'the physicalobject which causes such-and-such sense-data'. This describes the table by

means of the sense-data. In order to know anything at all about the table, we

must know truths connecting it with things with which we have acquaintance:

we  must  know  that  'such-and-such  sense-data  are  caused  by  a  physical

object'. There is no state of mind in which we are directly aware of the table;

all our knowledge of the table is really knowledge of truths, and the actual

thing which is the table is not, strictly speaking, known to us at all. We know

a  description,  and  we  know  that  there  is  just  one  object  to  which  this

description applies, though the object itself is not directly known to us. In

such  a  case,  we  say  that  our  knowledge  of  the  object  is  knowledge  by

description.

  All our knowledge, both knowledge of things and knowledge of truths,

rests upon acquaintance as its foundation. It is therefore important to consider

what kinds of things there are with which we have acquaintance.

  Sense-data, as we have already seen, are among the things with which we

are acquainted; in fact, they supply the most obvious and striking example of

knowledge  by  acquaintance.  But  if  they  were  the  sole  example,  our

knowledge would be very much more restricted than it is. We should only

know what is now present to our senses: we could not know anything about

the past—not even that there was a past—nor could we know any truths

about our sense-data, for all knowledge of truths, as we shall show, demands

acquaintance with things which are of an essentially different character from

sense-data, the things which are sometimes called 'abstract ideas', but which

we shall call 'universals'. We have therefore to consider acquaintance with

other things besides sense-data if we are to obtain any tolerably adequate

analysis of our knowledge.

  The first extension beyond sense-data to be considered is acquaintance by

memory. It is obvious that we often remember what we have seen or heard or

had  otherwise  present  to  our  senses,  and  that  in  such  cases  we  are  still

immediately aware of what we remember, in spite of the fact that it appears

as  past  and  not  as  present.  This  immediate  knowledge  by  memory  is  the

source of all our knowledge concerning the past: without it, there could be no

knowledge of the past by inference, since we should never know that there

was anything past to be inferred.

  The next extension to be considered is acquaintance by introspection. We

are not only aware of things, but we are often aware of being aware of them.When I see the sun, I am often aware of my seeing the sun; thus 'my seeing

the sun' is an object with which I have acquaintance. When I desire food, I

may be aware of my desire for food; thus 'my desiring food' is an object with

which I am acquainted. Similarly we may be aware of our feeling pleasure or

pain, and generally of the events which happen in our minds. This kind of

acquaintance, which may be called self-consciousness, is the source of all our

knowledge of mental things. It is obvious that it is only what goes on in our

own minds that can be thus known immediately. What goes on in the minds

of  others  is  known  to  us  through  our  perception  of  their  bodies,  that  is,

through the sense-data in us which are associated with their bodies. But for

our acquaintance with the contents of our own minds, we should be unable to

imagine  the  minds  of  others,  and  therefore  we  could  never  arrive  at  the

knowledge  that  they  have  minds.  It  seems  natural  to  suppose  that  self-

consciousness  is  one  of  the  things  that  distinguish  men  from  animals:

animals, we may suppose, though they have acquaintance with sense-data,

never  become  aware  of  this  acquaintance.  I  do  not  mean  that  they doubt

whether they exist, but that they have never become conscious of the fact that

they have sensations and feelings, nor therefore of the fact that they, the

subjects of their sensations and feelings, exist.

  We have spoken of acquaintance with the contents of our minds as self-

consciousness,  but  it  is  not,  of  course,  consciousness  of  our self:  it  is

consciousness of particular thoughts and feelings. The question whether we

are also acquainted with our bare selves, as opposed to particular thoughts

and feelings, is a very difficult one, upon which it would be rash to speak

positively. When we try to look into ourselves we always seem to come upon

some particular thought or feeling, and not upon the 'I' which has the thought

or  feeling.  Nevertheless  there  are  some  reasons  for  thinking  that  we  are

acquainted with the 'I', though the acquaintance is hard to disentangle from

other things. To make clear what sort of reason there is, let us consider for a

moment what our acquaintance with particular thoughts really involves.

  When I am acquainted with 'my seeing the sun', it seems plain that I am

acquainted with two different things in relation to each other. On the one

hand there is the sense-datum which represents the sun to me, on the other

hand there is that which sees this sense-datum. All acquaintance, such as my

acquaintance  with  the  sense-datum  which  represents  the  sun,  seems

obviously a relation between the person acquainted and the object with whichthe person is acquainted. When a case of acquaintance is one with which I

can be acquainted (as I am acquainted with my acquaintance with the sense-

datum representing the sun), it is plain that the person acquainted is myself.

Thus, when I am acquainted with my seeing the sun, the whole fact with

which I am acquainted is 'Self-acquainted-with-sense-datum'.

  Further, we know the truth 'I am acquainted with this sense-datum'. It is

hard to see how we could know this truth, or even understand what is meant

by it, unless we were acquainted with something which we call 'I'. It does not

seem  necessary  to  suppose  that  we  are  acquainted  with  a  more  or  less

permanent person, the same to-day as yesterday, but it does seem as though

we must be acquainted with that thing, whatever its nature, which sees the

sun and has acquaintance with sense-data. Thus, in some sense it would seem

we  must  be  acquainted  with  our  Selves  as  opposed  to  our  particular

experiences. But the question is difficult, and complicated arguments can be

adduced on either side. Hence, although acquaintance with ourselves seems

probably to occur, it is not wise to assert that it undoubtedly does occur.

  We  may  therefore  sum  up  as  follows  what  has  been  said  concerning

acquaintance with things that exist. We have acquaintance in sensation with

the data of the outer senses, and in introspection with the data of what may be

called the inner sense—thoughts, feelings, desires, etc.; we have acquaintance

in memory with things which have been data either of the outer senses or of

the  inner  sense.  Further,  it  is  probable,  though  not  certain,  that  we  have

acquaintance  with  Self,  as  that  which  is  aware  of  things  or  has  desires

towards things.

  In addition to our acquaintance with particular existing things, we also

have acquaintance with what we shall call universals, that is to say, general

ideas, such as whiteness, diversity, brotherhood, and so on. Every complete

sentence must contain at least one word which stands for a universal, since all

verbs have a meaning which is universal. We shall return to universals later

on, in Chapter IX; for the present, it is only necessary to guard against the

supposition  that  whatever  we  can  be  acquainted  with  must  be  something

particular and existent. Awareness of universals is called conceiving, and a

universal of which we are aware is called a concept.

  It will be seen that among the objects with which we are acquainted are

not included physical objects (as opposed to sense-data), nor other people's

minds.  These  things  are  known  to  us  by  what  I  call  'knowledge  bydescription', which we must now consider.

  By a 'description' I mean any phrase of the form 'a so-and-so' or 'the so-

and-so'.  A  phrase  of  the  form  'a  so-and-so'  I  shall  call  an  'ambiguous'

description; a phrase of the form 'the so-and-so' (in the singular) I shall call a

'definite' description. Thus 'a man' is an ambiguous description, and 'the man

with  the  iron  mask'  is  a  definite  description.  There  are  various  problems

connected with ambiguous descriptions, but I pass them by, since they do not

directly concern the matter we are discussing, which is the nature of our

knowledge concerning objects in cases where we know that there is an object

answering to a definite description, though we are not acquainted with any

such object. This is a matter which is concerned exclusively with definite

descriptions. I shall therefore, in the sequel, speak simply of 'descriptions'

when I mean 'definite descriptions'. Thus a description will mean any phrase

of the form 'the so-and-so' in the singular.

  We shall say that an object is 'known by description' when we know that it

is 'the so-and-so', i.e. when we know that there is one object, and no more,

having a certain property; and it will generally be implied that we do not have

knowledge of the same object by acquaintance. We know that the man with

the iron mask existed, and many propositions are known about him; but we

do not know who he was. We know that the candidate who gets the most

votes will be elected, and in this case we are very likely also acquainted (in

the only sense in which one can be acquainted with some one else) with the

man who is, in fact, the candidate who will get most votes; but we do not

know which of the candidates he is, i.e. we do not know any proposition of

the form 'A is the candidate who will get most votes' where A is one of the

candidates  by  name.  We  shall  say  that  we  have  'merely  descriptive

knowledge'  of  the  so-and-so  when,  although  we  know  that  the  so-and-so

exists, and although we may possibly be acquainted with the object which is,

in fact, the so-and-so, yet we do not know any proposition 'a is the so-and-so',

where a is something with which we are acquainted.

  When we say 'the so-and-so exists', we mean that there is just one object

which is the so-and-so. The proposition 'a is the so-and-so' means that a has

the property so-and-so, and nothing else has. 'Mr. A. is the Unionist candidate

for  this  constituency'  means  'Mr.  A.  is  a  Unionist  candidate  for  this

constituency,  and  no  one  else  is'.  'The  Unionist  candidate  for  this

constituency  exists'  means  'some  one  is  a  Unionist  candidate  for  thisconstituency,  and  no  one  else  is'.  Thus,  when  we  are  acquainted  with  an

object which is the so-and-so, we know that the so-and-so exists; but we may

know that the so-and-so exists when we are not acquainted with any object

which we know to be the so-and-so, and even when we are not acquainted

with any object which, in fact, is the so-and-so.

  Common words, even proper names, are usually really descriptions. That

is to say, the thought in the mind of a person using a proper name correctly

can generally only be expressed explicitly if we replace the proper name by a

description. Moreover, the description required to express the thought will

vary for different people, or for the same person at different times. The only

thing constant (so long as the name is rightly used) is the object to which the

name applies. But so long as this remains constant, the particular description

involved  usually  makes  no  difference  to  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  the

proposition in which the name appears.

  Let  us  take  some  illustrations.  Suppose  some  statement  made  about

Bismarck. Assuming that there is such a thing as direct acquaintance with

oneself, Bismarck himself might have used his name directly to designate the

particular person with whom he was acquainted. In this case, if he made a

judgement about himself, he himself might be a constituent of the judgement.

Here the proper name has the direct use which it always wishes to have, as

simply standing for a certain object, and not for a description of the object.

But if a person who knew Bismarck made a judgement about him, the case is

different.  What  this  person  was  acquainted  with  were  certain  sense-data

which he connected (rightly, we will suppose) with Bismarck's body. His

body, as a physical object, and still more his mind, were only known as the

body and the mind connected with these sense-data. That is, they were known

by  description.  It  is,  of  course,  very  much  a  matter  af  chance  which

characteristics of a man's appearance will come into a friend's mind when he

thinks of him; thus the description actually in the friend's mind is accidental.

The essential point is that he knows that the various descriptions all apply to

the same entity, in spite of not being acquainted with the entity in question.

  When we, who did not know Bismarck, make a judgement about him, the

description in our minds will probably be some more or less vague mass of

historical knowledge—far more, in most cases, than is required to identify

him. But, for the sake of illustration, let us assume that we think of him as

'the first Chancellor of the German Empire'. Here all the words are abstractexcept 'German'. The word 'German' will, again, have different meanings for

different people. To some it will recall travels in Germany, to some the look

of Germany on the map, and so on. But if we are to obtain a description

which we know to be applicable, we shall be compelled, at some point, to

bring  in  a  reference  to  a  particular  with  which  we  are  acquainted.  Such

reference is involved in any mention of past, present, and future (as opposed

to definite dates), or of here and there, or of what others have told us. Thus it

would seem that, in some way or other, a description known to be applicable

to a particular must involve some reference to a particular with which we are

acquainted, if our knowledge about the thing described is not to be merely

what follows logically from the description. For example, 'the most long-

lived of men' is a description involving only universals, which must apply to

some  man,  but  we  can  make  no  judgements  concerning  this  man  which

involve knowledge about him beyond what the description gives. If, however,

we  say,  'The  first  Chancellor  of  the  German  Empire  was  an  astute

diplomatist', we can only be assured of the truth of our judgement in virtue of

something with which we are acquainted—usually a testimony heard or read.

Apart from the information we convey to others, apart from the fact about the

actual Bismarck, which gives importance to our judgement, the thought we

really  have  contains  the  one  or  more  particulars  involved,  and  otherwise

consists wholly of concepts.

  All  names  of  places—London,  England,  Europe,  the  Earth,  the  Solar

System—similarly involve, when used, descriptions which start from some

one or more particulars with which we are acquainted. I suspect that even the

Universe,  as  considered  by  metaphysics,  involves  such  a  connexion  with

particulars. In logic, on the contrary, where we are concerned not merely with

what does exist, but with whatever might or could exist or be, no reference to

actual particulars is involved.

  It  would  seem  that,  when  we  make  a  statement  about  something  only

known by description, we often intend to make our statement, not in the form

involving the description, but about the actual thing described. That is to say,

when we say anything about Bismarck, we should like, if we could, to make

the judgement which Bismarck alone can make, namely, the judgement of

which he himself is a constituent. In this we are necessarily defeated, since

the actual Bismarck is unknown to us. But we know that there is an object B,

called Bismarck, and that B was an astute diplomatist. We can thus describethe  proposition  we  should  like  to  affirm,  namely,  'B  was  an  astute

diplomatist', where B is the object which was Bismarck. If we are describing

Bismarck as 'the first Chancellor of the German Empire', the proposition we

should  like  to  affirm  may  be  described  as  'the  proposition  asserting,

concerning the actual object which was the first Chancellor of the German

Empire,  that  this  object  was  an  astute  diplomatist'.  What  enables  us  to

communicate in spite of the varying descriptions we employ is that we know

there is a true proposition concerning the actual Bismarck, and that however

we  may  vary  the  description  (so  long  as  the  description  is  correct)  the

proposition described is still the same. This proposition, which is described

and is known to be true, is what interests us; but we are not acquainted with

the proposition itself, and do not know it, though we know it is true.

  It  will  be  seen  that  there  are  various  stages  in  the  removal  from

acquaintance with particulars: there is Bismarck to people who knew him;

Bismarck to those who only know of him through history; the man with the

iron mask; the longest-lived of men. These are progressively further removed

from acquaintance with particulars; the first comes as near to acquaintance as

is possible in regard to another person; in the second, we shall still be said to

know 'who Bismarck was'; in the third, we do not know who was the man

with the iron mask, though we can know many propositions about him which

are not logically deducible from the fact that he wore an iron mask; in the

fourth, finally, we know nothing beyond what is logically deducible from the

definition of the man. There is a similar hierarchy in the region of universals.

Many universals, like many particulars, are only known to us by description.

But here, as in the case of particulars, knowledge concerning what is known

by  description  is  ultimately  reducible  to  knowledge  concerning  what  is

known by acquaintance.

The fundamental principle in the analysis of propositions containing

descriptions is this: Every	proposition	which	we	can	understand	must	be

    composed	wholly	of	constituents	with	which	we	are	acquainted.

  We shall not at this stage attempt to answer all the objections which may

be urged against this fundamental principle. For the present, we shall merely

point  out  that,  in  some  way  or  other,  it  must  be  possible  to  meet  these

objections, for it is scarcely conceivable that we can make a judgement or

entertain a supposition without knowing what it is that we are judging orsupposing about. We must attach some meaning to the words we use, if we

are to speak significantly and not utter mere noise; and the meaning we attach

to our words must be something with which we are acquainted. Thus when,

for example, we make a statement about Julius Caesar, it is plain that Julius

Caesar himself is not before our minds, since we are not acquainted with him.

We  have  in  mind  some  description  of  Julius  Caesar:  'the  man  who  was

assassinated on the Ides of March', 'the founder of the Roman Empire', or,

perhaps,  merely  'the  man  whose  name  was Julius  Caesar'.  (In  this  last

description, Julius Caesar is a noise or shape with which we are acquainted.)

Thus our statement does not mean quite what it seems to mean, but means

something involving, instead of Julius Caesar, some description of him which

is  composed  wholly  of  particulars  and  universals  with  which  we  are

acquainted.

  The chief importance of knowledge by description is that it enables us to

pass beyond the limits of our private experience. In spite of the fact that we

can only know truths which are wholly composed of terms which we have

experienced in acquaintance, we can yet have knowledge by description of

things which we have never experienced. In view of the very narrow range of

our immediate experience, this result is vital, and until it is understood, much

of our knowledge must remain mysterious and therefore doubtful.

   





                         CHAPTER VI. ON INDUCTION

  In  almost  all  our  previous  discussions  we  have  been  concerned  in  the

attempt to get clear as to our data in the way of knowledge of existence. What

things are there in the universe whose existence is known to us owing to our

being  acquainted  with  them?  So  far,  our  answer  has  been  that  we  are

acquainted  with  our  sense-data,  and,  probably,  with  ourselves.  These  we

know to exist. And past sense-data which are remembered are known to have

existed in the past. This knowledge supplies our data.

  But if we are to be able to draw inferences from these data—if we are to

know  of  the  existence  of  matter,  of  other  people,  of  the  past  before  our

individual memory begins, or of the future, we must know general principles

of some kind by means of which such inferences can be drawn. It must be

known to us that the existence of some one sort of thing, A, is a sign of the

existence of some other sort of thing, B, either at the same time as A or at

some earlier or later time, as, for example, thunder is a sign of the earlier

existence of lightning. If this were not known to us, we could never extend

our knowledge beyond the sphere of our private experience; and this sphere,

as  we  have  seen,  is  exceedingly  limited.  The  question  we  have  now  to

consider is whether such an extension is possible, and if so, how it is effected.

  Let us take as an illustration a matter about which none of us, in fact, feel

the slightest doubt. We are all convinced that the sun will rise to-morrow.

Why? Is this belief a mere blind outcome of past experience, or can it be

justified as a reasonable belief? It is not easy to find a test by which to judge

whether a belief of this kind is reasonable or not, but we can at least ascertain

what sort of general beliefs would suffice, if true, to justify the judgement

that the sun will rise to-morrow, and the many other similar judgements upon

which our actions are based.

  It is obvious that if we are asked why we believe that the sun will rise to-

morrow, we shall naturally answer 'Because it always has risen every day'.

We have a firm belief that it will rise in the future, because it has risen in the

past. If we are challenged as to why we believe that it will continue to rise as

heretofore, we may appeal to the laws of motion: the earth, we shall say, is a

freely rotating body, and such bodies do not cease to rotate unless something

interferes from outside, and there is nothing outside to interfere with the earth

between now and to-morrow. Of course it might be doubted whether we arequite  certain  that  there  is  nothing  outside  to  interfere,  but  this  is  not  the

interesting doubt. The interesting doubt is as to whether the laws of motion

will  remain  in  operation  until  to-morrow.  If  this  doubt  is  raised,  we  find

ourselves in the same position as when the doubt about the sunrise was first

raised.

  The only  reason  for  believing  that  the  laws  of  motion  will  remain  in

operation is that they have operated hitherto, so far as our knowledge of the

past enables us to judge. It is true that we have a greater body of evidence

from the past in favour of the laws of motion than we have in favour of the

sunrise, because the sunrise is merely a particular case of fulfilment of the

laws of motion, and there are countless other particular cases. But the real

question is: Do any number of cases of a law being fulfilled in the past afford

evidence that it will be fulfilled in the future? If not, it becomes plain that we

have no ground whatever for expecting the sun to rise to-morrow, or for

expecting the bread we shall eat at our next meal not to poison us, or for any

of the other scarcely conscious expectations that control our daily lives. It is

to be observed that all such expectations are only probable; thus we have not

to seek for a proof that they must be fulfilled, but only for some reason in

favour of the view that they are likely to be fulfilled.

  Now  in  dealing  with  this  question  we  must,  to  begin  with,  make  an

important  distinction,  without  which  we  should  soon  become  involved  in

hopeless  confusions.  Experience  has  shown  us  that,  hitherto,  the  frequent

repetition of some uniform succession or coexistence has been a cause of our

expecting the same succession or coexistence on the next occasion. Food that

has a certain appearance generally has a certain taste, and it is a severe shock

to our expectations when the familiar appearance is found to be associated

with an unusual taste. Things which we see become associated, by habit, with

certain  tactile  sensations  which  we  expect  if  we  touch  them;  one  of  the

horrors  of  a  ghost  (in  many  ghost-stories)  is  that  it  fails  to  give  us  any

sensations of touch. Uneducated people who go abroad for the first time are

so surprised as to be incredulous when they find their native language not

understood.

  And this kind of association is not confined to men; in animals also it is

very strong. A horse which has been often driven along a certain road resists

the attempt to drive him in a different direction. Domestic animals expect

food when they see the person who usually feeds them. We know that allthese rather crude expectations of uniformity are liable to be misleading. The

man who has fed the chicken every day throughout its life at last wrings its

neck instead, showing that more refined views as to the uniformity of nature

would have been useful to the chicken.

  But in spite of the misleadingness of such expectations, they nevertheless

exist. The mere fact that something has happened a certain number of times

causes animals and men to expect that it will happen again. Thus our instincts

certainly cause us to believe that the sun will rise to-morrow, but we may be

in  no  better  a  position  than  the  chicken  which  unexpectedly  has  its  neck

wrung. We have therefore to distinguish the fact that past uniformities cause

expectations  as  to  the  future,  from  the  question  whether  there  is  any

reasonable ground for giving weight to such expectations after the question of

their validity has been raised.

  The  problem  we  have  to  discuss  is  whether  there  is  any  reason  for

believing  in  what  is  called  'the  uniformity  of  nature'.  The  belief  in  the

uniformity of nature is the belief that everything that has happened or will

happen is an instance of some general law to which there are no exceptions.

The crude expectations which we have been considering are all subject to

exceptions, and therefore liable to disappoint those who entertain them. But

science  habitually  assumes,  at  least  as  a  working  hypothesis,  that  general

rules which have exceptions can be replaced by general rules which have no

exceptions. 'Unsupported bodies in air fall' is a general rule to which balloons

and  aeroplanes  are  exceptions.  But  the  laws  of  motion  and  the  law  of

gravitation, which account for the fact that most bodies fall, also account for

the fact that balloons and aeroplanes can rise; thus the laws of motion and the

law of gravitation are not subject to these exceptions.

  The belief that the sun will rise to-morrow might be falsified if the earth

came suddenly into contact with a large body which destroyed its rotation;

but the laws of motion and the law of gravitation would not be infringed by

such an event. The business of science is to find uniformities, such as the

laws of motion and the law of gravitation, to which, so far as our experience

extends, there are no exceptions. In this search science has been remarkably

successful, and it may be conceded that such uniformities have held hitherto.

This brings us back to the question: Have we any reason, assuming that they

have always held in the past, to suppose that they will hold in the future?

  It  has  been  argued  that  we  have  reason  to  know  that  the  future  willresemble the past, because what was the future has constantly become the

past, and has always been found to resemble the past, so that we really have

experience of the future, namely of times which were formerly future, which

we may call past futures. But such an argument really begs the very question

at issue. We have experience of past futures, but not of future futures, and the

question is: Will future futures resemble past futures? This question is not to

be answered by an argument which starts from past futures alone. We have

therefore still to seek for some principle which shall enable us to know that

the future will follow the same laws as the past.

  The  reference  to  the  future  in  this  question  is  not  essential.  The  same

question arises when we apply the laws that work in our experience to past

things of which we have no experience—as, for example, in geology, or in

theories as to the origin of the Solar System. The question we really have to

ask is: 'When two things have been found to be often associated, and no

instance is known of the one occurring without the other, does the occurrence

of one of the two, in a fresh instance, give any good ground for expecting the

other?' On our answer to this question must depend the validity of the whole

of our expectations as to the future, the whole of the results obtained by

induction, and in fact practically all the beliefs upon which our daily life is

based.

  It must be conceded, to begin with, that the fact that two things have been

found  often  together  and  never  apart  does  not,  by  itself,  suffice  to prove

demonstratively that they will be found together in the next case we examine.

The most we can hope is that the oftener things are found together, the more

probable it becomes that they will be found together another time, and that, if

they  have  been  found  together  often  enough,  the  probability  will  amount

almost to certainty. It can never quite reach certainty, because we know that

in spite of frequent repetitions there sometimes is a failure at the last, as in the

case of the chicken whose neck is wrung. Thus probability is all we ought to

seek.

  It might be urged, as against the view we are advocating, that we know all

natural phenomena to be subject to the reign of law, and that sometimes, on

the basis of observation, we can see that only one law can possibly fit the

facts of the case. Now to this view there are two answers. The first is that,

even if some law which has no exceptions applies to our case, we can never,

in practice, be sure that we have discovered that law and not one to whichthere are exceptions. The second is that the reign of law would seem to be

itself only probable, and that our belief that it will hold in the future, or in

unexamined cases in the past, is itself based upon the very principle we are

examining.

  The principle we are examining may be called the principle of induction,

and its two parts may be stated as follows:

  (a) When a thing of a certain sort A has been found to be associated with a

thing of a certain other sort B, and has never been found dissociated from a

thing of the sort B, the greater the number of cases in which A and B have

been associated, the greater is the probability that they will be associated in a

fresh case in which one of them is known to be present;

  (b)  Under  the  same  circumstances,  a  sufficient  number  of  cases  of

association will make the probability of a fresh association nearly a certainty,

and will make it approach certainty without limit.

  As  just  stated,  the  principle  applies  only  to  the  verification  of  our

expectation in a single fresh instance. But we want also to know that there is

a probability in favour of the general law that things of the sort A are always

associated with things of the sort B, provided a sufficient number of cases of

association are known, and no cases of failure of association are known. The

probability of the general law is obviously less than the probability of the

particular case, since if the general law is true, the particular case must also

be true, whereas the particular case may be true without the general law being

true.  Nevertheless  the  probability  of  the  general  law  is  increased  by

repetitions, just as the probability of the particular case is. We may therefore

repeat the two parts of our principle as regards the general law, thus:

  (a) The greater the number of cases in which a thing of the sort A has been

found associated with a thing of the sort B, the more probable it is (if no

cases of failure of association are known) that A is always associated with B;

  b)  Under  the  same  circumstances,  a  sufficient  number  of  cases  of  the

association of A with B will make it nearly certain that A is always associated

with B, and will make this general law approach certainty without limit.

  It should be noted that probability is always relative to certain data. In our

case, the data are merely the known cases of coexistence of A and B. There

may be other data, which might be taken into account, which would gravely

alter the probability. For example, a man who had seen a great many white

swans might argue, by our principle, that on the data it was probable that allswans  were  white,  and  this  might  be  a  perfectly  sound  argument.  The

argument is not disproved by the fact that some swans are black, because a

thing  may  very  well  happen  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  some  data  render  it

improbable. In the case of the swans, a man might know that colour is a very

variable  characteristic  in  many  species  of  animals,  and  that,  therefore,  an

induction as to colour is peculiarly liable to error. But this knowledge would

be a fresh datum, by no means proving that the probability relatively to our

previous data had been wrongly estimated. The fact, therefore, that things

often fail to fulfil our expectations is no evidence that our expectations will

not probably be fulfilled in a given case or a given class of cases. Thus our

inductive principle is at any rate not capable of being disproved by an appeal

to experience.

  The inductive principle, however, is equally incapable of being proved by

an appeal to experience. Experience might conceivably confirm the inductive

principle as regards the cases that have been already examined; but as regards

unexamined  cases,  it  is  the  inductive  principle  alone  that  can  justify  any

inference from what has been examined to what has not been examined. All

arguments which, on the basis of experience, argue as to the future or the

unexperienced parts of the past or present, assume the inductive principle;

hence we can never use experience to prove the inductive principle without

begging the question. Thus we must either accept the inductive principle on

the  ground  of  its  intrinsic  evidence,  or  forgo  all  justification  of  our

expectations about the future. If the principle is unsound, we have no reason

to expect the sun to rise to-morrow, to expect bread to be more nourishing

than a stone, or to expect that if we throw ourselves off the roof we shall fall.

When we see what looks like our best friend approaching us, we shall have

no reason to suppose that his body is not inhabited by the mind of our worst

enemy or of some total stranger. All our conduct is based upon associations

which have worked in the past, and which we therefore regard as likely to

work in the future; and this likelihood is dependent for its validity upon the

inductive principle.

  The general principles of science, such as the belief in the reign of law,

and  the  belief  that  every  event  must  have  a  cause,  are  as  completely

dependent upon the inductive principle as are the beliefs of daily life All such

general  principles  are  believed  because  mankind  have  found  innumerable

instances of their truth and no instances of their falsehood. But this affords noevidence  for  their  truth  in  the  future,  unless  the  inductive  principle  is

assumed.

  Thus all knowledge which, on a basis of experience tells us something

about what is not experienced, is based upon a belief which experience can

neither  confirm  nor  confute,  yet  which,  at  least  in  its  more  concrete

applications, appears to be as firmly rooted in us as many of the facts of

experience. The existence and justification of such beliefs—for the inductive

principle, as we shall see, is not the only example—raises some of the most

difficult  and  most  debated  problems  of  philosophy.  We  will,  in  the  next

chapter, consider briefly what may be said to account for such knowledge,

and what is its scope and its degree of certainty.

       CHAPTER VII. ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF GENERAL

                                    PRINCIPLES

  We saw in the preceding chapter that the principle of induction, while

necessary to the validity of all arguments based on experience, is itself not

capable of being proved by experience, and yet is unhesitatingly believed by

every one, at least in all its concrete applications. In these characteristics the

principle  of  induction  does  not  stand  alone.  There  are  a  number  of  other

principles which cannot be proved or disproved by experience, but are used

in arguments which start from what is experienced.

  Some of these principles have even greater evidence than the principle of

induction, and the knowledge of them has the same degree of certainty as the

knowledge  of  the  existence  of  sense-data.  They  constitute  the  means  of

drawing inferences from what is given in sensation; and if what we infer is to

be true, it is just as necessary that our principles of inference should be true

as it is that our data should be true. The principles of inference are apt to be

overlooked because of their very obviousness—the assumption involved is

assented  to  without  our  realizing  that  it  is  an  assumption.  But  it  is  very

important to realize the use of principles of inference, if a correct theory of

knowledge is to be obtained; for our knowledge of them raises interesting and

difficult questions.

  In all our knowledge of general principles, what actually happens is that

first of all we realize some particular application of the principle, and then we

realize that the particularity is irrelevant, and that there is a generality which

may equally truly be affirmed. This is of course familiar in such matters as

teaching arithmetic: 'two and two are four' is first learnt in the case of some

particular pair of couples, and then in some other particular case, and so on,

until at last it becomes possible to see that it is true of any pair of couples.

The  same  thing  happens  with  logical  principles.  Suppose  two  men  are

discussing what day of the month it is. One of them says, 'At least you will

admit that if yesterday was the 15th to-day must be the 16th.' 'Yes', says the

other, 'I admit that.' 'And you know', the first continues, 'that yesterday was

the 15th, because you dined with Jones, and your diary will tell you that was

on the 15th.' 'Yes', says the second; 'therefore to-day is the 16th.'

  Now such an argument is not hard to follow; and if it is granted that its

premisses are true in fact, no one will deny that the conclusion must also betrue.  But  it  depends  for  its  truth  upon  an  instance  of  a  general  logical

principle. The logical principle is as follows: 'Suppose it known that if this is

true, then that is true. Suppose it also known that this is true, then it follows

that that is true.' When it is the case that if this is true, that is true, we shall

say that this 'implies' that, and that that 'follows from' this. Thus our principle

states that if this implies that, and this is true, then that is true. In other words,

'anything implied by a true proposition is true', or 'whatever follows from a

true proposition is true'.

  This  principle  is  really  involved—at  least,  concrete  instances  of  it  are

involved—in all demonstrations. Whenever one thing which we believe is

used to prove something else, which we consequently believe, this principle

is  relevant.  If  any  one  asks:  'Why  should  I  accept  the  results  of  valid

arguments based on true premisses?' we can only answer by appealing to our

principle. In fact, the truth of the principle is impossible to doubt, and its

obviousness  is  so  great  that  at  first  sight  it  seems  almost  trivial.  Such

principles, however, are not trivial to the philosopher, for they show that we

may have indubitable knowledge which is in no way derived from objects of

sense.

  The  above  principle  is  merely  one  of  a  certain  number  of  self-evident

logical principles. Some at least of these principles must be granted before

any argument or proof becomes possible. When some of them have been

granted, others can be proved, though these others, so long as they are simple,

are just as obvious as the principles taken for granted. For no very good

reason, three of these principles have been singled out by tradition under the

name of 'Laws of Thought'.

  They are as follows:

  (1) The law of identity: 'Whatever is, is.'

  (2) The law of contradiction: 'Nothing can both be and not be.'

  (3) The law of excluded middle: 'Everything must either be or not be.'

  These three laws are samples of self-evident logical principles, but are not

really  more  fundamental  or  more  self-evident  than  various  other  similar

principles: for instance, the one we considered just now, which states that

what follows from a true premiss is true. The name 'laws of thought' is also

misleading, for what is important is not the fact that we think in accordance

with these laws, but the fact that things behave in accordance with them; in

other words, the fact that when we think in accordance with them we thinktruly. But this is a large question, to which we must return at a later stage.

  In addition to the logical principles which enable us to prove from a given

premiss that something is certainly true, there are other logical principles

which enable us to prove, from a given premiss, that there is a greater or less

probability that something is true. An example of such principles—perhaps

the most important example is the inductive principle, which we considered

in the preceding chapter.

  One of the great historic controversies in philosophy is the controversy

between  the  two  schools  called  respectively  'empiricists'  and  'rationalists'.

The  empiricists—who  are  best  represented  by  the  British  philosophers,

Locke, Berkeley, and Hume—maintained that all our knowledge is derived

from experience; the rationalists—who are represented by the Continental

philosophers of the seventeenth century, especially Descartes and Leibniz—

maintained that, in addition to what we know by experience, there are certain

'innate  ideas'  and  'innate  principles',  which  we  know  independently  of

experience. It has now become possible to decide with some confidence as to

the truth or falsehood of these opposing schools. It must be admitted, for the

reasons already stated, that logical principles are known to us, and cannot be

themselves proved by experience, since all proof presupposes them. In this,

therefore,  which  was  the  most  important  point  of  the  controversy,  the

rationalists were in the right.

  On the other hand, even that part of our knowledge which is logically

independent of experience (in the sense that experience cannot prove it) is yet

elicited and caused by experience. It is on occasion of particular experiences

that we become aware of the general laws which their connexions exemplify.

It would certainly be absurd to suppose that there are innate principles in the

sense that babies are born with a knowledge of everything which men know

and which cannot be deduced from what is experienced. For this reason, the

word  'innate'  would  not  now  be  employed  to  describe  our  knowledge  of

logical principles. The phrase 'a priori' is less objectionable, and is more

usual in modern writers. Thus, while admitting that all knowledge is elicited

and caused by experience, we shall nevertheless hold that some knowledge is

a priori, in the sense that the experience which makes us think of it does not

suffice to prove it, but merely so directs our attention that we see its truth

without requiring any proof from experience.

  There is another point of great importance, in which the empiricists werein the right as against the rationalists. Nothing can be known to exist except

by the help of experience. That is to say, if we wish to prove that something

of  which  we  have  no  direct  experience  exists,  we  must  have  among  our

premisses  the  existence  of  one  or  more  things  of  which  we  have  direct

experience. Our belief that the Emperor of China exists, for example, rests

upon testimony, and testimony consists, in the last analysis, of sense-data

seen or heard in reading or being spoken to. Rationalists believed that, from

general consideration as to what must be, they could deduce the existence of

this  or  that  in  the  actual  world.  In  this  belief  they  seem  to  have  been

mistaken.  All  the  knowledge  that  we  can  acquire a  priori  concerning

existence seems to be hypothetical: it tells us that if one thing exists, another

must exist, or, more generally, that if one proposition is true, another must be

true. This is exemplified by the principles we have already dealt with, such as

'if this is true, and this implies that, then that is true', or 'if this and that have

been repeatedly found connected, they will probably be connected in the next

instance in which one of them is found'. Thus the scope and power of a priori

principles is strictly limited. All knowledge that something exists must be in

part  dependent  on  experience.  When  anything  is  known  immediately,  its

existence is known by experience alone; when anything is proved to exist,

without being known immediately, both experience and a priori principles

must be required in the proof. Knowledge is called empirical when it rests

wholly  or  partly  upon  experience.  Thus  all  knowledge  which  asserts

existence is empirical, and the only a priori knowledge concerning existence

is hypothetical, giving connexions among things that exist or may exist, but

not giving actual existence.

  A priori knowledge is not all of the logical kind we have been hitherto

considering.  Perhaps  the  most  important  example  of  non-logical a  priori

knowledge is knowledge as to ethical value. I am not speaking of judgements

as to what is useful or as to what is virtuous, for such judgements do require

empirical  premisses;  I  am  speaking  of  judgements  as  to  the  intrinsic

desirability of things. If something is useful, it must be useful because it

secures some end; the end must, if we have gone far enough, be valuable on

its own account, and not merely because it is useful for some further end.

Thus all judgements as to what is useful depend upon judgements as to what

has value on its own account.

  We  judge,  for  example,  that  happiness  is  more  desirable  than  misery,knowledge than ignorance, goodwill than hatred, and so on. Such judgements

must, in part at least, be immediate and a priori. Like our previous a priori

judgements, they may be elicited by experience, and indeed they must be; for

it  seems  not  possible  to  judge  whether  anything  is  intrinsically  valuable

unless  we  have  experienced  something  of  the  same  kind.  But  it  is  fairly

obvious that they cannot be proved by experience; for the fact that a thing

exists or does not exist cannot prove either that it is good that it should exist

or  that  it  is  bad.  The  pursuit  of  this  subject  belongs  to  ethics,  where  the

impossibility  of  deducing  what  ought  to  be  from  what  is  has  to  be

established.  In  the  present  connexion,  it  is  only  important  to  realize  that

knowledge as to what is intrinsically of value is a priori in the same sense in

which logic is a priori, namely in the sense that the truth of such knowledge

can be neither proved nor disproved by experience.

  All pure mathematics is a priori, like logic. This was strenuously denied

by the empirical philosophers, who maintained that experience was as much

the source of our knowledge of arithmetic as of our knowledge of geography.

They maintained that by the repeated experience of seeing two things and

two other things, and finding that altogether they made four things, we were

led by induction to the conclusion that two things and two other things would

always make four things altogether. If, however, this were the source of our

knowledge  that  two  and  two  are  four,  we  should  proceed  differently,  in

persuading  ourselves  of  its  truth,  from  the  way  in  which  we  do  actually

proceed. In fact, a certain number of instances are needed to make us think of

two abstractly, rather than of two coins or two books or two people, or two of

any other specified kind. But as soon as we are able to divest our thoughts of

irrelevant particularity, we become able to see the general principle that two

and two are four; any one instance is seen to be typical, and the examination

of other instances becomes unnecessary.(1)

  (1) Cf. A. N. Whitehead, Introduction to Mathematics (Home University

Library).

  The same thing is exemplified in geometry. If we want to prove some

property of all triangles, we draw some one triangle and reason about it; but

we can avoid making use of any property which it does not share with all

other triangles, and thus, from our particular case, we obtain a general result.

We do not, in fact, feel our certainty that two and two are four increased by

fresh instances, because, as soon as we have seen the truth of this proposition,our  certainty  becomes  so  great  as  to  be  incapable  of  growing  greater.

Moreover, we feel some quality of necessity about the proposition 'two and

two  are  four',  which  is  absent  from  even  the  best  attested  empirical

generalizations. Such generalizations always remain mere facts: we feel that

there might be a world in which they were false, though in the actual world

they happen to be true. In any possible world, on the contrary, we feel that

two and two would be four: this is not a mere fact, but a necessity to which

everything actual and possible must conform.

  The  case  may  be  made  clearer  by  considering  a  genuinely-empirical

generalization, such as 'All men are mortal.' It is plain that we believe this

proposition, in the first place, because there is no known instance of men

living beyond a certain age, and in the second place because there seem to be

physiological grounds for thinking that an organism such as a man's body

must sooner or later wear out. Neglecting the second ground, and considering

merely our experience of men's mortality, it is plain that we should not be

content with one quite clearly understood instance of a man dying, whereas,

in  the  case  of  'two  and  two  are  four',  one  instance  does  suffice,  when

carefully considered, to persuade us that the same must happen in any other

instance. Also we can be forced to admit, on reflection, that there may be

some doubt, however slight, as to whether all men are mortal. This may be

made plain by the attempt to imagine two different worlds, in one of which

there are men who are not mortal, while in the other two and two make five.

When Swift invites us to consider the race of Struldbugs who never die, we

are able to acquiesce in imagination. But a world where two and two make

five seems quite on a different level. We feel that such a world, if there were

one, would upset the whole fabric of our knowledge and reduce us to utter

doubt.

  The fact is that, in simple mathematical judgements such as 'two and two

are four', and also in many judgements of logic, we can know the general

proposition  without  inferring  it  from  instances,  although  some  instance  is

usually necessary to make clear to us what the general proposition means.

This is why there is real utility in the process of deduction, which goes from

the general to the general, or from the general to the particular, as well as in

the process of induction, which goes from the particular to the particular, or

from the particular to the general. It is an old debate among philosophers

whether deduction ever gives new knowledge. We can now see that in certaincases, at least, it does do so. If we already know that two and two always

make four, and we know that Brown and Jones are two, and so are Robinson

and Smith, we can deduce that Brown and Jones and Robinson and Smith are

four. This is new knowledge, not contained in our premisses, because the

general proposition, 'two and two are four', never told us there were such

people  as  Brown  and  Jones  and  Robinson  and  Smith,  and  the  particular

premisses do not tell us that there were four of them, whereas the particular

proposition deduced does tell us both these things.

  But the newness of the knowledge is much less certain if we take the stock

instance of deduction that is always given in books on logic, namely, 'All

men are mortal; Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is mortal.' In this case,

what we really know beyond reasonable doubt is that certain men, A, B, C,

were mortal, since, in fact, they have died. If Socrates is one of these men, it

is foolish to go the roundabout way through 'all men are mortal' to arrive at

the conclusion that probably Socrates is mortal. If Socrates is not one of the

men on whom our induction is based, we shall still do better to argue straight

from our A, B, C, to Socrates, than to go round by the general proposition,

'all men are mortal'. For the probability that Socrates is mortal is greater, on

our  data,  than  the  probability  that  all  men  are  mortal.  (This  is  obvious,

because if all men are mortal, so is Socrates; but if Socrates is mortal, it does

not follow that all men are mortal.) Hence we shall reach the conclusion that

Socrates  is  mortal  with  a  greater  approach  to  certainty  if  we  make  our

argument purely inductive than if we go by way of 'all men are mortal' and

then use deduction.

  This illustrates the difference between general propositions known a priori

such as 'two and two are four', and empirical generalizations such as 'all men

are mortal'. In regard to the former, deduction is the right mode of argument,

whereas in regard to the latter, induction is always theoretically preferable,

and warrants a greater confidence in the truth of our conclusion, because all

empirical generalizations are more uncertain than the instances of them.

  We have now seen that there are propositions known a priori, and that

among them are the propositions of logic and pure mathematics, as well as

the fundamental propositions of ethics. The question which must next occupy

us is this: How is it possible that there should be such knowledge? And more

particularly, how can there be knowledge of general propositions in cases

where we have not examined all the instances, and indeed never can examinethem all, because their number is infinite? These questions, which were first

brought prominently forward by the German philosopher Kant (1724-1804),

are very difficult, and historically very important.

   





         CHAPTER VIII. HOW A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE IS

                                    POSSIBLE

  Immanuel  Kant  is  generally  regarded  as  the  greatest  of  the  modern

philosophers. Though he lived through the Seven Years War and the French

Revolution, he never interrupted his teaching of philosophy at Königsberg in

East Prussia. His most distinctive contribution was the invention of what he

called  the  'critical'  philosophy,  which,  assuming  as  a  datum  that  there  is

knowledge  of  various  kinds,  inquired  how  such  knowledge  comes  to  be

possible, and deduced, from the answer to this inquiry, many metaphysical

results as to the nature of the world. Whether these results were valid may

well be doubted. But Kant undoubtedly deserves credit for two things: first,

for having perceived that we have a priori knowledge which is not purely

'analytic',  i.e.  such  that  the  opposite  would  be  self-contradictory,  and

secondly, for having made evident the philosophical importance of the theory

of knowledge.

  Before the time of Kant, it was generally held that whatever knowledge

was a priori must be 'analytic'. What this word means will be best illustrated

by examples. If I say, 'A bald man is a man', 'A plane figure is a figure', 'A

bad poet is a poet', I make a purely analytic judgement: the subject spoken

about is given as having at least two properties, of which one is singled out to

be asserted of it. Such propositions as the above are trivial, and would never

be enunciated in real life except by an orator preparing the way for a piece of

sophistry.  They  are  called  'analytic'  because  the  predicate  is  obtained  by

merely analysing the subject. Before the time of Kant it was thought that all

judgements of which we could be certain a priori were of this kind: that in all

of them there was a predicate which was only part of the subject of which it

was  asserted.  If  this  were  so,  we  should  be  involved  in  a  definite

contradiction if we attempted to deny anything that could be known a priori.

'A bald man is not bald' would assert and deny baldness of the same man, and

would therefore contradict itself. Thus according to the philosophers before

Kant, the law of contradiction, which asserts that nothing can at the same

time have and not have a certain property, sufficed to establish the truth of all

a priori knowledge.

  Hume (1711-76), who preceded Kant, accepting the usual view as to what

makes  knowledge a  priori,  discovered  that,  in  many  cases  which  hadpreviously  been  supposed  analytic,  and  notably  in  the  case  of  cause  and

effect, the connexion was really synthetic. Before Hume, rationalists at least

had supposed that the effect could be logically deduced from the cause, if

only we had sufficient knowledge. Hume argued—correctly, as would now

be generally admitted—that this could not be done. Hence he inferred the far

more doubtful proposition that nothing could be known a priori about the

connexion of cause and effect. Kant, who had been educated in the rationalist

tradition, was much perturbed by Hume's scepticism, and endeavoured to find

an answer to it. He perceived that not only the connexion of cause and effect,

but all the propositions of arithmetic and geometry, are 'synthetic', i.e. not

analytic: in all these propositions, no analysis of the subject will reveal the

predicate. His stock instance was the proposition 7 + 5 = 12. He pointed out,

quite truly, that 7 and 5 have to be put together to give 12: the idea of 12 is

not contained in them, nor even in the idea of adding them together. Thus he

was  led  to  the  conclusion  that  all  pure  mathematics,  though a  priori,  is

synthetic; and this conclusion raised a new problem of which he endeavoured

to find the solution.

  The question which Kant put at the beginning of his philosophy, namely

'How is pure mathematics possible?' is an interesting and difficult one, to

which every philosophy which is not purely sceptical must find some answer.

The  answer  of  the  pure  empiricists,  that  our  mathematical  knowledge  is

derived by induction from particular instances, we have already seen to be

inadequate, for two reasons: first, that the validity of the inductive principle

itself cannot be proved by induction; secondly, that the general propositions

of mathematics, such as 'two and two always make four', can obviously be

known with certainty by consideration of a single instance, and gain nothing

by enumeration of other cases in which they have been found to be true. Thus

our  knowledge  of  the  general  propositions  of  mathematics  (and  the  same

applies to logic) must be accounted for otherwise than our (merely probable)

knowledge of empirical generalizations such as 'all men are mortal'.

  The  problem  arises  through  the  fact  that  such  knowledge  is  general,

whereas  all  experience  is  particular.  It  seems  strange  that  we  should

apparently be able to know some truths in advance about particular things of

which we have as yet no experience; but it cannot easily be doubted that logic

and arithmetic will apply to such things. We do not know who will be the

inhabitants of London a hundred years hence; but we know that any two ofthem and any other two of them will make four of them. This apparent power

of anticipating facts about things of which we have no experience is certainly

surprising. Kant's solution of the problem, though not valid in my opinion, is

interesting. It is, however, very difficult, and is differently understood by

different philosophers. We can, therefore, only give the merest outline of it,

and  even  that  will  be  thought  misleading  by  many  exponents  of  Kant's

system.

  What  Kant  maintained  was  that  in  all  our  experience  there  are  two

elements to be distinguished, the one due to the object (i.e. to what we have

called the 'physical object'), the other due to our own nature. We saw, in

discussing matter and sense-data, that the physical object is different from the

associated sense-data, and that the sense-data are to be regarded as resulting

from an interaction between the physical object and ourselves. So far, we are

in agreement with Kant. But what is distinctive of Kant is the way in which

he apportions the shares of ourselves and the physical object respectively. He

considers that the crude material given in sensation—the colour, hardness,

etc.—is due to the object, and that what we supply is the arrangement in

space and time, and all the relations between sense-data which result from

comparison or from considering one as the cause of the other or in any other

way. His chief reason in favour of this view is that we seem to have a priori

knowledge as to space and time and causality and comparison, but not as to

the actual crude material of sensation. We can be sure, he says, that anything

we shall ever experience must show the characteristics affirmed of it in our a

priori knowledge, because these characteristics are due to our own nature,

and therefore nothing can ever come into our experience without acquiring

these characteristics.

  The physical object, which he calls the 'thing in itself',(1) he regards as

essentially unknowable; what can be known is the object as we have it in

experience, which he calls the 'phenomenon'. The phenomenon, being a joint

product of us and the thing in itself, is sure to have those characteristics

which  are  due  to  us,  and  is  therefore  sure  to  conform  to  our a  priori

knowledge.  Hence  this  knowledge,  though  true  of  all  actual  and  possible

experience, must not be supposed to apply outside experience. Thus in spite

of the existence of a priori knowledge, we cannot know anything about the

thing in itself or about what is not an actual or possible object of experience.

In  this  way  he  tries  to  reconcile  and  harmonize  the  contentions  of  therationalists with the arguments of the empiricists.

  (1) Kant's 'thing in itself' is identical in definition with the physical object,

namely,  it  is  the  cause  of  sensations.  In  the  properties  deduced  from  the

definition it is not identical, since Kant held (in spite of some inconsistency

as regards cause) that we can know that none of the categories are applicable

to the 'thing in itself'.

  Apart from minor grounds on which Kant's philosophy may be criticized,

there is one main objection which seems fatal to any attempt to deal with the

problem of a priori knowledge by his method. The thing to be accounted for

is our certainty that the facts must always conform to logic and arithmetic. To

say that logic and arithmetic are contributed by us does not account for this.

Our nature is as much a fact of the existing world as anything, and there can

be no certainty that it will remain constant. It might happen, if Kant is right,

that to-morrow our nature would so change as to make two and two become

five. This possibility seems never to have occurred to him, yet it is one which

utterly destroys the certainty and universality which he is anxious to vindicate

for  arithmetical  propositions.  It  is  true  that  this  possibility,  formally,  is

inconsistent with the Kantian view that time itself is a form imposed by the

subject upon phenomena, so that our real Self is not in time and has no to-

morrow. But he will still have to suppose that the time-order of phenomena is

determined by characteristics of what is behind phenomena, and this suffices

for the substance of our argument.

  Reflection, moreover, seems to make it clear that, if there is any truth in

our arithmetical beliefs, they must apply to things equally whether we think

of them or not. Two physical objects and two other physical objects must

make four physical objects, even if physical objects cannot be experienced.

To assert this is certainly within the scope of what we mean when we state

that two and two are four. Its truth is just as indubitable as the truth of the

assertion  that  two  phenomena  and  two  other  phenomena  make  four

phenomena.  Thus  Kant's  solution  unduly  limits  the  scope  of a  priori

propositions, in addition to failing in the attempt at explaining their certainty.

  Apart from the special doctrines advocated by Kant, it is very common

among philosophers to regard what is a priori as in some sense mental, as

concerned rather with the way we must think than with any fact of the outer

world.  We  noted  in  the  preceding  chapter  the  three  principles  commonly

called 'laws of thought'. The view which led to their being so named is anatural one, but there are strong reasons for thinking that it is erroneous. Let

us take as an illustration the law of contradiction. This is commonly stated in

the form 'Nothing can both be and not be', which is intended to express the

fact that nothing can at once have and not have a given quality. Thus, for

example, if a tree is a beech it cannot also be not a beech; if my table is

rectangular it cannot also be not rectangular, and so on.

  Now what makes it natural to call this principle a law of thought is that it

is by thought rather than by outward observation that we persuade ourselves

of its necessary truth. When we have seen that a tree is a beech, we do not

need to look again in order to ascertain whether it is also not a beech; thought

alone makes us know that this is impossible. But the conclusion that the law

of  contradiction  is  a  law  of thought  is  nevertheless  erroneous.  What  we

believe, when we believe the law of contradiction, is not that the mind is so

made that it must believe the law of contradiction. This belief is a subsequent

result of psychological reflection, which presupposes the belief in the law of

contradiction. The belief in the law of contradiction is a belief about things,

not only about thoughts. It is not, e.g., the belief that if we think a certain tree

is a beech, we cannot at the same time think that it is not a beech; it is the

belief that if the tree is a beech, it cannot at the same time be not a beech.

Thus the law of contradiction is about things, and not merely about thoughts;

and  although  belief  in  the  law  of  contradiction  is  a  thought,  the  law  of

contradiction itself is not a thought, but a fact concerning the things in the

world. If this, which we believe when we believe the law of contradiction,

were not true of the things in the world, the fact that we were compelled to

think it true would not save the law of contradiction from being false; and this

shows that the law is not a law of thought.

  A similar argument applies to any other a priori judgement. When we

judge that two and two are four, we are not making a judgement about our

thoughts, but about all actual or possible couples. The fact that our minds are

so constituted as to believe that two and two are four, though it is true, is

emphatically not what we assert when we assert that two and two are four.

And no fact about the constitution of our minds could make it true that two

and two are four. Thus our a priori knowledge, if it is not erroneous, is not

merely knowledge about the constitution of our minds, but is applicable to

whatever the world may contain, both what is mental and what is non-mental.

  The fact seems to be that all our a priori knowledge is concerned withentities which do not, properly speaking, exist, either in the mental or in the

physical world. These entities are such as can be named by parts of speech

which are not substantives; they are such entities as qualities and relations.

Suppose, for instance, that I am in my room. I exist, and my room exists; but

does  'in'  exist?  Yet  obviously  the  word  'in'  has  a  meaning;  it  denotes  a

relation which holds between me and my room. This relation is something,

although we cannot say that it exists in the same sense in which I and my

room  exist.  The  relation  'in'  is  something  which  we  can  think  about  and

understand, for, if we could not understand it, we could not understand the

sentence  'I  am  in  my  room'.  Many  philosophers,  following  Kant,  have

maintained that relations are the work of the mind, that things in themselves

have no relations, but that the mind brings them together in one act of thought

and thus produces the relations which it judges them to have.

  This view, however, seems open to objections similar to those which we

urged  before  against  Kant.  It  seems  plain  that  it  is  not  thought  which

produces the truth of the proposition 'I am in my room'. It may be true that an

earwig is in my room, even if neither I nor the earwig nor any one else is

aware of this truth; for this truth concerns only the earwig and the room, and

does not depend upon anything else. Thus relations, as we shall see more

fully in the next chapter, must be placed in a world which is neither mental

nor  physical.  This  world  is  of  great  importance  to  philosophy,  and  in

particular to the problems of a priori knowledge. In the next chapter we shall

proceed to develop its nature and its bearing upon the questions with which

we have been dealing.

   





             CHAPTER IX. THE WORLD OF UNIVERSALS

  At the end of the preceding chapter we saw that such entities as relations

appear to have a being which is in some way different from that of physical

objects, and also different from that of minds and from that of sense-data. In

the present chapter we have to consider what is the nature of this kind of

being, and also what objects there are that have this kind of being. We will

begin with the latter question.

  The problem with which we are now concerned is a very old one, since it

was brought into philosophy by Plato. Plato's 'theory of ideas' is an attempt to

solve this very problem, and in my opinion it is one of the most successful

attempts hitherto made. The theory to be advocated in what follows is largely

Plato's, with merely such modifications as time has shown to be necessary.

  The way the problem arose for Plato was more or less as follows. Let us

consider, say, such a notion as justice. If we ask ourselves what justice is, it is

natural to proceed by considering this, that, and the other just act, with a view

to discovering what they have in common. They must all, in some sense,

partake of a common nature, which will be found in whatever is just and in

nothing else. This common nature, in virtue of which they are all just, will be

justice itself, the pure essence the admixture of which with facts of ordinary

life  produces  the  multiplicity  of  just  acts.  Similarly  with  any  other  word

which may be applicable to common facts, such as 'whiteness' for example.

The word will be applicable to a number of particular things because they all

participate in a common nature or essence. This pure essence is what Plato

calls an 'idea' or 'form'. (It must not be supposed that 'ideas', in his sense, exist

in minds, though they may be apprehended by minds.) The 'idea' justice is not

identical  with  anything  that  is  just:  it  is  something  other  than  particular

things, which particular things partake of. Not being particular, it cannot itself

exist in the world of sense. Moreover it is not fleeting or changeable like the

things of sense: it is eternally itself, immutable and indestructible.

  Thus Plato is led to a supra-sensible world, more real than the common

world of sense, the unchangeable world of ideas, which alone gives to the

world of sense whatever pale reflection of reality may belong to it. The truly

real world, for Plato, is the world of ideas; for whatever we may attempt to

say about things in the world of sense, we can only succeed in saying that

they participate in such and such ideas, which, therefore, constitute all theircharacter. Hence it is easy to pass on into a mysticism. We may hope, in a

mystic illumination, to see the ideas as we see objects of sense; and we may

imagine that the ideas exist in heaven. These mystical developments are very

natural, but the basis of the theory is in logic, and it is as based in logic that

we have to consider it.

  The word 'idea' has acquired, in the course of time, many associations

which are quite misleading when applied to Plato's 'ideas'. We shall therefore

use the word 'universal' instead of the word 'idea', to describe what Plato

meant. The essence of the sort of entity that Plato meant is that it is opposed

to the particular things that are given in sensation. We speak of whatever is

given in sensation, or is of the same nature as things given in sensation, as a

particular; by opposition to this, a universal will be anything which may be

shared by many particulars, and has those characteristics which, as we saw,

distinguish justice and whiteness from just acts and white things.

  When we examine common words, we find that, broadly speaking, proper

names stand for particulars, while other substantives, adjectives, prepositions,

and  verbs  stand  for  universals.  Pronouns  stand  for  particulars,  but  are

ambiguous: it is only by the context or the circumstances that we know what

particulars they stand for. The word 'now' stands for a particular, namely the

present moment; but like pronouns, it stands for an ambiguous particular,

because the present is always changing.

  It will be seen that no sentence can be made up without at least one word

which  denotes  a  universal.  The  nearest  approach  would  be  some  such

statement as 'I like this'. But even here the word 'like' denotes a universal, for

I may like other things, and other people may like things. Thus all truths

involve universals, and all knowledge of truths involves acquaintance with

universals.

  Seeing that nearly all the words to be found in the dictionary stand for

universals, it is strange that hardly anybody except students of philosophy

ever realizes that there are such entities as universals. We do not naturally

dwell upon those words in a sentence which do not stand for particulars; and

if  we  are  forced  to  dwell  upon  a  word  which  stands  for  a  universal,  we

naturally think of it as standing for some one of the particulars that come

under the universal. When, for example, we hear the sentence, 'Charles I's

head was cut off', we may naturally enough think of Charles I, of Charles I's

head, and of the operation of cutting off his head, which are all particulars;but we do not naturally dwell upon what is meant by the word 'head' or the

word 'cut', which is a universal: We feel such words to be incomplete and

insubstantial; they seem to demand a context before anything can be done

with them. Hence we succeed in avoiding all notice of universals as such,

until the study of philosophy forces them upon our attention.

  Even among philosophers, we may say, broadly, that only those universals

which  are  named  by  adjectives  or  substantives  have  been  much  or  often

recognized, while those named by verbs and prepositions have been usually

overlooked. This omission has had a very great effect upon philosophy; it is

hardly  too  much  to  say  that  most  metaphysics,  since  Spinoza,  has  been

largely determined by it. The way this has occurred is, in outline, as follows:

Speaking  generally,  adjectives  and  common  nouns  express  qualities  or

properties of single things, whereas prepositions and verbs tend to express

relations between two or more things. Thus the neglect of prepositions and

verbs led to the belief that every proposition can be regarded as attributing a

property to a single thing, rather than as expressing a relation between two or

more things. Hence it was supposed that, ultimately, there can be no such

entities as relations between things. Hence either there can be only one thing

in the universe, or, if there are many things, they cannot possibly interact in

any  way,  since  any  interaction  would  be  a  relation,  and  relations  are

impossible.

  The first of these views, advocated by Spinoza and held in our own day by

Bradley  and  many  other  philosophers,  is  called monism;  the  second,

advocated by Leibniz but not very common nowadays, is called monadism,

because each of the isolated things is called a monad. Both these opposing

philosophies, interesting as they are, result, in my opinion, from an undue

attention to one sort of universals, namely the sort represented by adjectives

and substantives rather than by verbs and prepositions.

  As a matter of fact, if any one were anxious to deny altogether that there

are such things as universals, we should find that we cannot strictly prove

that  there  are  such  entities  as qualities,  i.e.  the  universals  represented  by

adjectives  and  substantives,  whereas  we  can  prove  that  there  must  be

relations,  i.e.  the  sort  of  universals  generally  represented  by  verbs  and

prepositions. Let us take in illustration the universal whiteness. If we believe

that there is such a universal, we shall say that things are white because they

have the quality of whiteness. This view, however, was strenuously denied byBerkeley and Hume, who have been followed in this by later empiricists. The

form  which  their  denial  took  was  to  deny  that  there  are  such  things  as

'abstract ideas '. When we want to think of whiteness, they said, we form an

image of some particular white thing, and reason concerning this particular,

taking care not to deduce anything concerning it which we cannot see to be

equally true of any other white thing. As an account of our actual mental

processes, this is no doubt largely true. In geometry, for example, when we

wish to prove something about all triangles, we draw a particular triangle and

reason about it, taking care not to use any characteristic which it does not

share with other triangles. The beginner, in order to avoid error, often finds it

useful to draw several triangles, as unlike each other as possible, in order to

make  sure  that  his  reasoning  is  equally  applicable  to  all  of  them.  But  a

difficulty emerges as soon as we ask ourselves how we know that a thing is

white  or  a  triangle.  If  we  wish  to  avoid  the  universals whiteness  and

triangularity,  we  shall  choose  some  particular  patch  of  white  or  some

particular triangle, and say that anything is white or a triangle if it has the

right sort of resemblance to our chosen particular. But then the resemblance

required will have to be a universal. Since there are many white things, the

resemblance must hold between many pairs of particular white things; and

this is the characteristic of a universal. It will be useless to say that there is a

different resemblance for each pair, for then we shall have to say that these

resemblances resemble each other, and thus at last we shall be forced to admit

resemblance as a universal. The relation of resemblance, therefore, must be a

true universal. And having been forced to admit this universal, we find that it

is no longer worth while to invent difficult and unplausible theories to avoid

the admission of such universals as whiteness and triangularity.

  Berkeley and Hume failed to perceive this refutation of their rejection of

'abstract ideas', because, like their adversaries, they only thought of qualities,

and  altogether  ignored relations  as  universals.  We  have  therefore  here

another respect in which the rationalists appear to have been in the right as

against the empiricists, although, owing to the neglect or denial of relations,

the  deductions  made  by  rationalists  were,  if  anything,  more  apt  to  be

mistaken than those made by empiricists.

  Having now seen that there must be such entities as universals, the next

point to be proved is that their being is not merely mental. By this is meant

that whatever being belongs to them is independent of their being thought ofor  in  any  way  apprehended  by  minds.  We  have  already  touched  on  this

subject at the end of the preceding chapter, but we must now consider more

fully what sort of being it is that belongs to universals.

  Consider such a proposition as 'Edinburgh is north of London'. Here we

have  a  relation  between  two  places,  and  it  seems  plain  that  the  relation

subsists independently of our knowledge of it. When we come to know that

Edinburgh is north of London, we come to know something which has to do

only  with  Edinburgh  and  London:  we  do  not  cause  the  truth  of  the

proposition by coming to know it, on the contrary we merely apprehend a

fact which was there before we knew it. The part of the earth's surface where

Edinburgh stands would be north of the part where London stands, even if

there were no human being to know about north and south, and even if there

were no minds at all in the universe. This is, of course, denied by many

philosophers, either for Berkeley's reasons or for Kant's. But we have already

considered  these  reasons,  and  decided  that  they  are  inadequate.  We  may

therefore now assume it to be true that nothing mental is presupposed in the

fact that Edinburgh is north of London. But this fact involves the relation

'north of', which is a universal; and it would be impossible for the whole fact

to involve nothing mental if the relation 'north of', which is a constituent part

of  the  fact,  did  involve  anything  mental.  Hence  we  must  admit  that  the

relation, like the terms it relates, is not dependent upon thought, but belongs

to the independent world which thought apprehends but does not create.

  This conclusion, however, is met by the difficulty that the relation 'north

of' does not seem to exist in the same sense in which Edinburgh and London

exist. If we ask 'Where and when does this relation exist?' the answer must be

'Nowhere and nowhen'. There is no place or time where we can find the

relation 'north of'. It does not exist in Edinburgh any more than in London,

for it relates the two and is neutral as between them. Nor can we say that it

exists at any particular time. Now everything that can be apprehended by the

senses or by introspection exists at some particular time. Hence the relation

'north of' is radically different from such things. It is neither in space nor in

time, neither material nor mental; yet it is something.

  It  is  largely  the  very  peculiar  kind  of  being  that  belongs  to  universals

which has led many people to suppose that they are really mental. We can

think of a universal, and our thinking then exists in a perfectly ordinary sense,

like  any  other  mental  act.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  we  are  thinking  ofwhiteness. Then in one sense it may be said that whiteness is 'in our mind'.

We have here the same ambiguity as we noted in discussing Berkeley in

Chapter IV. In the strict sense, it is not whiteness that is in our mind, but the

act of thinking of whiteness. The connected ambiguity in the word 'idea',

which we noted at the same time, also causes confusion here. In one sense of

this  word,  namely  the  sense  in  which  it  denotes  the object  of  an  act  of

thought, whiteness is an 'idea'. Hence, if the ambiguity is not guarded against,

we may come to think that whiteness is an 'idea' in the other sense, i.e. an act

of thought; and thus we come to think that whiteness is mental. But in so

thinking, we rob it of its essential quality of universality. One man's act of

thought is necessarily a different thing from another man's; one man's act of

thought at one time is necessarily a different thing from the same man's act of

thought at another time. Hence, if whiteness were the thought as opposed to

its object, no two different men could think of it, and no one man could think

of it twice. That which many different thoughts of whiteness have in common

is their object, and this object is different from all of them. Thus universals

are not thoughts, though when known they are the objects of thoughts.

  We shall find it convenient only to speak of things existing when they are

in time, that is to say, when we can point to some time at which they exist

(not excluding the possibility of their existing at all times). Thus thoughts and

feelings, minds and physical objects exist. But universals do not exist in this

sense; we shall say that they subsist or have being, where 'being' is opposed

to 'existence' as being timeless. The world of universals, therefore, may also

be described as the world of being. The world of being is unchangeable,

rigid,  exact,  delightful  to  the  mathematician,  the  logician,  the  builder  of

metaphysical systems, and all who love perfection more than life. The world

of existence is fleeting, vague, without sharp boundaries, without any clear

plan or arrangement, but it contains all thoughts and feelings, all the data of

sense, and all physical objects, everything that can do either good or harm,

everything  that  makes  any  difference  to  the  value  of  life  and  the  world.

According to our temperaments, we shall prefer the contemplation of the one

or of the other. The one we do not prefer will probably seem to us a pale

shadow of the one we prefer, and hardly worthy to be regarded as in any

sense real. But the truth is that both have the same claim on our impartial

attention, both are real, and both are important to the metaphysician. Indeed

no sooner have we distinguished the two worlds than it becomes necessary toconsider their relations.

  But  first  of  all  we  must  examine  our  knowledge  of  universals.  This

consideration will occupy us in the following chapter, where we shall find

that it solves the problem of a priori knowledge, from which we were first

led to consider universals.

       CHAPTER X. ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF UNIVERSALS

  In  regard  to  one  man's  knowledge  at  a  given  time,  universals,  like

particulars, may be divided into those known by acquaintance, those known

only  by  description,  and  those  not  known  either  by  acquaintance  or  by

description.

  Let us consider first the knowledge of universals by acquaintance. It is

obvious, to begin with, that we are acquainted with such universals as white,

red,  black,  sweet,  sour,  loud,  hard,  etc.,  i.e.  with  qualities  which  are

exemplified in sense-data. When we see a white patch, we are acquainted, in

the first instance, with the particular patch; but by seeing many white patches,

we easily learn to abstract the whiteness which they all have in common, and

in learning to do this we are learning to be acquainted with whiteness. A

similar process will make us acquainted with any other universal of the same

sort. Universals of this sort may be called 'sensible qualities'. They can be

apprehended with less effort of abstraction than any others, and they seem

less removed from particulars than other universals are.

  We come next to relations. The easiest relations to apprehend are those

which hold between the different parts of a single complex sense-datum. For

example, I can see at a glance the whole of the page on which I am writing;

thus the whole page is included in one sense-datum. But I perceive that some

parts of the page are to the left of other parts, and some parts are above other

parts. The process of abstraction in this case seems to proceed somewhat as

follows: I see successively a number of sense-data in which one part is to the

left of another; I perceive, as in the case of different white patches, that all

these sense-data have something in common, and by abstraction I find that

what they have in common is a certain relation between their parts, namely

the relation which I call 'being to the left of'. In this way I become acquainted

with the universal relation.

  In like manner I become aware of the relation of before and after in time.

Suppose I hear a chime of bells: when the last bell of the chime sounds, I can

retain the whole chime before my mind, and I can perceive that the earlier

bells came before the later ones. Also in memory I perceive that what I am

remembering came before the present time. From either of these sources I can

abstract the universal relation of before and after, just as I abstracted the

universal  relation  'being  to  the  left  of'.  Thus  time-relations,  like  space-