throughout the interval between seeing him at the window and seeing him on

the platform, and that he has pursued a continuous path through space from

the one to the other. You have no doubt that what you saw was something

solid, not an intangible object like a rainbow or a cloud. And so, although the

message received by the senses contains (so to speak) only a few key words,

your  mental  and  physical  habits  cause  you,  spontaneously  and  without

thought, to expand it into a coherent and amply informative dispatch.

  This  expansion  of  the  sensational  core  to  produce  what  goes  by  the

somewhat  question-begging  name  of  “perception”  is  obviously  only

trustworthy in so far as our habits of association run parallel to processes in

the external world. Clouds looked down upon from a mountain may look so

like the sea or a field of snow that only positive knowledge to the contrary

prevents  you  from  so  interpreting  your  visual  sensations.  If  you  are  not

accustomed to the gramophone, you will confidently believe that the voice

you hear on the other side of the door proceeds from a person in the room

that you are about to enter. There is no obvious limit to the invention of

ingenious  apparatus  capable  of  deceiving  the  unwary.  We  know  that  the

people we see on the screen in the cinema are not really there, although they

move and talk and behave in a manner having some resemblance to that of

human beings; but if we did not know it, we might at first find it hard to

believe. Thus what we seem to know through the senses may be deceptive

whenever the environment is different from what our past experience has led

us to expect.

  From the above considerations it follows that we cannot admit as data all

that  an  uncritical  acceptance  of  common  sense  would  take  as  given  in

perception. Only sensations and memories are truly data for our knowledge of

the external world. We must exclude from our list of data not only the things

that we consciously infer, but all that is obtained by animal inference, such as

the imagined hardness of an object seen but not touched. It is true that our

“perceptions”, in all their fullness, are data for psychology: we do in fact have

the  experience  of  believing  in  such-and-such  an  object.  It  is  only  for

knowledge of things outside our own minds that it is necessary to regard only

sensations  as  data.  This  necessity  is  a  consequence  of  what  we  know  ofphysics and physiology. The same external stimulus, reaching the brains of

two men with different experiences, will produce different results, and it is

only what these different results have in common that can be used in inferring

external causes. If it is objected that the truth of physics and physiology is

doubtful, the situation is even worse; for if they are false, nothing whatever as

to  the  outer  world  can  be  inferred  from  my  experiences.  I  am,  however,

throughout this work, assuming that science is broadly speaking true.

  If we define “data” as “those matters of fact of which, independently of

inference, we have a right to feel most nearly certain”, it follows from what

has been said that all my data are events that happen to me, and are, in fact,

what would commonly be called events in my mind. This is a view which has

been  characteristic  of  British  empiricism,  but  has  been  rejected  by  most

Continental philosophers, and is not now accepted by the followers of Dewey

or by most of the logical positivists. As the issue is of considerable importance,

I  shall  set  forth  the  reasons  which  have  convinced  me,  including  a  brief

repetition of those that have already been given.

  There  are,  first,  arguments  on  the  common-sense  level,  derived  from

illusions, squinting, reflection, refraction, etc., but above all from dreams. I

dreamed last night that I was in Germany, in a house which looked out on a

ruined church; in my dream I supposed at first that the church had been

bombed  during  the  recent  war,  but  was  subsequently  informed  that  its

destruction dated from the wars of religion in the sixteenth century. All this,

so long as I remained asleep, had all the convincingness of waking life. I did

really  have  the  dream,  and  did  really  have  an  experience  intrinsically

indistinguishable from that of seeing a ruined church when awake. It follows

that the experience which I call “seeing a church” is not conclusive evidence

that there is a church, since it may occur when there is no such external object

as I suppose in my dream. It may be said that, though when dreaming I may

think that I am awake, when I wake up I know that I am awake. But I do not

see how we are to have any such certainty; I have frequently dreamt that I

woke up; in fact once, after ether, I dreamt it about a hundred times in the

course of one dream. We condemn dreams, in fact, because they do not fit into

a  proper  context,  but  this  argument  can  be  made  inconclusive,  as  inCalderon’s play, La Vida es Sueño. I do not believe that I am now dreaming,

but I cannot prove that I am not. I am, however, quite certain that I am having

certain experiences, whether they be those of a dream or those of waking life.

  We come now to another class of arguments, derived from physics and

physiology. This class of arguments came into philosophy with Locke, who

used it to show that secondary qualities are subjective. This class of arguments

is  capable  of  being  used  to  throw  doubt  on  the  truth  of  physics  and

physiology, but I will deal with them on the hypothesis that science, in the

main, is true.

  We experience a visual sensation when light waves reach the eye, and an

auditory sensation when sound waves reach the ear. There is no reason to

suppose that light waves are at all like the experience which we call seeing

something, or sound waves at all like the experience which we call hearing a

sound. There is no reason whatever to suppose that the physical sources of

light and sound waves have any more resemblance to our experiences than

the waves have. If the waves are produced in unusual ways, our experience

may lead us to infer subsequent experiences which it turns out that we do not

have; this shows that even in normal perception interpretation plays a larger

part than common sense supposes, and that interpretation sometimes leads us

to entertain false expectations.

  Another difficulty is connected with time. We see and hear now, but what

(according to common sense) we are seeing and hearing occurred some time

ago. When we both see and hear an explosion, we see it first and hear it

afterwards. Even if we could suppose that the furniture of our room is exactly

what it seems, we cannot suppose this of a nebula millions of light-years

away, which looks like a speck but is not much smaller than the milky way,

and of which the light that reaches us now started before human beings began

to exist. And the difference between the nebula and the furniture is only one

of degree.

  Then there are physiological arguments. People who have lost a leg may

continue to feel pain in it. Dr. Johnson, disproving Berkeley, thought the pain

in his toe when he kicked a stone was evidence for the existence of the stone,

but it appears that it was not even evidence for the existence of his toe, sincehe might have felt it even if his toe had been amputated. Speaking generally, if

a nerve is stimulated in a given manner, a certain sensation results, whatever

may be the source of the stimulation. Given sufficient skill, it ought to be

possible to make a man see the starry heavens by tickling his optic nerve, but

the instrument used would bear little resemblance to the august bodies studied

by astronomers.

  The  above  arguments,  as  I  remarked  before,  may  be  interpreted

sceptically, as showing that there is no reason to believe that our sensations

have external causes. As this interpretation concedes what I am at present

engaged in maintaining, namely that sensations are the sole data for physics, I

shall not, for the moment, consider whether it can be refuted, but shall pass on

to  a  closely  similar  line  of  argument  which  is  related  to  the  method  of

Cartesian doubt. This method consists in searching for data by provisionally

rejecting everything that it is found possible to call in question.

  Descartes argues that the existence of sensible objects might be uncertain,

because it would be possible for a deceitful demon to mislead us. We should

substitute for a deceitful demon a cinema in technicolour. It is, of course, also

possible  that  we  may  be  dreaming.  But  he  regards  the  existence  of  our

thoughts as wholly unquestionable. When he says “I think, therefore I am”,

the primitive certainties at which he may be supposed to have arrived are

particular “thoughts”, in the large sense in which he uses the term. His own

existence is an inference from his thoughts, an inference whose validity does

not at the moment concern us. In the context, what appears certain to him is

that  there  is  doubting,  but  the  experience  of  doubting  has  no  special

prerogative over other experiences. When I see a flash of lightning I may, it is

maintained, be uncertain as to the physical character of lightning, and even as

to  whether  anything  external  to  myself  has  happened,  but  I  cannot  make

myself doubt that there has been the occurrence which is called “seeing a flash

of lightning”, though there may have been no flash outside my seeing.

  It is not suggested that I am certain about all my own experiences; this

would certainly be false. Many memories are dubious, and so are many faint

sensations. What I am saying—and in this I am expounding part of Descartes’

argument—is  that  there  are  some  occurrences  that  I  cannot  make  myselfdoubt, and that these are all of the kind that, if we admit a not-self, are part of

the life of my self. Not all of them are sensations; some are abstract thoughts,

some are memories, some are wishes, some are pleasures or pains. But all are

what we should commonly describe as mental events in me.

  My own view is that this point of view is in the right in so far as it is

concerned with data that are matters of fact. Matters of fact that lie outside

my experience can be made to seem doubtful, unless there is an argument

showing  that  their  existence  follows  from  matters  of  fact  within  my

experience together with laws of whose certainty I feel reasonably convinced.

But this is a long question, concerning which, at the moment, I wish to say

only a few preliminary words.

  Hume’s scepticism with regard to the world of science resulted from (a)

the doctrine that all my data are private to me, together with (b) the discovery

that  matters  of  fact,  however  numerous  and  well-selected,  never  logically

imply any other matter of fact. I do not see any way of escaping from either of

these theses. The first I have been arguing; I may say that I attach especial

weight  in  this  respect  to  the  argument  from  the  physical  causation  of

sensations. As to the second, it is obvious as a matter of syntax to any one

who has grasped the nature of deductive arguments. A matter of fact which is

not contained in the premisses must require for its assertion a proper name

which does not occur in the premisses. But there is only one way in which a

new proper name can occur in a deductive argument, and that is when we

proceed from the general to the particular, as in “all men are mortal, therefore

Socrates  is  mortal”.  Now  no  collection  of  assertions  of  matters  of  fact  is

logically equivalent to a general assertion, so that, if our premisses concern

only matters of fact, this way of introducing a new proper name is not open to

us. Hence the thesis follows.

  If we are not to deduce Hume’s scepticism from the above two premisses,

there seems to be only one possible way of escape, and that is to maintain

that,  among  the  premisses  of  our  knowledge,  there  are  some  general

propositions,  or  there  is  at  least  one  general  proposition,  which  is  not

analytically  necessary,  i.e.  the  hypothesis  of  its  falsehood  is  not  self-

contradictory. A principle justifying the scientific use of induction would havethis  character.  What  is  needed  is  some  way  of  giving  probability  (not

certainty) to the inferences from known matters of fact to occurrences which

have not yet been, and perhaps never will be, part of the experience of the

person making the inference. If an individual is to know anything beyond his

own experiences up to the present moment, his stock of uninferred knowledge

must consist not only of matters of fact, but also of general laws, or at least a

law, allowing him to make inferences from matters of fact; and such law or

laws  must,  unlike  the  principles  of  deductive  logic,  be  synthetic,  i.e.  not

proved true by their falsehood being self-contradictory. The only alternative

to this hypothesis is complete scepticism as to all the inferences of science and

common sense, including those which I have called animal inferences.                                          II 


                                    Solipsism


THE doctrine called “solipsism” is usually defined as the belief that I alone

exist. It is not one doctrine unless it is true. If it is true, it is the assertion that

I, Bertrand Russell, alone exist. But if it is false, and I have readers, then for

you who are reading this chapter it is the assertion that you alone exist. This

is a view suggested by the conclusions reached in the preceding chapter, to the

effect that all my data, in so far as they are matters of fact, are private to me,

and that inferences from one or more matters of fact to other matters of fact

are never logically demonstrative. These conclusions suggest that it would be

rational to doubt everything outside my own experience, such as the thoughts

of other people and the existence of material objects when I am not seeing

them. It is this view that we are now to examine.

  We  must  begin  by  giving  more  precision  to  the  doctrine,  and  by

distinguishing various forms that it may take. We must not state it in the

words  “I  alone  exist”,  for  these  words  have  no  clear  meaning  unless  the

doctrine is false. If the world is really the common-sense world of people and

things, we can pick out one person and suppose him to think that he is the

whole  universe.  This  is  analogous  to  the  people  before  Columbus,  who

believed the Old World to be the total of land on this planet. But if other

people and things do not exist, the word “myself” loses its meaning, for this is

an  exclusive  and  delimiting  word.  Instead  of  saying  “myself  is  the  whole

universe”, we must say “data are the whole universe”. Here “data” may be

defined  by  enumeration.  We  can  then  say:  “this  list  is  complete;  there  is

nothing more”. Or we can say: “there is not known to be anything more”. In

this form, the doctrine does not require a prior definition of the Self, and what

it asserts is sufficiently definite to be discussed.

  We may distinguish two kinds of solipsism, which I shall call “dogmatic”

and “sceptical” respectively. The dogmatic kind, in the above statement, says

“there is nothing beyond data”, while the sceptical kind says “there is notknown  to  be  anything  beyond  data”.  No  grounds  exist  in  favour  of  the

dogmatic form, since it is just as difficult to disprove existence as to prove it,

when what is concerned is something which is not a datum. I shall therefore

say no more about dogmatic solipsism, and shall concentrate on the sceptical

form.

  The sceptical form of the doctrine is difficult to state precisely. It is not

right to say, as we did just now, “nothing is known except data”, since some

one else might know more; there is the same objection as there is to dogmatic

solipsism. If we emend our statement by saying “nothing is known to me

except the following (giving a list of data)”, we have again introduced the Self,

which, as we saw, we must not do in defining our doctrine. It is not altogether

easy to evade this objection.

  I think we can state the problem with which solipsism is concerned as

follows: “The propositions p, p, … p are known otherwise than by inference.
                                12n

Can this list be made such that from it other propositions, asserting matters of

fact, can be inferred?” In this form we do not have to state that our list is

complete, or that it embraces all that some one person knows.

  It  is  obvious  that  if  our  list  consists  entirely  of  propositions  asserting

matters  of  fact,  then  the  answer  to  our  question  is  in  the  negative,  and

sceptical solipsism is true. But if our list contains anything in the nature of

laws  the  answer  may  be  different.  These  laws,  however,  will  have  to  be

synthetic. Any collection of matters of fact is logically capable of being the

whole; in pure logic, any two events are compossible, and no collection of

events implies the existence of other events.

  But before pursuing this line of thought let us consider different forms of

solipsism.

    Solipsism may be more drastic or less drastic; as it becomes more drastic it

becomes  more  logical  and  at  the  same  time  more  unplausible.  In  its  least

drastic form, it accepts all my mental states that are accepted by common

sense or by orthodox psychology, i.e. not only those of which I am directly

aware, but also those that are inferred on purely psychological grounds. It is

generally held that at all times I have many faint sensations that I do not

notice. If there is a ticking clock in the room, I may notice it and be annoyedby  it,  but  as  a  rule  I  am  quite  unaware  of  it,  even  if  it  is  easily  audible

whenever I choose to listen to it. In such a case one would naturally say that I

am having auditory sensations of which I am not conscious. The same may be

said, at most times, of objects in the periphery of my field of vision. If they are

important objects, such as an enemy with a loaded revolver, I shall quickly

become aware of them and bring them into the centre of my visual field: but if

they  are  uninteresting  and  motionless  I  shall  remain  unaware  of  them.

Nevertheless it seems natural to suppose that I am in some sense seeing them.

  The same sort of considerations apply to lapses of memory. If I look at an

old diary, I find dinner engagements noted that I have completely forgotten,

but I find it hard to doubt that I had the experience which common sense

would describe as going to a dinner party. I believe that I was once an infant,

although no trace of that period survives in my explicit memory.

  Such  inferred  mental  states  are  allowed  by  the  least  drastic  form  of

solipsism. It merely refuses to allow inferences to anything other than myself

and my mental states.

  This, however, is illogical. The principles required to justify inferences

from mental states of which I am aware to others of which I am not aware are

exactly the same as those required for inferences to physical objects and to

other  minds.  If,  therefore,  we  are  to  secure  the  logical  safety  of  which

solipsism is in search, we must confine ourselves to mental states of which we

are now aware. Buddha was admired because he could meditate while tigers

roared around him; but if he had been a consistent solipsist he would have

held that the noise of roaring ceased as soon as he ceased to notice it.

  We thus arrive at a second form of solipsism, which says that the universe

consists,  or  perhaps  consists,  of  only  the  following  items;  and  then  we

enumerate whatever, at the moment of speaking, we perceive or remember.

And this will have to be confined to what I actually notice, for what I could

notice is inferred. At the moment, I notice my dog asleep, and as a plain man I

am convinced that I could have noticed him any time this last hour, since he

has been consistently (so I believe) in my field of vision, but I have in fact

been quite unaware of him. The thoroughgoing solipsist will have to say that

when,  during  the  last  hour,  my  eye  absent-mindedly  rested  on  the  dog,nothing whatever occurred in me in consequence; for to argue that I had a

sensation which I did not notice is to allow an inference of the forbidden kind.

  In regard to memory, the results of this theory are extremely odd. The

things that I am recollecting at one moment are quite different from those that

I  am  recollecting  at  another,  but  the  thoroughgoing  solipsist  should  only

admit what I am remembering now. Thus his world will be one of disjointed

fragments  which  change  completely  from  moment  to  moment—change,  I

mean, not as to what exists now, but as to what did exist in the past.

  But we have not done with the sacrifices which the solipsist must make to

logic if he is to feel safe. It is quite clear that I can have a recollection without

the thing remembered having happened; as a matter of logical possibility, I

might have begun to exist five minutes ago, complete with all the memories

that  I  then  had.  We  ought  therefore  to  cut  out  events  remembered,  and

confine  the  solipsist’s  universe  to  present  percepts,  including  percepts  of

present  states  of  mind  which  purport  to  be  recollections.  With  regard  to

present percepts, this most rigorous type of solipsist (if he exists) accepts the

premiss of Descartes’ cogito, with some interpretation. What he admits can

only be correctly stated in the form: “A, B, C, … occur.” To call A, B, C, …

“thoughts”  adds  nothing  except  for  those  who  reject  solipsism.  What

distinguishes the consistent solipsist is the fact that the proposition “A occurs”,

if it comes in his list, is never inferred. He rejects as invalid all inferences from

one  or  more  propositions  of  the  form  “A  occurs”  to  other  propositions

asserting  the  occurrence  of  something,  whether  named  or  described.  The

conclusions of such inferences, he maintains, may or may not happen to be

true, but can never be known to be true.

  Having now stated the solipsist position, we must inquire what can be said

for and against it.

  The  argument  for  sceptical  solipsism  is  as  follows:  From  a  group  of

propositions of the form “A occurs”, it is impossible to infer by deductive logic

any  other  proposition  asserting  the  occurrence  of  something.  If  any  such

inference is to be valid, it must depend upon some non-deductive principle

such as causality or induction. No such principle can be shown to be even

probable by means of deductive arguments from a group of propositions ofthe form “A occurs”. (I shall be concerned in a later chapter with the proof of

this assertion.) For example, the validity of induction cannot be inferred from

the  course  of  events  except  by  assuming  induction  or  some  equally

questionable  postulate. Therefore  if,  as  empiricists  maintain,  all  our

knowledge is based on experience, it must be not only based on experience,

but  confined  to  experience;  for  it  is  only  by  assuming  some  principle  or

principles  which  experience  cannot  render  even  probable  that  anything

whatever can be proved by experience except the experience itself.

  I  think  this  argument  proves  that  we  have  to  choose  between  two

alternatives. Either we must accept sceptical solipsism in its most rigorous

form, or we must admit that we know, independently of experience, some

principle or principles by means of which it is possible to infer events from

other events, at least with probability. If we adopt the first alternative, we

must reject far more than solipsism is ordinarily thought to reject; we cannot

know of the existence of our own past or future, or have any ground for

expectations  as  to  our  own  future,  if  it  occurs.  If  we  adopt  the  second

alternative, we must partially reject empiricism; we must admit that we have

knowledge as to certain general features of the course of nature, and that this

knowledge,  though  it  may  be  caused  by  experience,  cannot  be  logically

inferred  from  experience.  We  must  admit  also  that,  if  we  have  such

knowledge, it is not yet explicit; causality and induction, in their traditional

forms,  cannot  be  quite  true,  and  it  is  by  no  means  clear  what  should  be

substituted for them. It thus appears that there are great difficulties in the way

of accepting either alternative.

  For my part, I reject the solipsist alternative and adopt the other. I admit,

what is of the essence of the matter, that the solipsist alternative cannot be

disproved by means of deductive arguments, provided we grant what I shall

call “the empiricist hypothesis”, namely that what we know without inference

consists solely of what we have experienced (or, more strictly, what we are

experiencing) together with the principles of deductive logic. But we cannot

know the empiricist hypothesis to be true, since that would be knowledge of a

sort that the hypothesis itself condemns. This does not prove the hypothesis to

be false, but it does prove that we have no right to assert it. Empiricism maybe a true philosophy, but if it is it cannot be known to be true; those who

assert that they know it to be true contradict themselves. There is therefore no

obstacle ab initio to our rejecting the empiricist hypothesis.

  As  against  solipsism  it  is  to  be  said,  in  the  first  place,  that  it  is

psychologically impossible to believe, and is rejected in fact even by those

who mean to accept it. I once received a letter from an eminent logician, Mrs.

Christine Ladd Franklin, saying that she was a solipsist, and was surprised

that there were no others. Coming from a logician, this surprise surprised me.

The fact that I cannot believe something does not prove that it is false, but it

does  prove  that  I  am  insincere  and  frivolous  if  I  pretend  to  believe  it.

Cartesian  doubt  has  value  as  a  means  of  articulating  our  knowledge  and

showing  what  depends  on  what,  but  if  carried  too  far  it  becomes  a  mere

technical  game  in  which  philosophy  loses  seriousness.  Whatever  anybody,

even I myself, may argue to the contrary, I shall continue to believe that I am

not the whole universe, and in this every one will in fact agree with me, if I

am right in my conviction that other people exist.

  The most important part of the argument as to solipsism is the proof that

it is only tenable in its most drastic form. There are various half-way positions

which are not altogether unplausible, and have in fact been accepted by many

philosophers. Of these the least drastic is the view that there can never be

good  grounds  for  asserting  the  existence  of  something  which  no  one

experiences; from this we may, with Berkeley, infer the unreality of matter

while  retaining  the  reality  of  mind.  But  this  view,  since  it  admits  the

experiences of others than myself, and since these experiences are only known

to me by inference, considers that it is possible to argue validly from the

existence  of  certain  occurrences  to  the  existence  of  others;  and  if  this  is

admitted, it will be found that there is no reason why the inferred events

should be experienced. Exactly similar considerations apply to the form of

solipsism which believes that oneself has a past and a probable future; this

belief can only be justified by admitting principles of inference which lead to

the rejection of every form of solipsism.

  We are thus reduced to the two extreme hypotheses as alone logically

defensible.  Either,  on  the  one  hand,  we  know  principles  of  non-deductiveinference which justify our belief, not only in other people, but in the whole

physical  world,  including  the  parts  which  are  never  perceived  but  only

inferred from their effects; or, on the other hand, we are confined to what

may  be  called  “solipsism  of  the  moment”,  in  which  the  whole  of  my

knowledge is limited to what I am now noticing, to the exclusion of my past

and probable future, and also of all those sensations to which, at this instant, I

am not paying attention. When this alternative is clearly realized, I do not

think  that  anybody  would  honestly  and  sincerely  choose  the  second

hypothesis.

  If solipsism of the moment is rejected, we must seek to discover what are

the synthetic principles of inference by the knowledge of which our scientific

and common-sense beliefs are to be justified in their broad outlines. To this

task we shall address ourselves in Part VI. But it will be well first to make a

survey, on the one hand of data, and on the other hand of scientific beliefs

interpreted in their least questionable form. By analysing the results of this

survey  we  may  hope  to  discover  the  premisses  which,  consciously  or

unconsciously, are assumed in the reasonings of science.                                          III 


      Probable Inference in Common-Sense


                                      Practice


A “PROBABLE” inference (to repeat what has already been said) is one in which,

when  the  premisses  are  true  and  the  reasoning  correct,  the  conclusion  is

nevertheless not certain but only probable in a greater or less degree. In the

practice of science there are two kinds of inferences: those that are purely

mathematical, and those that may be called “substantial”. The inference from

Kepler’s  laws  to  the  law  of  gravitation  as  applied  to  the  planets  is

mathematical, but the inference from the recorded apparent motions of the

planets  to  Kepler’s  laws  is  substantial,  for  Kepler’s  laws  are  not  the  only

hypotheses logically compatible with observed facts. Mathematical inference

has been sufficiently investigated during the last half-century. What I wish to

discuss is non-mathematical inference, which is always only probable.

  I shall, broadly speaking, accept as valid any inference which is part of the

accepted body of scientific theory, unless it contains some error of a specific

kind. I shall not consider the arguments for scepticism concerning science, but

shall analyse scientific inference on the hypothesis that it is in general valid.

  My concern in this chapter will be mainly with pre-scientific knowledge

as embodied in common sense.

  We must bear in mind the distinction between inference as understood in

logic and what may be called “animal inference”. By “animal inference” I

mean what happens when an occurrence A causes a belief B without any

conscious intermediary. When a dog smells a fox he becomes excited, but we

do  not  think  that  he  says  to  himself:  “This  smell  has  in  the  past  been

frequently  associated  with  the  neighbourhood  of  a  fox;  therefore  there  is

probably a fox in the neighbourhood now.” He acts, it is true, as he would if

he went through this reasoning, but the reasoning is performed by the body,

through habit, or the “conditioned reflex” as it is called. Whenever A has, inthe animal’s past experience, been frequently associated with B, where B is

something of emotional interest, the occurrence of A tends to cause behaviour

appropriate to B. There is here no conscious connection of A and B; there is,

we  may  say,  A-perception  and  B-behaviour.  In  old-fashioned  language,  it

would be said that the “impression” of A causes the “idea” of B. But the newer

phraseology,  in  terms  of  bodily  behaviour  and  observable  habit,  is  more

precise and covers a wider field.

  Most substantial inferences in science, as opposed to merely mathematical

inferences, arise, in the first place, from analysis of animal inferences. But

before  developing  this  aspect  of  our  subject,  let  us  consider  the  scope  of

animal inference in human behaviour.

  The practical (as opposed to the theoretical) understanding of language

comes under the head of animal inference. Understanding a word consists

practically of (a) the effects of hearing it, and (b) the causes of uttering it. You

understand the word “fox” if, when you hear it, you have an impulse to act in

a manner appropriate to the presence of a fox, and when you see a fox, you

have  an  impulse  to  say  “fox”.  But  you  do  not  need  to  be  aware  of  this

connection between foxes and the word “fox”; the inference from the word to

the fox or from the fox to the word is an animal inference. It is otherwise with

erudite words, such as “dodecahedron”. We learn the meaning of such words

through a verbal definition, and in such cases the connection of word and

meaning begins by being a conscious inference before it becomes a habit.

  Words are a particular case of signs. We may say that, to a given organism

                                                      1
O, a member of a class of stimuli A is a sign of some member of a class of

objects B if the occurrence to O of a stimulus of class A produces a reaction

appropriate to an object of class B. But this is not yet quite precise. Before

seeking further precision, let us consider a concrete example, say “no smoke

without fire”.

  There are various stages to be gone through before this proverb can be

enunciated. First, there must be repeated experience of both smoke and fire,

either  simultaneously  or  in  close  temporal  succession.  Originally,  each

produced  its  own  reaction,  (say)  smoke  that  of  sniffing,  and  fire  that  of

running away. But in time a habit is formed, and smoke produces the reactionof  running  away.  (I  am  assuming  an  environment  where  forest  fires  are

frequent.) Some ages after the first formation of this habit, two new habits are

formed: smoke leads to the word “smoke”, and fire leads to the word “fire”.

Where these three habits exist—smoke causing a reaction appropriate to fire,

smoke  causing  the  word  “smoke”  and  fire  causing  the  word  “fire”—the

materials exist for the formation of a fourth habit, that of the word “smoke”

causing the word “fire”. When this habit exists in a reflective philosopher, it

may  cause  the  sentence  “no  smoke  without  fire”.  Such,  at  least,  is  a  bare

outline of a very complex process.

  In the above example, when all these habits exist, smoke is a sign of fire,

the word “smoke” is a sign of smoke, and the word “fire” is a sign of fire.

Perhaps it may be assumed that the sign-relation is often transitive, i.e. that, if

A is a sign of B and B is a sign of C, then A is a sign of C. This will not be

invariably the case, but it will tend to happen if the sign-relations of A and B,

B and C are very firmly established in the animal’s organism. In that case,

when the word “smoke” is a sign of smoke, and smoke is a sign of fire, the

word “smoke” will be, derivatively, a sign of fire. If fire causes the word “fire”,

the word “smoke” will thus have become, derivatively, a cause of the word

“fire”.

  Let us set up a definition: An organism O has an “idea” of a kind of object

B when its action is appropriate to B although no object of the kind B is

sensibly present. This, however, requires some limitation. An “idea” need not

produce all the reactions that would be produced by the object; this is what

we mean by saying that an idea may be faint, or not vividly imagined. There

may be nothing but the word “B”. Thus we shall say that the idea of B is

present to O whenever O shows some reaction appropriate to B and to nothing

else.

  We can now say that A is a sign of B when A causes the “idea” of B.

  We  have  used  the  word  “appropriate”,  and  this  word  needs  further

definition. It must not be defined teleologically, as “useful to the organism” or

what not. The reaction “appropriate” to B is primarily the reaction caused by

the sensible presence of B, independently of acquired habits. A cry of pain on

contact with something very hot is an appropriate reaction in this sense. Butwe  cannot  altogether  exclude  acquired  habits  from  our  definition  of

appropriate reactions. To say “fox” when you see a fox is appropriate. We may

make a distinction: there is no situation to which, apart from acquired habits,

we  react  by  saying  “fox”. We  may  therefore  decide  to  include  among

“appropriate” reactions those which, as a result of habit, occur in the presence

of  the  object  B,  but  do  not  occur  spontaneously  as  reactions  to  anything

except B, and do not occur as habitual reactions to anything other than B

except as a result of a combination of habits.

  The  above  discussion  gives  the  definition  of  what  may  be  called  a

“subjective” sign, when A causes the idea of B. We may say that A is an

“objective” sign of B when A is in fact followed or accompanied by B, and not

only by the idea of B. We may say roughly that there is error on the part of an

organism whenever a subjective sign is not also an objective sign; but such a

statement is not correct without qualification.

    Qualification  is  required  because  we  must  distinguish  an  idea

accompanied by belief from one merely entertained. If you had two friends

called Box and Cox, it is probable that the sight of Box would cause the idea

of Cox, but not the belief in the presence of Cox. I think that entertaining an

idea without belief is a more complex occurrence than entertaining it with

belief. An idea is or involves (I will not argue which) an impulse to a certain

kind of action. When the impulse is uninhibited, the idea is “believed”; when

inhibited, the idea is merely “entertained”. In the former case we may call the

idea “active”, in the latter “suspended”. Error is only connected with active

ideas. Thus there is error when a subjective sign produces an active idea,

although there is no such sequence between the sign and the object of the

idea.

  Error, according to this view, is pre-intellectual; it requires only bodily

habits. There is error when a bird flies against a pane of glass which it does

not see. We all, like the bird, entertain rash beliefs which may, if erroneous,

lead  to  painful  shocks.  Scientific  method,  I  suggest,  consists  mainly  in

eliminating those beliefs which there is positive reason to think a source of

shocks,  while  retaining  those  against  which  no  definite  argument  can  be

brought.  In what I have been saying I have been assuming causal laws of the form

“A causes B”, where A and B are classes of occurrences. Such laws are perhaps

never wholly true. True laws can only be expressed in differential equations.

But it is not necessary that they should be exactly true. What we need is only:

“In  a  good  deal  more  than  half  the  cases  in  which  A  occurs,  B  occurs

simultaneously or soon afterwards.” This makes B probable whenever A has

occurred, and that is as much as we should demand. I have assumed that if, in

the history of a given organism, A has often been followed by B, A will be

accompanied or quickly followed by the “idea” of B, i.e. by an impulse to the

actions which would be stimulated by B. This law is inevitably vague. If A

and  B  are  emotionally  interesting  to  the  organism,  one  case  of  their

conjunction may suffice to set up a habit; if not, many may be needed. The

conjunction  of  54  and  6  times  9  has,  for  most  children,  little  emotional

interest; hence the difficulty of learning the multiplication table. On the other

hand, “once bit twice shy” shows how easily a habit is formed when the

emotional interest is strong.

  As appears from what we have been saying, science starts, and must start,

from  rough  and  ready  generalizations  which  are  only  approximately  true,

many of which exist as animal inferences before they are put into words. The

process is as follows: A is followed by B a certain number of times; then A is

accompanied by the expectation of B; then (probably much later) comes the

explicit judgment “A is a sign of B”; and only then, when multitudes of such

judgments already exist, can science begin. Then comes Hume, with his query

as to whether we ever have reason to regard A as an objective sign of B, or

even to suppose that we shall continue to think it a sign of B. This is a sketch

of the psychology of the subject; it has no direct bearing on its logic.

  The distinction between animal inference and scientific inference, I repeat,

is this: In animal inference, the percept A causes the idea of B, but there is no

awareness of the connection; in scientific inference (whether valid or invalid)

there is a belief involving both A and B, which I have expressed by “A is a

sign of B”. It is the occurrence of a single belief expressing a connection of A

and B that distinguishes what is commonly called inference from what I call

animal inference. But it is important to notice that the belief expressing theconnection  is,  in  all  the  most  elementary  cases,  preceded  by  the  habit  of

animal inference.

  Take, as an example, the belief in more or less permanent objects. A dog,

seeing his master on different occasions, reacts in a way which has some

constant features; this is the observable fact which we express by saying that

the dog “recognizes” his master. When the dog looks for his absent master,

something more than recognition is involved. It is difficult not to use unduly

intellectualist language to describe what occurs in such a case. One might be

tempted to say that there is a desire to replace an idea of an object by an

impression of it, but this is the sort of phrase that seems to say much and

really  says  little.  The  simplest  observable  fact  about  desire  in  animals  is

restless behaviour until a certain situation arises, and then relative quiescence.

There are also physiological facts about the secretions of the glands, such as

Pavlov employed. I am not denying that dogs have experiences more or less

similar to those which we have when we feel desire, but this is an inference

from their behaviour, not a datum. What we observe can be summed up by

saying that a certain part of the dog’s behaviour is unified by reference to his

master, as a planet’s behaviour is unified by reference to the sun. In the case

of the planet, we do not infer that it “thinks” about the sun; in the case of the

dog, most of us do make the corresponding inference. But that is a difference

with which we need not be concerned as yet.

  When we come to language, it is natural to have a single word for those

features of the environment which are connected together in the kind of way

in which appearances of the dog’s master are connected together for the dog.

Language has proper names for the objects with which we are most intimately

associated,  and  general  names  for  other  objects.  Proper  names  embody  a

common-sense metaphysic, which, as animal inference, antedates language.

Consider such children’s questions as “Where’s mother?” “Where’s my ball?”

These imply that mothers and balls, when not sensibly present, nevertheless

exist somewhere, and can probably be made sensible by suitable action. This

belief in permanent or quasi-permanent objects is based upon recognition, and

thus implies memory in some sense. However that may be, it is clear that, by

the time a child begins to speak, he has a habit of similar reactions to a certaingroup of stimuli, which, when reflected upon, becomes a belief in persistent

common-sense objects. Much the same must have been true of mankind when

developing  language.  The  metaphysic  of  more  or  less  permanent  objects

underlies the vocabulary and syntax of every language, and is the basis of the

concept of substance. The only point about it that I am concerned to make at

the  moment  is  that  it  results  from  intellectualizing  the  animal  inference

involved in recognition.

  I come now to memory. What I wish to say about memory is, that its

general  though  not  invariable  trustworthiness  is  a  premiss of  scientific

knowledge, which is necessary if science is to be accepted as mainly true, but

is  not  capable  of  being  made  even  probable  by  arguments  which  do  not

assume memory. More precisely: When I remember something, it is probable

that what I remember occurred, and I can form some estimate of the degree of

probability by the vividness of my recollection.

  Let us first make clear what is meant logically by saying that memory is a

premiss of knowledge. It would be a mistake to set up a general statement of

the form: “What is remembered probably occurred.” It is rather each instance

of  memory  that  is  a  premiss.  That  is  to  say,  we  have  beliefs  about  past

occurrences  which  are  not  inferred  from  other  beliefs,  but  which,

nevertheless,  we  should  not  abandon  except  on  very  cogent  grounds.  (By

“we”, here, I mean people versed in scientific method and careful as to what

they  believe.)  The  cogent  grounds  must  necessarily  involve  one  or  more

scientific laws, and also matters of fact, which may be either perceived or

remembered. When Macbeth’s witches vanish, he doubts whether he ever saw

them, because he believes in the persistence of material objects. But although

any  memory  may  come  to  be  thought  mistaken,  it  always  has  a  certain

weight, which makes us accept it in the absence of contrary evidence.

  A few words must be said at this point about scientific laws as opposed to

particular facts. It is only by assuming laws that one fact can make another

probable  or  improbable.  If  I  remember  that  at  noon  yesterday  I  was  in

America, but five minutes earlier I was in Kamchatka, I shall think that one of

my  memories  must  be  mistaken,  because  I  am  firmly  persuaded  that  the

journey cannot be performed in five minutes. But why do I think this? As anempiricist,  I  hold  that  laws  of  nature  should  be  inferred  inductively  from

particular facts. But how am I to establish particular facts about how long a

journey  has  taken?  It  is  clear  that  I  must  rely  partly  on  memory,  since

otherwise I shall not know that I have taken a journey. The ultimate evidence

for  any  scientific  law  consists  of  particular  facts,  together  with  those

principles of scientific inference which it is my purpose to investigate. When I

say  that  memory  is  a  premiss,  I  mean  that,  among  the  facts  upon  which

scientific  laws  are  based,  some  are  admitted  solely  because  they  are

remembered. They are admitted, however, only as probable, and any one of

them may be rejected later, after scientific laws have been discovered which

make  the  particular  memory  improbable.  But  this  improbability  is  only

arrived at by assuming that most memories are veridical.

  The necessity of memory as a premiss may be made evident by asking the

question: what reason have we for rejecting the hypothesis that the world

came into existence five minutes ago? If it had begun then just as, in fact, it

then was, containing people with the habits and supposed memories that in

fact people then had, there would be no possible way of finding out that they

had only just begun to exist. Yet there is nothing logically impossible in the

hypothesis. Nothing that is happening now logically implies anything that

happened at another time. And the laws of nature by which we infer the past

are themselves, as we have seen, dependent upon memories for the evidence

in  their  favour.  Consequently  remembered  facts  must  be  included  with

perceived facts as part of our data, though we may as a rule assign a lower

degree of credence to them than we do to facts of present perception.

  There is a distinction to be made here, which is not without importance. A

recollection is a present fact: I remember now what I did yesterday. When I

say that memory is a premiss, I do not mean that from my present recollection

I can infer the past event recollected. This may be in some sense true, but is

not the important fact in this connection. The important fact is that the past

occurrence is itself a premiss for my knowledge. It cannot be inferred from the

present  fact  of  my  recollecting  it  except  by  assuming  the  general

trustworthiness of memory, i.e. that an event remembered probably did take

place. It is this that is the memory-premiss of knowledge.  It must be understood that, when I say that this or that is a premiss, I do

not mean that it is certainly true; I mean only that it is something to be taken

account of in arriving at the truth, but not itself inferred from something

believed to be true. The situation is the same as that in a criminal trial in

which the witnesses contradict each other. Each witness has a certain prima

facie weight, and we have to seek a consistent system embracing as many of

their statements as possible.

  I come now to another source of knowledge, namely testimony. I do not

think that the general truthfulness of testimony needs to be a premiss in the

finished  structure  of  scientific  knowledge,  but it  is  a  premiss  in  the  early

stages, and animal inference makes us prone to believe it. Moreover I think we

shall find that, in the finished structure of science, there is a general premiss

which is needed to secure the probable trustworthiness of testimony as well as

certain other things.

  Let us first consider common-sense arguments, such as would have weight

in a law court. If twelve people, each of whom lies as often as he speaks the

truth, independently testify to a certain occurrence, the odds are 4095 to 1 that

they are testifying truly. This may be taken as practical certainty, unless the

twelve people all have a special motive for lying. This may happen. If two

ships have a collision at sea, all the sailors on one ship swear one thing, and

all the sailors on the other swear the opposite. If one of the ships has been

sunk  with  all  hands,  there  will  be  unanimous  testimony,  about  which,

nevertheless, lawyers experienced in such cases will feel sceptical. But we

need not pursue such arguments, which are a matter for lawyers rather than

philosophers.

  The  common-sense  practice  is  to  accept  testimony  unless  there  is  a

positive reason against doing so in the particular case concerned. The cause,

though not the justification, of this practice is the animal inference from a

word or sentence to what it signifies. If you are engaged in a tiger hunt and

somebody exclaims “tiger “ your body will, unless you inhibit your impulses,

get into a state very similar to that in which it would be if you saw a tiger.

Such a state is the belief that a tiger is in the neighbourhood; thus you will be

believing the testimony of the man who said “tiger”. The creation of suchhabits is half of learning the English language; the other half is the creation of

the  habit  of  saying  “tiger  “  when  you  see  one.  (I  am  omitting  niceties  of

grammar  and  syntax.)  You  can,  of  course,  learn  to  inhibit  the  impulse  to

belief; you may come to know that your companion is a practical joker. But an

inhibited  impulse  still  exists,  and  if  it  ceased  to  exist  you  would  cease  to

understand  the  word  “tiger”.  This  applies  even  to  such  dry  statements  as

“tigers are found in India and Eastern Asia”. You may think you hear this

statement without any of the emotions appropriate to tigers, and yet it may

cause during the following night a nightmare from which you wake in a cold

sweat, showing that the impulses appropriate to the word “tiger” survived

subconsciously.

  It is this primitive credulity about testimony which causes the success of

advertising. Unless you are an unusually sophisticated person, you will, if you

are told often and emphatically that so-and-so’s soaps or politics are the best,

in  the  end  come  to  believe  it,  with  the  result  that  so-and-so  becomes  a

millionaire or a dictator as the case may be. However, I do not want to stray

into politics, so I will say no more about this aspect of the belief in testimony.

    Testimony must be distinguished from information as to the meaning of a

word, though the distinction is not always easy. You learn the correct use of

the word “cat” because your parents say “cat” when you are noticing a cat. If

they were not sufficiently truthful for this—if, when you are noticing a cat,

they  said  sometimes  “dog”,  sometimes  “cow”,  sometimes  “crocodile”—you

could  never  learn  to  speak  correctly.  The  fact  that  we  do  learn  to  speak

correctly is a testimonial to the habitual veracity of parents. But while, from

the parent’s point of view, his utterance of the word “cat” is a statement, from

the child’s point of view it is merely a step in the acquisition of language-

habits. It is only after the child knows the meaning of the word “cat” that your

utterance of the word is a statement for him as well as for you.

    Testimony is very important in one respect, namely, that it helps to build

up the distinction between the comparatively public world of sense and the

private world of thought, which is already well established when scientific

thinking begins. I was once giving a lecture to a large audience when a cat

stalked in and lay down at my feet. The behaviour of the audience persuadedme that I was not suffering from a hallucination. Some of our experiences, but

not  all,  appear  from  the  behaviour  of  others  (including  testimony)  to  be

common to all who are in a certain neighbourhood and are making use of

normal  senses.  Dreams  have  not  this  public  character;  no  more  do  most

“thoughts”. It must be noticed that the public character of (say) a clap of

thunder is an inference, originally an animal inference. I hear thunder, and a

person standing beside me says “thunder”. I infer that he heard thunder, and

until I become a philosopher I make this inference with my body, i.e. my mind

emerges believing that he heard the thunder without having gone through a

“mental” process. When I become a philosopher I have to examine the body’s

inferential propensities, including the belief in a public world which it has

inferred from observing behaviour (especially speech-behaviour) similar to its

own.

  From the point of view of the philosopher, the interesting question is not

only whether the testimony you hear is intended to be truthful, but whether it

has any intention of conveying information. There are here various stages

towards meaninglessness. When you hear an actor on the stage say “I have

supped full with horrors”, you do not think he is complaining about rationing,

and you know that his statements are not intended to be believed. When you

hear a soprano voice on a phonograph lamenting her lover’s faithlessness in

anguished tones, you know that there is no lady in the box, and that the lady

who  made  the  record  was  not  expressing  her  own  emotions,  but  only

intending to give you pleasure in the contemplation of an imaginary sorrow.

Then there was the Scotch ghost in the eighteenth century, which kept on

repeating:  “Once  I  was  hap-hap-happy  but  noo  I  am  meeserable”,  which

turned out to be a rusty spit. Lastly, there are the people in dreams, who say

all sorts of things that, when we wake up, we are convinced nobody did say.

  For all these reasons, we cannot accept testimony at its face value. The

question arises: why should we accept it at all?

  We depend here, as we do when we believe in sound waves and light

waves,  upon  an  inference  going  beyond  our  experience.  Why  should  not

everything that seems to us to be testimony be like either the creakings of the

rusty spit or the conversation of people in dreams? We cannot refute thishypothesis by reliance upon experience, for our experience may be exactly the

same whether the hypothesis is true or false. And in any inference beyond

future as well as past experience we cannot rely upon induction. Induction

argues  that,  if  A  has  been  frequently found  to  be  followed  by  B,  it  will

probably be found to be followed by B next time. This is a principle which

remains entirely within experience, actual or possible.

  In the case of testimony, we depend upon analogy. The behaviour of other

people’s bodies—and especially their speech behaviour—is noticeably similar

to our own, and our own is noticeably associated with “mental” phenomena.

(For the moment it does not matter what we mean by “mental”.) We therefore

argue  that  other  people’s  behaviour  is  also  associated  with  “mental”

phenomena. Or rather, we accept this at first as an animal inference, and

invent the analogy argument afterwards to rationalize the already existing

belief.

  Analogy differs from induction—at least as I am using the words—by the

fact that an analogical inference, when it passes outside experience, cannot be

verified. We cannot enter into the minds of others to observe the thoughts and

emotions  which  we  infer  from  their  behaviour.  We  must  therefore  accept

analogy—in the sense in which it goes beyond experience—as an independent

premiss  of  scientific  knowledge,  or  else  we  must  find  some  other  equally

effective principle.

  The  principle  of  analogical  inference  will  have  to  be  more  or  less  as

follows: Given a class of cases in which A is accompanied or succeeded by B,

and another class of cases in which it cannot be ascertained whether B is

present or not, there is a probability (varying according to circumstances) that

in these cases also B is present.

  This is not an accurate statement of the principle, which will need various

limitations.  But  the  necessary  further  refinements  would  not  make  much

difference in relation to the problem with which we are concerned.

  A further step away from experience is involved in the inference to such

things as sound waves and light waves. Let us concentrate on the former.

Suppose at a point O, from which many roads radiate, you place a charge of

gunpowder, and at a certain moment you cause it to explode. Every hundredyards along these roads you station an observer with a flag. A person in a

stationary balloon observes all the observers, who have orders to wave their

flags when they hear the noise of the gunpowder exploding. It is found that

those who are equidistant from O all wave their flags at the same moment,

while those who are further from O wave their flags later than those who are

nearer; moreover, the time that elapses between the seen explosion and the

waving of a given observer’s flag is proportional to his distance from O. It is

inferred  by  science  (common  sense  concurring)  that  some  process  travels

outward from O, and that, therefore, something connected with the sound is

happening, not only where there are observers, but also where there are none.

In this inference we pass outside all experience, not only outside our personal

experience as in the case of testimony. We cannot therefore interpret science

wholly in terms of experience, even when we include all experience.

  The principle used in the above inference may be called, provisionally, the

principle of spatio-temporal continuity in causal laws. This is the same thing

as  denial  of  action  at  a  distance.  We  cannot  believe  that  sounds  arrive

successively at successive observers unless something has travelled over the

intervening space. If we deny this, our world becomes altogether too staccato

to be credible. The basis of our belief, presumably, is the continuity of all

observed  motions;  thus  perhaps  analogy  can  be  stretched  to  cover  this

inference. However, there is much to be said before we can be clear as to the

principle governing such inferences. I therefore leave the further consideration

of this subject for a later chapter.

  So far, I have been concerned in collecting rough and ready examples of

elementary scientific inference. It remains to give precision to the results of

our preliminary survey.

  I will end with a summary of the results of our present discussion.

  When we begin to reflect, we find ourselves possessed of a number of

habits which may be called “animal inferences”. These habits consist of acting

in the presence of A more or less as we should in the presence of B, and they

result from the past conjunction of A and B in our experience. These habits,

when we become conscious of them, cause such beliefs as “A is always (or

usually) followed by B”. This is one of the main sources of the stock of beliefswith which we start when we begin to be scientific; in particular, it includes

the understanding of language.

  Another pre-scientific belief which survives in science is the belief in more

or less permanent objects, such as people and things. The progress of science

refines this belief, and in modern quantum theory not very much remains of

it, but science could hardly have been created without it.

  The  general,  though  not  universal,  trustworthiness  of  memory  is  an

independent postulate. It is necessary to much of our knowledge, and cannot

be established by inference from anything that does not assume it.

    Testimony is, like memory, part of the sources of our primitive beliefs. But

it need not itself be made into a premiss, since it can be merged in the wider

premiss of analogy.

  Finally, to infer such things as sound waves and light waves we need a

principle which may be called spatio-temporal causal continuity, or denial of

action  at  a  distance.  But  this  last  principle  is  complicated,  and  demands

further discussion.1 Or, more correctly, a “subjective sign”.                                          IV 


                    Physics and Experience


THE question to be discussed in this Chapter is one which, in my opinion, has

been  far  too  little  considered.  It  is  this:  Assuming  physics  to  be  broadly

speaking true, can we know it to be true, and, if the answer is to be in the

affirmative,  does  this  involve  knowledge  of  other  truths  besides  those  of

physics? We might find that, if the world is such as physics says it is, no

organism could know it to be such; or that, if an organism can know it to be

such, it must know some things other than physics, more particularly certain

principles of probable inference.

  This question becomes acute through the problem of perception. There

have, from the earliest times, been two types of theory as to perception, one

empirical,  the  other  idealist.  According  to  the  empirical  theory,  some

continuous chain of causation leads from the object to the percipient, and

what is called “perceiving” the object is the last link in this chain, or rather the

last before the chain begins to lead out of the percipient’s body instead of into

it. According to the idealist theory, when a percipient happens to be in the

neighbourhood of an object a divine illumination causes the percipient’s soul

to have an experience which is like the object.

  Each of these theories has its difficulties.

  The  idealist  theory  has  its  origin  in  Plato,  but  reaches  its  logical

culmination in Leibniz, who held that the world consists of monads which

never interact, but which all go through parallel developments, so that what

happens to me at any instant has a similarity to what is happening to you at

the same instant. When you think you move your arm, I think I see you

moving  it;  thus  we  are  both  deceived,  and  no  one  before  Leibniz  was

sufficiently acute to unmask the deception, which he regards as the best proof

of God’s goodness. This theory is fantastic, and has had few adherents; but in

less  logical  forms  portions  of  the  idealistic  theory  of  perception  are  to  be

found even among those who think themselves most remote from it.    Philosophy  is  an  offshoot  of  theology,  and  most  philosophers,  like

Malvolio, “think nobly of the soul”. They are therefore pre-disposed to endow

it with magical powers, and to suppose that the relation between perceiving

and  what  is  perceived  must  be  something  utterly  different  from  physical

causation.  This  view  is  reinforced  by  the  belief  that  mind  and  matter  are

completely disparate, and that perceiving, which is a mental phenomenon,

must be totally unlike an occurrence in the brain, which is all that can be

attributed to physical causation.

  The theory that perceiving depends upon a chain of physical causation is

apt to be supplemented by a belief that to every state of the brain a certain

state of the mind “corresponds”, and vice versa, so that, given either the state

of the brain or the state of the mind, the other could be inferred by a person

who sufficiently understood the correspondence. If it is held that there is no

causal interaction between mind and brain, this is merely a new form of the

pre-established  harmony.  But  if  causation  is  regarded—as  it  usually  is  by

empiricists—as  nothing  but  invariable  sequence  or  concomitance,  then  the

supposed  correspondence  of  brain  and  mind  tautologically  involves  causal

interaction. The whole question of the dependence of mind on body or body

on mind has been involved in quite needless obscurity owing to the emotions

involved.  The  facts  are  quite  plain.  Certain  observable  occurrences  are

commonly  called  “physical”,  certain  others  “mental”;  sometimes  “physical”

occurrences appear as causes of “mental” ones, sometimes vice versa. A blow

causes me to feel pain, a volition causes me to move my arm. There is no

reason to question either of these causal connections, or at any rate no reason

which does not apply to all causal connections equally.

  These considerations remove one set of difficulties that stand in the way

of acceptance of the physical theory of perception.

  The  common-sense  arguments  in  favour  of  the  physical  causation  of

perceptions are so strong that only powerful prejudices could have caused

them to be questioned. When we shut our eyes we do not see, when we stop

our  ears  we  do  not  hear,  when  we  are  under  an  anaesthetic  we  perceive

nothing. The appearance that a thing presents can be altered by jaundice,

short  sight,  microscopes,  mists,  etc.  The  time  at  which  we  hear  a  sounddepends upon our distance from its physical point of origin. The same is true

of what we see, though the velocity of light is so great that, where terrestrial

objects are concerned, the time between an occurrence and our seeing of it is

inappreciable. If it is by a divine illumination that we perceive objects, it must

be admitted that the illumination adapts itself to physical conditions.

  There  are,  however,  two  objections  to  the  physical  causation  of

perceptions. One is that it makes it impossible, or at least very difficult, to

suppose that external objects are what they seem to be; the other is that it

seems to make it doubtful whether the occurrences that we call “perceptions”

can really be a source of knowledge as to the physical world. The first of these

may be ignored as having only to do with prejudices, but the second is more

important.

  The  problem  is  this:  Every  empiricist  holds  that  our  knowledge  as  to

matters of fact is derived from perception, but if physics is true there must be

so little resemblance between our percepts and their external causes that it is

difficult to see how, from percepts, we can acquire a knowledge of external

objects. The problem is further complicated by the fact that physics has been

inferred from perception. Historically, physicists started from naïve realism,

that is to say, from the belief that external objects are exactly as they seem; on

the basis of this assumption, they developed a theory which made matter

something quite unlike what we perceive. Thus their conclusion contradicted

their  premiss,  though  no  one  except  a  few  philosophers  noticed  this.  We

therefore have to decide whether, if physics is true, the hypothesis of naïve

realism can be so modified that there shall be a valid inference from percepts

to physics. In a word: If physics is true, is it possible that it should be known?

  Let us first try to define what we are to mean by the hypothesis that

physics is true. I want to adopt this hypothesis only to the extent to which it

appeals to educated common sense. We find that the theories of physicists

constantly undergo modification, so that no prudent man of science would

expect any physical theory to be quite unchanged a hundred years hence. But

when theories change, the alteration usually has only a small effect so far as

observable  phenomena  are  concerned.  The practical  difference  between

Einstein’s  theory  of  gravitation  and  Newton’s  is  very  minute,  though  thetheoretical difference is very great. Moreover, in every new theory there are

some parts that seem pretty certain, while others remain very speculative.

Einstein’s substitution of space-time for space and time represents a change of

language for which there are the same sort of grounds of simplicity as there

were for the Copernican change of language. This part of Einstein’s theory

may be accepted with considerable confidence. But the view that the universe

is a three-dimensional sphere of finite diameter remains speculative; no one

would be surprised if evidence were found which would lead astronomers to

give up this way of speaking.

  Or,  again,  take  the  physical  theory  of  light.  No  one  doubts  that  light

travels at the rate of roughly 300,000 kilometers per second, but whether it

consists  of  waves,  or  of  particles  called  photons,  is  a  matter  as  to  which

dispute has been possible. In the case of sound, on the other hand, the wave

theory may be accepted as firmly established.

  Every physical theory which survives goes through three stages. In the

first stage, it is a matter of controversy among specialists; in the second stage,

the specialists are agreed that it is the theory which best fits the available

evidence,  though  it  may  well  hereafter  be  found  incompatible  with  new

evidence; in the third stage, it is thought very unlikely that any new evidence

will do more than somewhat modify it.

  When I say that I shall assume physics to be true, I mean that I shall

accept  those  parts  of  physics  which  have  reached  the  third  stage,  not  as

certain,  but  as  more  probable  than  any  philosophical  speculation,  and

therefore  proper  to  be  accepted  by  philosophers  as  a  premiss  in  their

arguments.

  Let us now see what the most certain parts of physics have to say that is

relevant to our present problem.

  The great physical discoveries of the seventeenth century were made by

means of two working hypotheses. One of these was that causal laws in the

physical world need only take account of matter and motion, matter being

composed of particles persisting through time but continuously changing their

positions in space. It was assumed that, so far as physics is concerned, there is

no need to take account of anything about a particle except its position inspace at various times; that is to say, we might suppose particles to differ only

in position, not in quality. At first, this was hardly more than a definition of

the  word  “physics”;  when  it  was  necessary  to  take  account  of  qualitative

differences, we were concerned with a different subject, called “chemistry”.

During  the  present  century,  however,  the  modern  theory  of  the  atom  has

reduced chemistry, theoretically, to physics, This has enormously extended

the scope of the hypothesis that different particles of matter differ only in

position.

  Does this hypothesis apply also to physiology, or is the behaviour of living

matter subject to laws different from those governing dead matter? Vitalists

maintain the latter view, but I think the former has the greater weight of

authority in its favour. What can be said is that, wherever a physiological

process is understood, it is found to follow the laws of physics and chemistry,

and  that,  further,  there  is  no  physiological  process  which  is  clearly  not

explicable by these laws. It is therefore the best hypothesis that physiology is

reducible to physics and chemistry. But this hypothesis has not nearly the

same degree of certainty as the reduction of chemistry to physics.

  I  shall  assume  henceforth  that  the  first  of  the  seventeenth-century

working hypotheses, which may be called the hypothesis of the homogeneity

of matter, applies throughout the physical world, and to living as well as dead

matter. I shall not constantly repeat that this theory is not certainly true; this

is to be taken as said once for all. I assume the theory because the weight of

evidence, though not conclusive, seems to me strongly in its favour.

  The second of the working hypotheses of the seventeenth century may be

called the hypothesis of the independence of causes; it is embodied in the

parallelogram law. In its simplest form it says such things as: If you walk for a

minute on the deck of a moving ship, you will reach the same point, relatively

to the water, as you would if first you stood still for a minute while the ship

moved, and then the ship stood still for a minute while you did your walk on

the deck. More generally, when a body is subject to several forces, the result

of their all acting at once for a given length of time is the same as would be

the result of their all acting by turns, each for the given length of time—or

rather, if the given length of time is very short this will be nearly true, and theshorter the time the more nearly true it will become. For instance, the moon is

attracted both by the earth and by the sun; in one second, it will move very

nearly  as  if,  for  one  second,  it  were  not  attracted  by  either,  but  went  on

moving as before, then for another second it were to move as if (starting from

rest) it were attracted by the earth only, then for another second as if (starting

from rest) it were attracted by the sun only. If we take a shorter time than a

second this will be more nearly true, approaching the limit of complete truth

as the period of time is indefinitely diminished.

  This principle is of the utmost importance technically. It enables us, when

we have studied the effects of a number of separate forces each acting singly,

to  calculate  the  effect  of  their  all  acting  together.  It  is  the  basis  of  the

mathematical methods employed in traditional physics. But it must be said

that it is not self-evident, except in simple cases like that of the man walking

on the deck of the ship. In other cases, it is to be believed if it works, but we

ought not to be surprised if we find that it sometimes does not work. In the

quantum  theory  of  the  atom  it  has  had  to  be  abandoned,  though  this  is

perhaps not definitive. However that may be, this second working hypothesis

is  much  less  securely  established  than  the  first.  It  holds,  at  least

approximately, over a wide field, but there is no good ground for believing

that it holds universally.

  The present century has somewhat modified the assumptions of physics.

First,  there  is  a  four-dimensional  manifold  of  events,  instead  of  the  two

manifolds of space and time; second, causal laws do not suffice to determine

individual events, but only statistical distributions; third, change is probably

discontinuous. These modifications would be more important to us than they

are,  but  for  the  fact  that  the  second  and  third  only  apply  effectively  to

microscopic phenomena, while the physical occurrences, such as speaking,

which are associated with “mental” events, are macroscopic. Therefore if a

human body works wholly in accordance with physical laws, it will still be

correct to use the laws of classical physics to determine what a man will say,

and generally what will be the large-scale motions of his body.

  This brings us to the problem of the relation of mind and matter, since

perception is commonly considered “mental” while the object perceived andthe stimulus to perceiving are considered “physical”. My own belief is that

there is no difficulty whatever about this problem. The supposed difficulties

have their origin in bad metaphysics and bad ethics. Mind and matter, we are

told, are two substances, and are utterly disparate. Mind is noble, matter is

base. Sin consists in subjection of the mind to the body. Knowledge, being one

of the noblest of mental activities, cannot depend upon sense, for sense marks

a  form  of  subjection  to matter,  and  is  therefore  bad.  Hence  the  Platonic

objection to identifying knowledge with perception. All this, you may think, is

antiquated, but it has left a trail of prejudices hard to overcome.

    Nevertheless, the distinction of mind and matter would hardly have arisen

if  it  had  not  some  foundation.  We  must  seek,  therefore,  for  one  or  more

distinctions  more  or  less  analogous  to  the  distinction  between  mind  and

matter. I should define a “mental” occurrence as one which can be known

without inference. But let us examine some more conventional definitions.

  We cannot use the Cartesian distinction between thought and extension, if

only  on  Leibniz’s  ground,  that  extension  involves  plurality  and  therefore

cannot be an attribute of a single substance. But we might try a somewhat

analogous  distinction.  Material  things,  we  may  say,  have  spatial  relations,

while mental things do not. The brain is in the head, but thoughts are not—so

at  least  philosophers  assure  us.  This  point  of  view  is  due  to  a  confusion

between different meanings of the word “space”. Among the things that I see

at a given moment there are spatial relations which are a part of my percepts;

if percepts are “mental”, as I should contend, then spatial relations which are

ingredients of percepts are also “mental”. Naïve realism identifies my percepts

with physical things; it assumes that the sun of the astronomers is what I see.

This involves identifying the spatial relations of my percepts with those of

physical things. Many people retain this aspect of naïve realism although they

have rejected all the rest.

  But this identification is indefensible. The spatial relations of physics hold

between  electrons,  protons,  neutrons,  etc.,  which  we  do  not  perceive;  the

spatial relations of visual percepts hold between things that we do perceive,

and in the last analysis between coloured patches. There is a rough correlation

between physical space and visual space, but it is very rough. First: depthsbecome indistinguishable when they are great. Second: the timing is different;

the place where the sun seems to be now corresponds to the place where the

physical sun was eight minutes ago. Third: the percept is subject to changes

which  the  physicist  does  not  attribute  to  changes  in  the  object,  e.g.  those

brought  about  by  clouds,  telescopes,  squinting,  or  closing  the  eyes.  The

correspondence between the percept and the physical object is therefore only

approximate, and it is no more exact as regards spatial relations than it is in

other respects. The sun of the physicist is not identical with the sun of my

percepts,  and  the  93,000,000  miles  that  separate  it  from  the  moon  are  not

identical with the spatial relation between the visual sun and the visual moon

when I happen to see both at once.

  When I say that something is “outside” me, there are two different things

that I may mean. I may mean that I have a percept which is outside the

percept of my body in perceptual space, or I may mean that there is a physical

object which is outside my body as a physical object in the space of physics.

Generally there is a rough correspondence between these two. The table that I

see is outside my body as I see it in perceptual space, and the physical table is

outside  my  physical  body  in  physical  space.  But  sometimes  the

correspondence fails. I dream, say, of a railway accident: I see the train falling

down an embankment, and I hear the shrieks of the injured. These dream-

objects  are  genuinely  and  truly  “outside”  my  dream  body  in  my  own

perceptual space. But when I wake up I find that the whole dream was due to

a noise in my ear. And when I say that the noise is in my ear, I mean that the

physical source of the sound that I experience is “in” my ear as a physical

object in physical space. In another sense, we might say that all noises are in

the ear, but if we confuse these two senses the result is an inextricable tangle.

    Generalizing, we may say that my percept of anything other than my

body  is  “outside”  the  percept  of  my  body  in  perceptual  space,  and  if  the

perception is not misleading the physical object is “outside” my physical body

in physical space. It does not follow that my percept is outside my physical

body. Indeed, such a hypothesis is prima facie meaningless, although, as we

shall see, a meaning can be found for it, and it is then false.

  We can now begin to tackle our central question, namely, what do wemean by a “percept”, and how can it be a source of knowledge as to something

other than itself?

  What  is  a  “percept”?  As  I  use  the  word,  it  is  what  happens  when,  in

common-sense terms, I see something or hear something or otherwise believe

myself  to  become  aware  of  something  through  my  senses.  The  sun,  we

believe, is always there, but I only sometimes see it: I do not see it at night, or

in cloudy weather, or when I am otherwise occupied. But sometimes I see it.

All the occasions on which I see the sun have a certain resemblance to each

other, which enabled me in infancy to learn to use the word “sun” on the right

occasions. Some of the resemblances between different occasions when I see

the sun are obviously in me; for example, I must have my eyes open and turn

in the right direction. These, therefore, we do not regard as properties of the

sun. But there are other resemblances which, so far as common sense can

discover, do not depend upon us; when we see the sun, it is almost always

round  and  bright  and  hot.  The  few  occasions  when  it  is  not  are  easily

explicable as due to fog or to an eclipse. Common sense therefore says: there

is  an  object  which  is  round  and  bright  and  hot;  the  kind  of  event  called

“seeing the sun” consists in a relation between me and this object, and when

this relation occurs I am “perceiving” the object.

  But at this point physics intervenes in a very awkward way. It assures us

that the sun is not “bright” in the sense in which we usually understand the

word; it is a source of light-rays which have a certain effect upon eyes and

nerves and brains, but when this effect is absent because the light-rays do not

encounter  a  living  organism,  there  is  nothing  that  can  be  properly  called

“brightness”. Exactly the same considerations apply to the words “hot” and

“round”—at least if “round” is understood as a perceptible quality. Moreover,

though you see the sun now, the physical object to be inferred from your

seeing existed eight minutes ago; if, in the intervening minutes, the sun had

gone out, you would still be seeing exactly what you are seeing. We cannot

therefore identify the physical sun with what we see; nevertheless what we

see is our chief reason for believing in the physical sun.

  Assuming  the  truth  of  physics,  what  is  there  in  its  laws  that  justifies

inferences  from  percepts  to  physical  objects?  Before  we  can  adequatelydiscuss this question, we must determine the place of percepts in the world of

physics. There is here a peculiarity: physics never mentions percepts except

when it speaks of empirical verification of its laws; but if its laws are not

concerned with percepts, how can percepts verify them? This question should

be borne in mind during the following discussions.

  The question of the position of percepts in the causal chains of physics is a

different one from that of the cognitive status of percepts, though the two are

interconnected. At the moment I am concerned with the location of percepts

in  causal  chains.  Now  a  percept—say  hearing  a  noise—has  a  series  of

antecedents, which travel in space-time from the physical source of the noise

through the air to the ears and brain. The experience which we call “hearing

the noise” is as nearly as can be determined simultaneous with the cerebral

term of the physical causal chain. If the noise is of the kind to call forth a

bodily movement, the movement begins almost immediately after “hearing

the noise”. If we are going to fit “hearing the noise” into a physical causal

chain, we must therefore connect it with the same region of space-time as that

of the accompanying cerebral events. And this applies also to the noise as

something perceived. The only region of space-time with which this noise has

any direct connection is the present state of the hearer’s brain; the connection

with the physical source of the sound is indirect. Exactly the same argument

applies to things seen.

  I am anxious to minimize the metaphysical assumptions to be made in this

connection.  You  may  hold  that  mind  and  matter  interact,  or  that,  as  the

Cartesians  contended,  they  run  in  parallel  series,  or  that,  as  materialists

believe,  mental  occurrences  are  mere  concomitants  of  certain  physical

occurrences,  determined  by  them  but  having  no  reciprocal  influence  on

physical events. What you hold in these respects has no bearing on the point

that  I  am  making.  What  I  am  saying  is  something  which  is  obvious  to

educated common sense, namely that, whether we consider the percept or the

simultaneous state of the brain, the causal location of either is intermediate

between  occurrences  in  afferent  nerves  constituting  the  stimulus,  and

occurrences in efferent nerves constituting the reaction.

  This  applies  not  only  to  the  perceiving,  which  we  naturally  regard  as“mental”, but to what we experience when we perceive. That is to say, it

applies not only to “seeing the sun”, but also to the sun, if we mean by “the

sun” something that a human being can experience. The astronomer’s sun is

inferred, it is not hot or bright, and it existed eight minutes before what is

called seeing it. If I see the sun and it makes me blink, what I see is not

93,000,000 miles and eight minutes away, but is causally (and therefore spatio-

temporally) intermediate between the light-waves striking the eye and the

consequent blinking.

  The dualistic view of perception, as a relation of a subject to an object, is

one which, following the leadership of William James, empiricists have now

for the most part abandoned. The distinction between “seeing the sun” as a

mental  event,  and  the immediate  object  of  my  seeing,  is  now  generally

rejected as invalid, and in this view I concur. But many of those who take the

view that I take on this point nevertheless inconsistently adhere to some form

of naïve realism. If my seeing of the sun is identical with the sun that I see,

then the sun that I see is not the astronomer’s sun. For exactly the same

reasons, the tables and chairs that I see, if they are identical with my seeing of

them, are not located where physics says they are, but where my seeing is.

You may say that my seeing, being mental, is not in space; if you do, I will not

argue the point. But I shall none the less insist that there is one, and only one,

region of space-time with which my seeing is always causally bound up, and

that is my brain at the time of the seeing. And exactly the same is true of all

objects of sense-perception.

  We  are  now  in  a  position  to  consider  the  relation  between  a  physical

occurrence and the subsequent occurrence popularly regarded as seeing it.

Consider, say, a flash of lightning on a dark night. The flash, for the physicist,

is  an  electrical  discharge,  which  causes  electromagnetic  waves  to  travel

outward from the region where it has taken place. These waves, if they meet

no  opaque  matter,  merely  travel  further  and  further;  but  when  they  meet

opaque matter their energy undergoes transformations into new forms. When

they happen to meet a human eye connected with a human brain, all sorts of

complicated things happen, which can be studied by the physiologist. At the

moment when this causal process reaches the brain, the person to whom thebrain belongs “sees” the flash. This person, if he is unacquainted with physics,

thinks that the flash is what takes place when he “sees” the flash; or rather, he

thinks that what takes place is a relation between himself and the flash, called

“perceiving” the flash. If he is acquainted with physics, he does not think this,

but he still holds that the sort of thing that takes place when he “sees” the

flash gives an adequate basis for knowledge of the physical world.

  We can now at last tackle the question: How, and to what extent, can

percepts be a source of knowledge as to physical objects? A percept, we have

agreed, comes at the end of a causal chain which starts at the object. (Of

course no causal chain really has either a beginning or an end. From another

point of view the percept is a beginning; it begins the reaction to a stimulus.)

If the percept is to be a source of knowledge of the object, it must be possible

to infer the cause from the effect, or at least to infer some characteristics of

the  cause.  In  this  backward  inference  from  effect  to  cause,  I  shall  for  the

present assume the laws of physics.

  If  percepts  are  to  allow  inferences  to  objects,  the  physical  world  must

contain more or less separable causal chains. I can see at the present moment

various  things—sheets  of  paper,  books,  trees,  walls,  and  clouds.  If  the

separateness of these things in my visual field is to correspond to a physical

separateness, each of them must start its own causal chain, arriving at my eye

without much interference from the others. The theory of light assures us that

this  is  the  case.  Light-waves  emanating  from  a  source  will,  in  suitable

circumstances, pursue their course practically unaffected by other light-waves

in the same region. But when light-waves encounter a reflecting or refracting

object this independence of the medium disappears.

  This is important in deciding what the object is that we are supposed to

see.  In  the  daytime,  practically  all  the  light  that  reaches  the  eye  comes

ultimately from the sun, but we do not say that we are seeing only the sun.

We are seeing the last region after which the course of the light was virtually

unimpeded until it reached the eye. When light is reflected or scattered, we

consider,  as  a  rule,  that  it  makes  us  see  the  last  object  from  which  it  is

reflected or scattered; when it is refracted, we consider that we are still seeing

the  previous  source,  though  inaccurately.  Reflected  light,  however,  is  notalways taken as giving perception of the reflector; it is not so taken when the

reflection is accurate, as in a mirror. What I see when I shave I consider to be

my own face. But when sunlight is reflected on an outdoor landscape it gives

me much more information about the things in the landscape than about the

sun, and I therefore consider that I am perceiving the things in the landscape.

  In a lesser degree similar things may be said about sound. We distinguish

between  hearing  a  sound  and  hearing  an  echo  of  it.  If  the  sun  were  as

chromatically noisy as it is bright, and if terrestrial things were resonant only

to certain of its notes, we should say that we were hearing the things, not the

sun, when they gave characteristic sound-reflections.

  The other senses do not give the same kind of perception of distant objects

or of intermediate links in causal chains, because they are not concerned with

physical  processes  having  the  peculiar  kind  of  independence  that  is

characteristic of wave motions.

  From what we have been saying it is clear that the relation of a percept to

the physical object which is supposed to be perceived is vague, approximate,

and somewhat indefinite. There is no precise sense in which we can be said to

perceive physical objects.

  The question of perception as a source of knowledge can be merged in a

wider  question:  How  far,  and  in  what  circumstances,  can  one  stage  in  a

physical process be a basis for inferring an earlier stage? Clearly this can only

happen in so far as the process in question is independent of other processes.

That  processes  can  be  thus  independent  is  perhaps  surprising.  We  see  the

separate  stars  because  the  light  that  starts  from  each  travels  on  through

regions full of other trails of light, and yet retains its independence. When this

independence fails, we see a vague blur, like the milky way. In the case of the

milky  way,  the  independence  does  not  fail  till  we  reach  the  physiological

stage; that is why telescopes can separate the different stars of the milky way.

But the independence of the light from different parts of one star cannot be

restored  by  telescopes;  that  is  why  stars  have  no  measurable  apparent

magnitude.

  Our  perceptive  apparatus,  as  studied  by  the  physiologist,  can  to  some

extent be ignored by the physicist, because it can be treated as approximatelyconstant. It is not of course really constant. By squinting I can see two suns,

but I do not imagine that I have performed an astronomical miracle. If I close

my eyes and turn my face to the sun, I see a vague red glare; this change in

the sun’s appearance I attribute to myself, not to the sun. Things look different

when I see them out of the corner of my eye from what they do when I focus

on them. They look different to short-sighted and to long-sighted people. And

so on. But common sense learns to distinguish these subjective sources of

variation in the percept from those that are due to variation in the physical

object. Until we learn to draw, we think that a rectangular object always looks

rectangular; and we are right, in the sense that an animal inference causes us

to judge it to be rectangular.

    Science deals with these matters by assuming a normal observer who is to

some extent a fiction, like the economic man, but not so completely a fiction

as to be practically useless. When a normal observer sees a difference between

two objects, for example that one looks yellow and the other looks blue, this

difference is assumed to have its source in a difference in the objects, not in

the subjective perceptive apparatus of the observer. If, in a given case, this

assumption  is  erroneous,  it  is  held  that  multiplicity  of  observations  by  a

multitude  of  observers  will  correct  it.  By  such  methods,  the  physicist  is

enabled to treat our perceptive apparatus as the source of a constant error,

which, because it is constant, is for many purposes negligible.

  The  principles  which  justify  the  inference  from  percepts  to  physical

objects have not been sufficiently studied. Why, for example, when a number

of people see the sun, should we believe that there is a sun outside their

percepts, and not merely that there are laws determining the circumstances in

which we shall have the experience called “seeing the sun”?

  Here we come up against a principle which is used both by science and by

common sense, to the effect that, when a number of phenomena in separated

parts of space-time are obviously causally interconnected, there must be some

continuous process in the intervening regions which links them all together.

This principle of spatio-temporal continuity needs to be re-examined after we

have  considered  the  inference  from  perceptual  to  physical  space.  In  the

meantime,  it  can  be  accepted  as  at  least  a  first  step  towards  formalizinginference from perceptual to physical objects.

  I will conclude with a summary of the present Chapter.

  Our main question was: If physics is true, how can it be known, and what,

besides physics, must we know to infer physics? This problem arises through

the physical causation of perception, which makes it probable that physical

objects  differ  greatly  from  percepts;  but  if  so,  how  can  we  infer  physical

objects from percepts? Moreover, since perceiving is considered to be “mental”

while its causes are “physical”, we are confronted with the old problem of the

relation between mind and matter. My own belief is that the “mental” and the

“physical”  are  not  so  disparate  as  is  generally  thought.  I  should  define  a

“mental”  occurrence  as  one  which  some  one  knows  otherwise  than  by

inference; the distinction between “mental” and “physical” therefore belongs

to theory of knowledge, not to metaphysics.

  One  of  the  difficulties  which  have  led  to  confusion  was  failure  to

distinguish between perceptual and physical space. Perceptual space consists

of  perceptible  relations  between  parts  of  percepts, whereas  physical  space

consists of inferred relations between inferred physical things. What I see may

be outside my percept of my body, but not outside my body as a physical

thing.

  Percepts,  considered  causally,  are  between  events  in  afferent  nerves

(stimulus) and events in efferent nerves (reaction); their location in causal

chains is the same as that of certain events in the brain. Percepts as a source of

knowledge of physical objects can only serve their purpose in so far as there

are separable, more or less independent, causal chains in the physical world.

This only happens approximately, and therefore the inference from percepts

to physical objects cannot be precise. Science consists largely of devices for

overcoming this initial lack of precision on the assumption that perception

gives a first approximation to the truth.                                          V 


                        Time in Experience


THE purpose of this Chapter is to consider those features of crude experience

which form the raw material of the concept of time, which has to go through

a long elaboration before it is fit to appear in physics or history. There are two

sources of our belief in time; the first is the perception of change within one

specious present, the other is memory. When you look at your watch, you can

see the second-hand moving, but only memory tells you that the minute-hand

and hour-hand have moved. Shakespeare’s timepieces had no second-hand, as

appears from the lines:


  Ah! yet doth beauty, like a dial hand,


  Steal from his figure, and no pace perceiv’d.

  “Pace perceiv’d” is only possible when the motion is so rapid that, though

the beginning and end are noticeably different, the lapse of time is so short

that both are parts of one sensation. No sensation, not even that caused by a

flash  of  lightning,  is  strictly  instantaneous.  Physiological  disturbances  die

down  gradually,  and  the  length  of  time  during  which  we  see  a  flash  of

lightning is much greater than the length of time occupied by the physical

phenomenon.

  The relation of “preceding”, or of “earlier-and-later”, is an element in the

experience of perceiving a change, and also in the experience of remembering.

Strictly speaking, we ought also to add immediate expectation, but this is of

less importance. When I see a rapid movement, such as that of a falling star,

or  of  cloud-shadows  in  a  landscape,  I  am  aware  that  one  part  of  the

movement  is  earlier  than  another,  in  spite  of  the  whole  being  comprised

within one specious present; if I were not aware of this, I should not know

whether the movement had been from A to B or from B to A, or even that

change  had  occurred.  When  a  movement  is  sufficiently  rapid  we  do  notperceive  change:  if  you  spin  a  penny  very  efficiently,  it  takes  on  the

appearance of a diaphanous sphere. If a motion is to be perceived, it must be

neither  too  fast  nor  too  slow.  If  it  satisfies  this  condition, it  provides

experiences from which it is possible to obtain ostensive definitions of the

words  for  temporal  relations:  “preceding”,  “succeeding”,  “before”,  “after”,

“earlier”,  “later”.  When  these  words  have  come  to  be  understood,  we  can

understand such sentences as “A precedes B” even when A and B are not part

of one specious present, provided we know what is meant by “A” and what by

“B”.

  But one specious present is a very small part of one man’s life, and for

longer periods of time within our own experience we rely upon memory. In

fact, of course, we rely upon a great deal besides memory. In regard to past

engagements noted in my diary, I can infer their time-order and their distance

from the present by the dates at which they are recorded. This, however, is a

process  presupposing  considerable  knowledge,  whereas  I  am  concerned  at

present with the data upon which our knowledge concerning time is based.

Within  limits,  and  with  a  considerable  risk  of  error,  we  can  place  our

memories in a time-order by the way they “feel”. Suppose we have just had a

conversation,  beginning  amicably,  but  ending  in  a  violent  quarrel,  and

suppose the person with whom we were conversing has flounced out of the

room in a rage. We can go over the whole conversation in retrospect, thinking

“at this point I said the wrong thing”, or “at that point the remark he allowed

himself was unpardonable”. Our memory, in fact, is not of a heap of events,

but of a series, and often there can be no reasonable doubt that the time-order

supplied by our memory is correct.

  There  is  here,  however,  a  complication  which  has  been  too  often

overlooked.  All  my  recollections  occur now,  not  at  the  times  when  the

recollected events occurred. The time-order of the past events, in so far as I

can know it by means of memory, must be connected with a quality of my

recollections: some must feel recent and others must feel remote. It must be by

means of this felt quality of recentness or remoteness that I place remembered

events in a series when I am relying upon memory alone. In travelling from

percepts  towards  “the  dark  backward  and  abysm  of  time”,  the  presentcontents of my mind have an order, which I believe to be correlated, roughly

at  any  rate,  with  the  objective  time-order  of  the  events  to  which  my

recollections refer. This order in the present contents of my mind, which, by

means  of  expectation,  may  be  extended  into the  future,  may  be  called

“subjective”  time.  Its  relations  to  objective  time  are  difficult,  and  demand

discussion.

  St. Augustine, whose absorption in the sense of sin led him to excessive

subjectivity, was content to substitute subjective time for the time of history

and physics. Memory, perception, and expectation, according to him, made up

all that there is of time. But obviously this won’t do. All his memories and all

his expectations occurred at about the time of the fall of Rome, whereas mine

occur at about the time of the fall of industrial civilization, which formed no

part of the Bishop of Hippo’s expectations. Subjective time might suffice for a

solipsist of the moment, but not for a man who believes in a real past and

future, even if only his own. My momentary experience contains a space of

perception, which is not the space of physics, and a time of perception and

recollection,  which  is  not  the  time  of  physics  and  history.  My  past,  as  it

occurred, cannot be identified with my recollections of it, and my objective

history, which was in objective time, differs from the subjective history of my

present recollections, which, objectively, is all now.

  That  memory  is  in  the  main  veridical  is,  in  my  opinion,  one  of  the

premisses  of  knowledge.  What  this  premiss  asserts  is,  or  implies,  broadly

speaking, that a present recollection is as a rule correlated with a past event.

Obviously this is not logically necessary. I might have come into existence a

few moments ago, complete with just those recollections which I then had. If

the whole world came into existence then, just as it then was, there will never

be anything to prove that it did not exist earlier; in fact, all the evidence that

we now have in favour of its having existed earlier, we should then have. This

illustrates what I mean by saying that memory is a premiss, for we are none

of us prepared for a moment to entertain the supposition that the world began

five  minutes  ago.  We  do  not  entertain  the  supposition,  because  we  are

persuaded  that,  as  a  rule,  when  we  recollect,  something  resembling  our

present recollection occurred at a time which is objectively past.  I  said  a  moment  ago  that  the  general  trustworthiness  of  memory  is  a

premiss of human knowledge. We might find at a later stage that it can be

subsumed under a wider premiss, but for the present this possibility may be

ignored.  What  does,  however,  need  to  be  considered  at  this  stage  is  the

relation of confidence in particular memories to the postulate that memory is

trustworthy as a rule, or in certain specified circumstances.

  When I remember something, I do not first take note of my present state

of mind, then reflect that memory is usually veridical, and finally infer that

something like what I am recollecting occurred in the past. On the contrary,

what happens when I remember is belief that something happened in the past.

What I am concerned with in this Chapter is (a) analysis of such beliefs, and

(b) statement of what is meant when such a belief is said to be true. Neither of

these questions is as simple as seems to be generally supposed.

  Memories often float through the mind as mere images, unaccompanied

by belief, but I am concerned only with memories that are believed. Let us

take a concrete illustration. Suppose I have seen my child very nearly run over

by a motor-car, but in fact unhurt, and suppose that in the following night I

have a nightmare in which the child is killed. When I wake up, I think, with

inexpressible relief: “This did not occur; that occurred.”

  A good deal of clarification is necessary before we can arrive at the core of

the problems raised by this illustration. To begin with, when we say “this did

not occur”, we are not denying that the nightmare occurred; in so far as we

are remembering the nightmare as a private experience, our memory is quite

correct.  The  nightmare,  however,  did  not  have  the  context  that  waking

experiences have: it had no context whatever in the life of the child, or of any

person except myself and such persons as had to listen while I related it, and

in  my  own  life  its  context  sharply  ended  when  I  woke,  instead  of  being

prolonged through years of sorrow. This is the sort of thing we mean by

saying that the nightmare was only a dream.

  But  all  this  is  irrelevant  to  our  problem  of  memory,  and  I  have  only

mentioned it in order to make clear what is relevant and what is not. When I

remember  the  nightmare,  my  memory  is  veridical;  I  am  only  misled  if  I

suppose the nightmare to have had the sort of context that a similar wakingexperience would have had. An error of memory occurs only when we believe

that, in the past, we had some experience which in fact we did not have, and

when,  further,  we  believe  this  in  the  specific  way  that  is  called

“remembering”, as opposed to the way that comes when we read records of

forgotten events, or have to listen to aunts relating our exploits as children.

Such errors of memory undoubtedly occur. I will not insist upon George IV

remembering that he was at the battle of Waterloo; coming nearer home, I

know that when, too late, I have thought of a witty retort, I find a tendency to

remember that I actually made it, which I only resist by a considerable moral

effort. When two people independently report an acrimonious conversation,

each will usually falsify the truth in a way favourable to his self-esteem. And

even memories having little emotional interest can often be proved by records

to be inaccurate.

  But  the  most  convincing  examples  of  false  memories  are  supplied  by

dreams, though not by the nightmare which I supposed a moment ago. Let us

alter the nightmare: I now do not dream that I see the child killed, but that,

having seen this,” it is my duty to tell the child’s mother what has happened.

This is just as much a nightmare, but now the false belief in my dream is not

merely  as  to  the  context  of  my  experience,  but  as  to  my  very  own  past

experience.  When  I  dream  that  I see  the  child  run  over,  I  do  have  the

experience, though it does not have its usual concomitants; but when I dream

that I saw the child run over, I never did have the experience that in my

dream I am remembering. This is a genuine case of false memory, and shows

that memory alone cannot make it certain that what is remembered really

occurred, however much we may whittle down what is remembered to its

core of purely personal experience.

  This example, I hope, will make it clear what I mean by “subjective” time,

and what is the problem of its relation to objective time. In dreams, as in

waking life, there is a difference between perceiving and remembering. The

perceiving and the remembering do really occur in dreams, and so far as the

perceiving is concerned we do not have to suppose that dreams deceive us as

to our own experiences: what, in dreams, we see and hear, we do in fact see

and hear, though, owing to the unusual context, what we see and hear givesrise  to  false  beliefs.  Similarly  what  we  remember  in  dreams  we  do  really

remember, that is to say, the experience called “remembering” does occur. In

the  dream,  this  remembering  has  a  quality  differing  from  that  of  dream-

perception, and in virtue of this quality the remembering is referred to the

past. But the quality is not that of genuine pastness which belongs to the

events  of  history;  it  is  that  of  subjective  pastness,  in  virtue of  which  the

present  remembering  is  judged  (falsely)  to  refer  to  something  that  is

objectively past.

  This quality of subjective pastness belongs to waking memories as well as

to those of dreams, and is what makes them subjectively distinguishable from

perceptions. It is a quality which is capable of degrees: our memories feel

more remote or less remote, and can be arranged in a series by this qualitative

difference. But since all our memories are now from the point of view of

history, this subjective time-order is wholly distinct from the objective time-

order,  though  we  hope  that  there  is  a  certain  degree  of  correspondence

between the two.

  I can perceive a remembering, but I cannot perceive what is remembered.

Remembering consists of remembering “something”. I want now to analyse

remembering, and especially to consider this relation to “something”. In short:

what do we mean when, thinking of some past occurrence, we judge “that

occurred”? What can “that” be?

  The difficulty is that, to know what we mean by “that occurred”, the word

“that” must refer to some present content of the mind, whereas, if the word

“occurred” is justified, the word “that” must refer to something in the past.

Thus it would seem that the word “that” must refer to something which is

both past and present. But we are in the habit of thinking that the past is dead,

and that nothing past can also be present. What, then, do we mean when we

judge “that occurred”?

  There are two different possible answers, connected with the two different

theories as to proper names which we considered in an earlier chapter. If we

consider that, in describing the structure of the world, the terms which must

be merely named must include “events”, which are uniquely defined by their

spatio-temporal position, and are logically incapable of recurring, then wemust say that the phrase “that occurred” is inaccurate, and should be replaced

by “something very like that occurred”. If, on the other hand, we hold that an

“event” can be defined as a bundle of qualities, each and all of which may

recur, then “that occurred” may be completely accurate. If, for example, I see a

rainbow on two occasions, and I see some shade of colour near the middle on

one occasion, I probably saw the very same shade on the other occasion. If,

then, remembering the earlier rainbow while I am seeing the later one, I say,

of some shade of colour that I am now seeing, “that occurred on the previous

occasion”, what I say may be exactly true.

  Either of these answers will solve the particular difficulty with which we

have been immediately concerned, and for the present I shall not attempt to

decide between them. They leave open the question what is meant by the

word “occurred”; I shall deal with this when I come to consider public time.

  It should be observed that what we mean by “the past” in the historical

sense is understood by us in virtue of the experience of succession within one

specious  present.  It  is  this  experience  that  makes  us  understand  the  word

“precedes”.  We  can  then  understand:  “if y  is  in  the  specious  present, x

precedes y”. We can therefore understand what is meant by saying that x

precedes everything in the specious present, i.e. that x is in the past. The

essential point is that the time that occurs in the specious present is objective,

not subjective.

  We can now sum up the discussion of this Chapter.

  There are two sources for our knowledge of time. One is the perception of

succession within one specious present, the other is memory. Remembering

can be perceived, and is found to have a quality of greater or less remoteness,

in virtue of which all my present memories can be placed in a time-order. But

this  time  is  subjective,  and  must  be  distinguished  from  historical  time.

Historical time has to the present the relation of “preceding”, which I know

from the experience of change within one specious present. In historical time,

all my present memories are now, but in so far as they are veridical they point

to  occurrences  in  the  historical  past.  There  is  no logical  reason  why  any

memories  should  be  veridical;  so  far  as  logic  can  show,  all  my  present

memories might be just what they are if there had never been any historicalpast. Our knowledge of the past therefore depends upon some postulate which

is not to be discovered by mere analysis of our present rememberings.                                          VI 


                        Space in Psychology


PSYCHOLOGY  is  concerned  with  space,  not  as  a  system  of  relations  among

material objects, but as a feature of our perceptions. If we could accept naïve

realism,  this  distinction  would  have  little  importance:  we  should  perceive

material objects and their spatial relations, and the space that characterizes

our perceptions would be identical with the space of physics. But in fact naïve

realism cannot be accepted, percepts are not identical with material objects,

and  the  relation  of  perceptual  to  physical  space  is  not  identity.  What  the

relation is, I shall consider presently; I am concerned, to begin with, only with

space as it appears in psychology, ignoring all questions of physics.

  It is clear that experience is what has led us to believe in the existence of

spatial relations. Psychology is concerned to examine what experiences are

relevant, and by what process of inference or construction we pass from such

experiences to the space of common sense. Since a great part of the process

occurs in early infancy, and is no longer remembered in later years, it is a

somewhat  difficult  matter  of  observation  and  inference  to  discover  the

character of the original experiences which give rise to the habits that adult

common sense takes for granted. To take only the most obvious instance: we

place things touched and things seen in one space, automatically and without

reflection, but babies under the age of about three months seem unable to do

so. That is to say, they do not know how to touch an object that they see and

that is within their reach. It is only through frequent accidental contacts that

they gradually learn the movements necessary to produce a tactile sensation

when a visual sensation is given. Chickens, on the other hand, can do this

from birth.

  We  have  to  separate  the  crude  material  of  sensation  from  the

supplementation that it has acquired through experience and habit. When you

see (let us say) an orange, you do not have merely a visual experience, but

also expectations of touch, smell, and taste. You would have a violent shock ofsurprise if you found that it felt like putty, or smelt like a bad egg, or tasted

like a beef-steak. You would be even more surprised if, like Macbeth’s dagger,

it proved incapable of being touched. Such surprises show that expectations of

non-visual sensations are part of what spontaneously happens to you when

you have a visual sensation of a familiar kind. In the chicken, apparently, such

expectations are in part due to its innate constitution. In human beings this

happens much less, if at all; our expectations seem to be generated, mainly if

not wholly, by experience. A visual sensation has at first, it would seem, a

certain purity, and only gradually, through frequent collocations, acquires the

penumbra of expectations connected with other senses that it has in adult life.

And the same is true of other senses.

  It  follows  that  the  unitary  space  of  common  sense  is  a  construction,

though not a deliberate one. It is part of the business of psychology to make us

aware of the steps in this construction.

  When we examine our momentary visual field, stripping it, as far as we

can, of all the adjuncts derived from experience, we find that it is a complex

whole in which the parts are interrelated in various ways. There are relations

of right and left, up and down; there are also relations which we learn to

interpret as depth. These relations all belong to the sensational datum. The

best way to become aware of the sensational element in visual perceptions of

depth is by the use of the stereoscope. When you look at the two separate

photographs that are going to be seen together in the stereoscope, they both

look flat, as they are; but when you see the combination in the stereoscope,

you get the impression that things “stand out”, and that some are nearer than

others. As a judgment this would of course be mistaken; the photographs are

just as flat as they were before. But it is a genuine quality of the visual datum,

and very instructive as a help in showing how we arrive visually at estimates

of depth.

  By means of the three relations right-and-left, up-and-down, seeming-far-

and-seeming-near, your momentary visual field can be arranged in a three-

dimensional manifold. But far-and-near, estimated visually, is not capable of

distinguishing except when one of the distances is very short; we cannot “see”

that the sun is further off than the moon, or even than clouds which are notobscuring it.

  Other senses than sight supply other elements which contribute to the

common-sense construction of space. When a part of the body is touched, we

can tell, within limits, what part it is, without needing to look. (On the tongue

or the finger-tips we can tell pretty accurately, on the back only vaguely.) This

implies that touches in one part have a quality not belonging to touches in

another  part,  and  that  the  qualities  appropriate  to  different  parts  have

relations enabling us to arrange them in a two-dimensional order. Experience

teaches us to connect sensations of touch with the visual sensations of seeing

different parts of the body.

  Not only static sensations, such as we have mentioned, but also sensations

of movement are involved in constructing common-sense space. Sensations of

movement are of two sorts, active and passive—active when we have a feeling

of muscular exertion, passive when the observed change seems independent of

ourselves. When we move a part of our body and see it move, we have active

and passive sensations at the same time. What I am calling passive sensations

are only relatively passive; there is always the activity of attention, involving

adjustment of the sense organs, except in the case of rather violent sensations.

When you unexpectedly hit your head against a low doorway you are almost

wholly passive, whereas when you listen carefully to a very faint sound the

element of activity is considerable. (I am speaking of activity and passivity as

elements in sensations, and am not inquiring into their causal status.)

    Movement is essential in enlarging our conception of space beyond our

own  immediate  neighbourhood.  The  distance  from  where  we  are  to  some

place may be estimated as an hour’s walk, three hours by train, or twelve

hours by aeroplane. All such estimates assume fixed places. You can tell how

long it takes from London to Edinburgh, because both retain fixed positions

on the earth’s surface, but you cannot tell how long it will take to reach Mr.

Jones, because he may move while you are on the way. All distances above a

rather small minimum depend upon the assumption of immobility; it is partly

the fact that this assumption is never quite true that necessitated the special

theory of relativity, in which distance is between events, not bodies, and is a

space-time distance, not a purely spatial distance. But such considerations takeus beyond the scope of common sense.

  It is to be observed that the spatial relations given in sensation are always

between data of the same sense. There is a spatial relation between two parts

of the same visual field, or between two simultaneous pin-pricks on different

parts of the hand; such spatial relations are within the realm of sensation, and

are not learnt by experience. But between the tactual sensation of a pin-prick

and the visual sensation of seeing the pin there is no direct sensational spatial

relation,  but  only  a  correlation  which  human  beings  learn  by  experience.

When you both see and feel a pin touching your hand it is only experience

that enables you to identify the point of contact seen and the point of contact

felt  by  touch.  To  say  that  they  are  the  same  place  is  convenient,  but  in

psychology  it  is  not  strictly  accurate:  what  is  accurate  is  that  they  are

correlated places in two different spaces, visual and tactual. It is true that in

physical space only one place is involved, but this place lies outside our direct

experience, and is neither visual nor tactual.

  The construction of one space in which all our perceptual experiences are

located  is  a  triumph  of  pre-scientific  common  sense.  Its  merit  lies  in  its

convenience, not in any ultimate truth that it may be supposed to possess.

Common sense, in attributing to it a degree of non-conventional truth beyond

what it actually has a right to claim, is in error, and this error, uncorrected,

adds greatly to the difficulty of a sound philosophy of space.

  An even more serious error, committed not only by common sense but by

many philosophers, consists in supposing that the space in which perceptual

experiences are located can be identified with the inferred space of physics,

which is inhabited mainly by things which cannot be perceived. The coloured

surface that I see when I look at a table has a spatial position in the space of

my visual field; it exists only where eyes and nerves and brain exist to cause

the energy of photons to undergo certain transformations. (The “where” in

this sentence is a “where” in physical space.) The table as a physical object,

consisting of electrons, positrons, and neutrons, lies outside my experience,

and if there is a space which contains both it and my perceptual space, then in

that space the physical table must be wholly external to my perceptual space.

This conclusion is inevitable if we accept the view as to the physical causationof sensations which is forced on us by physiology and which we considered in

an earlier chapter.

  The conception of one unitary space, Kant’s “infinite given whole”, is one

which  must  be  abandoned.  The  crude  material  available  for  empirical

constructions  contains  several  kinds  of  relations—more  especially  those

between parts of one visual field or parts of one tactual field—each of which

arranges  its  field  in  a  manifold  having  the  properties  that  pure

mathematicians  need  for  a  geometry.  By  means  of  correlations—more

especially  between  the  visual  and  tactual  place  of  an  object  which  I

simultaneously see and touch—the various spaces generated by relations of

parts of single sensational fields can be amalgamated into one space. To the

making  of  this  space  experience  of  correlations  is  necessary;  the  kinds  of

relations given in single experiences no longer suffice.

  The  common-sense  world  results  from  a  further  correlation,  combined

with an illegitimate identification. There is a correlation between the spatial

relations of unperceived physical objects and the spatial relations of visual or

other sensational data, and there is an identification of such data with certain

physical objects. For example: I am sitting in a room, and I see—or at least

common sense thinks I see—spatial relations between the pieces of furniture

that it contains. I know that on the other side of the door there is a hall and a

staircase. I believe that the spatial relations of things beyond the door—e.g. the

relation “to-the-left-of”— are the same as those between the bits of furniture

that I see; and further, I identify what I see with physical objects which can

exist unseen, so that, if I am content with common sense, there is no gulf

between the visual furniture and the unseen hall beyond the door. The two

accordingly are thought to fit into one space, of which part is perceived while

the rest is inferred.

  But in fact, if physics and physiology are to be believed, I do not “see” the

furniture in my room except in a Pickwickian sense. When I am said to “see” a

table, what really happens is that I have a complex sensation which is, in

certain respects, similar in structure to the physical table. The physical table,

consisting of electrons, positrons, and neutrons, is inferred, and so is the space

in which it is located. It has long been a commonplace in philosophy that thephysical table does not have the qualities of the sensational table: it has no

colour, it is not warm or cold in the sense in which we know warmth and cold

by experience, it is not hard or soft if “hard” and “soft” mean qualities given in

tactile sensations, and so on. All this, I say, has long been a commonplace, but

it has a consequence that has not been adequately recognized, namely that the

space in which the physical table is located must also be different from the

space that we know by experience.

  We say that the table is “outside” me, in a sense in which my own body is

not. But in saying this we have to guard against an ambiguity due to the

necessity  of  distinguishing  between  physical  and  psychological  space.  The

visual table is “outside” my body in visual space, if “my body” is interpreted as

what I see, and not as what physics takes to be my body. The physical table is

“outside” my body if my body is interpreted as in physics, but has no direct or

obvious spatial relation to my body as a visual object that I experience. When

we come to consider the hall on the other side of the door, which I cannot see,

we are wholly confined to the physical sense: the hall is outside my physical

body  in  physical  space,  but  is  not,  in  any  obvious  sense,  outside  my

sensational body in psychological space, because there is no sensational hall,

and therefore the hall has no location whatever in psychological space. Thus

while there are two senses in which the table is “outside” me, there is only one

sense in which the hall is “outside” me.

  There is a further source of confusion, which is due to the fact that there

are two quite divergent ways of correlating psychological and physical space.

The  obvious  way  is  to  correlate  the  place  of  the  sensational  table  in

psychological space with the place of the physical table in physical space, and

for most purposes this is the more important correlation. But there is a quite

different relation between the two kinds of space, and this other relation must

be  understood  if  confusions  are  to  be  avoided.  Physical  space  is  wholly

inferential, and is constructed by means of causal laws. Physics starts with a

manifold of events, some of which can be collected into series by physical

laws; for example, the successive events constituting the arrival of a light-ray

at successive places are bound together by the laws of the propagation of light.

In such cases we use the denial of action at a distance, not as a physicalprinciple, but as a means of defining space-time order. That is to say, if two

events are connected by a causal law, so that one is an effect of the other, any

third event which is a cause of the one and an effect of the other is to be

placed between the two in space-time order.

  Consider  now  a  single  causal  sequence,  beginning  with  an  external

stimulus,  say  to  the  eye,  continuing  along  afferent  nerves  to  the  brain,

producing first a sensation and then a volition, followed by a current along

efferent  nerves  and  finally  a  muscular  movement.  This  whole  series,

considered as one causal sequence, must, in physical space-time, occupy a

continuous series of positions, and since the physiological terms of the series

end and begin in the brain, the “mental” terms must begin and end in the

brain. That is to say, considered as part of the manifold of events ordered in

space-time by causal relations, sensations and volitions must be located in the

brain.  A  point  in  space-time,  following  the  theory  to  be  developed  in  a

subsequent chapter, is a class of events, and there is no reason why some of

these events should not be “mental”. Our feeling to the contrary is only due to

obstinate adherence to the mind-matter dualism.

  We can now sum up the above discussion. When I have the experience

called “seeing a table”, the visual table has, primarily, a position in the space

of my momentary visual field. Then, by means of experienced correlations, it

has a position in a space which embraces all my perceptual experiences. Next,

by means of physical laws it is correlated with a place in physical space-time,

namely  the  place  occupied  by  the  physical  table.  Finally,  by  means  of

psychophysical  laws  it  is  related  to  another  place  in  physical  space-time,

namely the place occupied by my brain as a physical object. If the philosophy

of space is to avoid hopeless confusions, these different correlations must be

kept carefully disentangled.

  In  conclusion,  it  should  be  observed  that  the  twofold  space  in  which

percepts are located is closely analogous to the twofold time of memories. In

subjective time, memories are in the past; in objective time, they are now.

Similarly,  in  subjective  space  my  percept  of  a  table  is  over  there,  but  in

physical space it is here.                                        VII 


                            Mind and Matter


COMMON SENSE believes that we know something about mind, and something

about matter; it holds, further, that what we know of both is enough to show

that  they  are  quite  different  kinds  of  things.  I  hold,  on  the  contrary,  that

whatever we know without inference is mental, and that the physical world is

only known as regards certain abstract features of its space-time structure—

features which, because of their abstractness, do not suffice to show whether

the physical world is, or is not, different in intrinsic character from the world

of mind.

  I will begin with an attempt to state the common-sense point of view as

clearly as is possible in view of the confusions that are essential to it.

    Mind—so common sense might say—is exhibited by persons who do and

suffer various things. Cognitively, they perceive, remember, imagine, abstract,

and infer; on the side of the emotions, they have feelings that are pleasurable

and feelings that are painful, and they have sentiments, passions, and desires;

volitionally,  they  can  will  to  do  something  or  will  to  abstain  from  doing

something. All these occurrences can be perceived by the person to whom

they happen, and all are to be classified together as “mental” events. Every

mental event happens “to” some person, and is an event in his life.

  But in addition to perceiving “thoughts”—so common sense holds—we also

perceive “things”, and events which are outside ourselves. We see and touch

physical objects; we hear sounds which are also heard by other people, and

therefore are not in us; when we smell a bad drain, other people do so too,

unless they are plumbers. What we perceive, when it is outside ourselves, is

called “physical”; this term includes both “things” which are “matter”, and

events, such as a noise or a flash of lightning.

  Common sense also allows inferences to what is not perceived, at any rate

by us, e.g. the centre of the earth, the other side of the moon, the thoughts of

our friends, and the mental events that have produced historical records. Aninferred mental event can be known without inference by the person to whom

it happens. An inferred physical thing or event may or may not have been

perceived by some one; some physical things, such as the centre of the earth,

are held to have been never perceived.

  This  common-sense  view,  while  on  the  whole  acceptable  as  regards

mental  events,  requires  radical  alteration  where  physical  events  are

concerned. What I know without inference when I have the experience called

“seeing  the  sun”  is  not  the  sun,  but  a  mental  event  in  me.  I  am  not

immediately aware of tables and chairs, but only of certain effects that they

have on me. The objects of perception which I take to be “external” to me,

such as coloured surfaces that I see, are only “external” in my private space,

which ceases to exist when I die—indeed my private visual space ceases to

exist whenever I am in the dark or shut my eyes. And they are not “external”

to “me”, if “me” means the sum-total of my mental events; on the contrary,

they are among the mental events that constitute me. They are only “external”

to certain other percepts of mine, namely those which common sense regards

as  percepts  of  my  body;  and  even  to  these  they  are  “external”  only  for

psychology, not for physics, since the space in which they are located is the

private space of psychology.

  In  considering  what  common  sense  regards  as  perception  of  external

objects, there are two opposite questions to be considered: first, why must the

datum be regarded as private; second, what reason is there to take the datum

as a sign of something which has an existence not dependent upon me and my

perceptive apparatus?

  The reasons for regarding the datum—say in sight or touch—as private, are

twofold. On the one hand there is physics, which, starting with the intention

of doing its best for naïve realism, arrives at a theory of what goes on in the

physical  world  which  shows  that  there  is  no  ground  for  supposing  the

physical  table  or  chair  to  resemble  the  percept  except  in  certain  abstract

structural  respects.  On  the  other  hand  there  is  the  comparison  of  what

different people experience when, according to common sense, they perceive

the same thing. If we confine ourselves to the sense of sight, when two people

are said to see the same table there are differences of perspective, differencesof apparent size, differences in the way light is reflected, and so on. Thus at

most  the  projective  properties  of  the  table  are  the  same  for  a  number  of

percipients, and even these are not quite the same if there is a refracting

medium such as a steaming kettle, or our old friend the water that makes a

stick look bent. If we consider, as common sense does, that the “same” object

can be perceived by both sight and touch, the object, if it is to be really the

same, must be still further removed from the datum, for a complex sight-

datum and a complex touch-datum differ in intrinsic quality, and cannot be

similar except in structure.

  Our second question is more difficult. If the datum in my perceptions is

always private to me, why do I nevertheless regard it as a sign by means of

which I can infer a physical “thing” or event which is a cause of my percept if

my  body  is  suitably  placed,  but  does  not  form  part  of  my  immediate

experience except partially in exceptional cases?

  When  we  begin  to  reflect,  we  find  ourselves  with  an  unshakeable

conviction that some of our sensations have causes external to our own body.

Headache, toothache, and stomachache, we are willing to admit, have internal

causes, but when we stub our toe or run into a post in the dark or see a flash

of lightning we cannot easily make ourselves doubt that our experience has an

external source. It is true that we sometimes come to think that this belief was

mistaken, for instance if it occurs in dreams, or when we have a buzzing in

the ears which sounds like the hum of telegraph wires. But such cases are

exceptional, and common sense has discovered ways of dealing with them.

  What chiefly confirms us in our belief that most sensations have physical

causes is, on the one hand, the quasi-publicity of many sensations, and, on the

other  hand,  the  fact  that,  if  regarded  as  arising  spontaneously,  they  seem

completely erratic and unaccountable.

  As regards quasi-publicity, the argument is the opposite of that which

proves  the  privacy  of  data:  although  two  neighbouring  men  do  not  have

exactly  the  same  visual  data,  they  have  data  which  are  very  similar,  and

although visual and tactual qualities are different, the structural properties of

an  object  seen  are  approximately  identical  with  those  of  the  same  object

touched. If you have models of the regular solids, the one which you can seeto be a dodecahedron will be correctly named by an educated blind man after

feeling it. Apart from the publicity concerned with different percipients, there

is also what may be called temporal publicity in one man’s experience. I know

that by taking suitable measures I can see St. Paul’s at any time; I know that

the sun and moon and stars recur in my visual world, and so do my friends

and my house and my furniture. I know that the differences between the

times  when  I  see  these  objects  and  the  times  when  I  do  not  are  easily

explicable as due to differences in me or my environment which do not imply

any change in the objects. Such considerations confirm the common-sense

belief that there are, in addition to mental events, things which are sources of

similar  percepts  in  different  observers  at  one  time,  and  often  of  the  same

observer at different times.

  As regards the irregularity of a world consisting only of data, this is an

argument to which it is difficult to give precision. Roughly speaking, many

sensations occur without any fixed antecedents in our own experience, and in

a manner which suggests irresistibly that, if they have causes, these causes lie

partly outside our experience. If you are hit on the head by a tile falling off a

roof while you are walking below, you will experience a sudden violent pain

which cannot be explained causally by anything of which you were aware

before the accident happened. It is true that there are some extreme psycho-

analysts who maintain that accidents only happen to people who have grown

tired of life through reflecting on their sins, but I do not think such a view has

many adherents. Consider the inhabitants of Hiroshima when the bomb burst:

it  cannot  be  that  they  had  all  reached  a  point  in  their  psychological

development which demanded disaster as the next step. To explain such an

occurrence  causally,  we  must  admit  purely  physical  causes;  if  they  are

rejected, we must acquiesce in causal chaos.

  Such arguments may be reinforced by the considerations set forth above

in  the  chapter  on  solipsism,  showing  that  we  must  choose  between  two

alternatives:  either  (a)  no  inferences  from  data  to  other  events  are  to  be

admitted  as  valid,  in  which  case  we  know  far  less  than  most  solipsists

suppose, and in fact a great deal less than we can force ourselves to regard as

the minimum of our knowledge, or (b) there are principles of inference whichallow us to infer things outside our own experience.

  Belief in the physical causation of sensations is also reinforced by the fact

that, if this belief is rejected, there remains no reason for the acceptance of

science in its broad outlines, while the refusal of such acceptance does not

seem rational.

  Such are the broad considerations which lead us to look for a way of

systematizing  and  rationalizing  our  common-sense  propensity  to  infer

physical causes of sensations.

  The inferences from experiences to the physical world can, I think, all be

justified  by  the  assumption  that  there  are  causal  chains,  each  member  of

which  is  a  complex  structure  ordered  by  the  spatio-temporal  relation  of

compresence  (or  of  contiguity);  that  all  the  members  of  such  a  chain  are

similar in structure; that each member is connected with each other by a

series  of  contiguous  structures;  and  that,  when  a  number  of  such  similar

structures are found to be grouped about a centre earlier in time than any of

them, it is probable that they all have their causal origin in a complex event

which is at that centre and has a structure similar to the structure of the

observed events. I shall, at a later stage, endeavour to give greater precision to

this assumption, and to show reasons for accepting it. For the present, to avoid

verbiage, I shall treat it as though it were unquestionably correct, and on this

basis I shall return to the relations between mental and physical events.

  When, on a common-sense basis, people talk of the gulf between mind and

matter, what they really have in mind is the gulf between a visual or tactual

percept and a “thought”—e.g. a memory, a pleasure, or a volition. But this, as

we have seen, is a division within the mental world; the percept is as mental

as the “thought”. Slightly more sophisticated people may think of matter as

the unknown cause of sensation, the “thing-in-itself” which certainly does not

have the secondary qualities and perhaps does not have the primary qualities

either. But however much they may emphasize the unknown character of the

thing-in-itself, they still suppose themselves to know enough of it to be sure

that it is very different from a mind. This comes, I think, of not having rid

their imaginations of the conception of material things as something hard that

you can bump into. You can bump into your friend’s body, but not into hismind; therefore his body is different from his mind. This sort of argument

persists imaginatively in many people who have rejected it intellectually.

  Then,  again,  there  is  the  argument  about  brain  and  mind. When  a

physiologist examines a brain, he does not see thoughts, therefore the brain is

one thing and the mind which thinks is another. The fallacy in this argument

consists  in  supposing  that  a  man  can  see  matter.  Not  even  the  ablest

physiologist can perform this feat. His percept when he looks at a brain is an

event in his own mind, and has only a causal connection with the brain that

he fancies he is seeing. When, in a powerful telescope, he sees a tiny luminous

dot, and interprets it as a vast nebula existing a million years ago, he realizes

that what he sees is different from what he infers. The difference from the

case of a brain looked at through a microscope is only one of degree: there is

exactly the same need of inference, by means of the laws of physics, from the

visual  datum  to  its  physical  cause.  And  just  as  no  one  supposes  that  the

nebula has any close resemblance to a luminous dot, so no one should suppose

that the brain has any close resemblance to what the physiologist sees.

  What, then, do we know about the physical world? Let us first define

more exactly what we mean by a “physical” event. I should define it as an

event which, if known to occur, is inferred, and which is not known to be

mental. And I define a “mental” event (to repeat) as one with which some one

is acquainted otherwise than by inference. Thus a “physical” event is one

which is either totally unknown, or, if known at all, is not known to any one

except by inference—or, perhaps we should say, is not known to be known to

any one except by inference.

  If physical events are to suffice as a basis for physics, and, indeed, if we

are  to  have  any  reason  for  believing  in  them,  they  must  not  be totally

unknown, like Kant’s things-in-themselves. In fact, on the principle which we

are assuming, they are known, though perhaps incompletely, so far as their

space-time structure is concerned, for this must be similar to the space-time

structure of their effects upon percipients. E.g. from the fact that the sun looks

round in perceptual space we have a right to infer that it is round in physical

space. We have no right to make a similar inference as regards brightness,

because brightness is not a structural property.  We  cannot,  however,  infer  that  the  sun  is not  bright—meaning  by

“brightness”  the  quality  that  we  know  in  perception.  The  only  legitimate

inferences as regards the physical sun are structural; concerning a property

which  is  not  structural,  such  as  brightness,  we  must  remain  completely

agnostic.  We  may  perhaps  say  that  it  is  unlikely  that  the  physical  sun  is

bright, since we have no knowledge of the qualities of things that are not

percepts,  and  therefore  there  seems  to  be  an  illimitable  field  of  choice  of

possible qualities. But such an argument is so speculative that perhaps we

ought not to attach much weight to it.

  This brings us to the question: Is there any reason, and if so what, for

supposing that physical events differ in quality from mental events?

  Here we must, to begin with, distinguish events in a living brain from

events elsewhere. I will begin with events in a living brain.

  I assume, for reasons which will be given in Part IV, that a small region of

space-time is a collection of compresent events, and that space-time regions

are  ordered  by  means  of  causal  relations.  The  former  assumption  has  the

consequence that there is no reason why thoughts should not be among the

events of which the brain consists, and the latter assumption leads to the

conclusion that, in physical space, thoughts are in the brain. Or, more exactly,

each region of the brain is a class of events, and among the events constituting

a region thoughts are included. It is to be observed that, if we say thoughts are

in the brain, we are using an ellipsis. The correct statement is that thoughts

are among the events which, as a class, constitute a region in the brain. A

given thought, that is to say, is a member of a class, and the class is a region in

the brain. In this sense, where events in brains are concerned, we have no

reason to suppose that they are not thoughts, but, on the contrary, have strong

reason  to  suppose  that  at  least  some  of  them  are  thoughts.  I  am  using

“thoughts” as a generic term for mental events.

  When we come to events in parts of physical space-time where there are

no  brains,  we  have  still  no  positive  argument  to  prove  that  they  are  not

thoughts, except such as may be derived from observation of the differences

between living and dead matter coupled with inferences based on analogy or

its absence. We may contend, for instance, that habit is in the main confinedto living matter, and that, since memory is a species of habit, it is unlikely that

there is memory except where there is living matter. Extending this argument,

we can observe that the behaviour of living matter, especially of its higher

forms, is much more dependent on its past history than that of dead matter,

and that, therefore, the whole of that large part of our mental life that depends

upon habit is presumably only to be found where there is living matter. But

such arguments are inconclusive and limited in scope. Just as we cannot be

                                                                                          1
sure that the sun is not bright, so we cannot be sure that it is not intelligent.

We may be right in thinking both improbable, but we are certainly wrong if

we say they are impossible.

  I conclude that, while mental events and their qualities can be known

without inference, physical events are known only as regards their space-time

structure.  The  qualities  that  compose  such  events  are  unknown—so

completely unknown that we cannot say either that they are, or that they are

not, different from the qualities that we know as belonging to mental events.1 I do not wish the reader to take this possibility too seriously. It is of the order of “pigs might fly”,

  dealt with by Mr. Crawshay-Williams in The Comforts of Unreason, p. 193.                                      part IV


                          Scientific Concepts                                          I 


                              Interpretation


IN all that has been said hitherto about the world of science, everything has

been taken at its face value. I am not saying merely that we have taken the

attitude of believing what men of science tell us, for this attitude, up to a

point, is the only rational one for any man who is not a specialist on the

matter in question. In saying that this attitude is rational, I do not mean that

we  should  feel  sure  of  the  truth  of  what  we  are  told,  for  it  is  generally

admitted  that  probably  in  due  course  corrections  will  be  found  necessary.

What I do mean is that the best scientific opinion of the present time has a

better chance of truth, or of approximate truth, than any differing hypothesis

suggested by a layman. The case is analogous to that of firing at a target. If

you  are  a  bad  shot  you  are  not  likely  to  hit  the  bull’s  eye,  but  you  are

nevertheless more likely to hit the bull’s eye than to hit any other equal area.

So the scientist’s hypothesis, though not likely to be quite right, is more likely

to  be  right  than  any  variant  suggested  by  an  unscientific  person.  This,

however, is not the point with which we are concerned in this chapter.

  The  matter  with  which  we  are  now  to  be  concerned  is  not  truth,  but

interpretation. It often happens that we have what seems adequate reason to

believe  in  the  truth  of  some  formula  expressed  in  mathematical  symbols,

although we are not in a position to give a clear definition of the symbols. It

happens also, in other cases, that we can give a number of different meanings

to the symbols, all of which will make the formula true. In the former case we

lack even one definite interpretation of our formula, whereas in the latter we

have many. This situation, which may seem odd, arises in pure mathematics

and  in  mathematical  physics;  it  arises  even  in  interpreting  common-sense

statements such as “my room contains three tables and four chairs”. It will

thus appear that there is a large class of statements, concerning each of which,

in  some  sense,  we  are  more  certain  of  its  truth  than  of  its  meaning.

“Interpretation” is concerned with such statements; it consists in finding asprecise a meaning as possible for a statement of this sort, or, sometimes, in

finding a whole system of possible meanings.

  Let us take first an illustration from pure mathematics. Mankind have long

been convinced that 2 + 2 = 4; they have been so firmly convinced of this that

it has been taken as the stock example of something certain. But when people

were asked what they meant by “2”, “4”, “+”, and “=”, they gave vague and

divergent answers, which made it plain that they did not know what these

symbols  meant.  Some  maintained  that  we  know  each  of  the  numbers  by

intuition, and therefore have no need to define them. This might seem fairly

plausible  where  small  numbers  were  concerned,  but  who  could  have  an

intuition of 3,478,921? So they said we had an intuition of 1 and +; we could

then define “2” as “1 + 1”, “3” as “2 + 1”, “4” as “3 + 1”, and so on. But this did

not work very well. It enabled us to say that 2 + 2 = (1 + 1) + (1 + 1), and that 4

= {(1 + 1) + 1} + 1 and we then needed a fresh intuition to tell us that we could

rearrange the brackets, in fact to assure us that, if l, m, n are three numbers,

then




  Some philosophers were able to produce this intuition on demand, but

most people remained somewhat sceptical of their claims, and felt that some

other method was called for.

  A new development, more germane to our problem of interpretation, was

due to Peano. Peano started with three undefined terms, “0”, “finite integer (or

number)”  and  “successor  of”,  and  concerning  these  terms  he  made  five

assumptions, namely:


(1)  0 is a number;

(2)  If a is a number, the successor of a (i.e. a + 1) is a number;

(3)  If two numbers have the same successor, the two numbers are identical;

(4)  0 is not the successor of any number;

(5)  If s be a class to which belongs o and also the successor of every number

    belonging to s, then every number belongs to s.  The last of these assumptions is the principle of mathematical induction.

  Peano showed that by means of these five assumptions he could prove

every formula in arithmetic.

  But now a new trouble arose. It was assumed that we need not know what

we meant by “0”, “number”, and “successor”, so long as we meant something

satisfying the five assumptions. But then it turned out that there were an

infinite number of possible interpretations. For instance, let “0” mean what we

commonly call “1”, and let “number” mean what we commonly call “number

other than 0”; then all the five assumptions are still true, and all arithmetic

can be proved, though every formula will have an unexpected meaning. “2”

will mean what we usually call “3”, but “2 + 2” will not mean “3 + 3”; it will

mean “3 + 2”, and “2 + 2 = 4” will mean what we usually express by “3 + 2 =

5”. In like manner we could interpret arithmetic on the assumption that “0”

means “100”, and “number” means “number greater than 99”. And so on.

  So long as we remain in the region of arithmetical formulae, all these

different interpretations of “number” are equally good. It is only when we

come to the empirical uses of numbers in enumeration that we find a reason

for preferring one interpretation to all the others. When we buy something in

a shop, and the attendant says “three shillings, please”, his “three” is not a

mere mathematical symbol, meaning “the third term after the beginning of

some  series”;  his  “three”,  in  fact,  is  not  capable  of  being  defined  by  its

arithmetical  properties.  It  is  obvious  that  his  interpretation  of  “three”  is,

outside  arithmetic,  preferable  to  all  the  others  that  Peano’s  system  leaves

possible. Such statements as “men have 10 fingers”, “dogs have 4 legs”, “New

York  has  10,000,000  inhabitants”,  require  a  definition  of  numbers  which

cannot  be  derived  from  the  mere  fact  that  they  satisfy  the  formulae  of

arithmetic.  Such  a  definition  is,  therefore,  the  most  satisfactory

“interpretation” of number-symbols.

  The  same  sort  of  situation  arises  whenever  mathematics  is  applied  to

empirical material. Take, for example, geometry, considered not as a logical

exercise in deducing consequences from arbitrarily assumed axioms, but as a

help  in  land  surveying,  map  making,  engineering,  or  astronomy.  Such

practical  uses  of  geometry  involve  a  difficulty  which,  though  sometimesadmitted  in  a  perfunctory  manner,  is  never  allowed  anything  like  its  due

weight.  Geometry,  as  set  forth  by  the  mathematicians,  uses  points, lines,

planes, and circles, but it is a platitude to say that no such objects are to be

found in nature. When, in surveying, we use the process of triangulation, it is

admitted that our triangles do not have accurate straight lines for their sides

nor exact points at their corners, but this is glozed over by saying that the

sides are approximately straight and the corners approximately points. It is

not at all clear what this means, so long as it is maintained that there are no

exact straight lines or points to which our rough-and-ready lines and points

approximate. We may mean that sensible lines and points have approximately

the properties set forth in Euclid’s definitions and axioms, but unless we can

say, within limits, how close the approximation is, such a view will make

calculation vague and unsatisfactory.

  This problem of the exactness of mathematics and the inexactness of sense

is  an  ancient  one,  which  Plato  solved  by  the  fantastic  hypothesis  of

reminiscence. In modern times, like some other unsolved problems, it has been

forgotten through familiarity, like a bad smell which you no longer notice

because you have lived with it so long. It is clear that, if geometry is to be

applied to the sensible world, we must be able to find definitions of points,

lines, planes, etc., in terms of sensible data, or else we must be able to infer

from sensible data the existence of unperceived entities having the properties

that geometry needs. To find ways, or a way, of doing one or other of these

things is the problem of the empirical interpretation of geometry.

  There is also a non-empirical interpretation, which leaves geometry within

the sphere of pure mathematics. The assemblage of all ordered trios of real

numbers forms a three-dimensional Euclidean space. With this interpretation,

all  Euclidean  geometry  is  deducible  from  arithmetic.  Every  non-Euclidean

geometry is capable of a similar arithmetical interpretation. It can be proved

that Euclidean geometry, and every form of non-Euclidean geometry, can be

applied to every class having the same number of terms as the real numbers;

the  question  of  the  number  of  dimensions,  and  whether  the  resulting

geometry  is  Euclidean  or  non-Euclidean,  will  depend  upon  the  ordering

relation that we select; an infinite number of ordering relations exist (in thelogical sense), and only reasons of empirical convenience can lead us to select

some one among them for special attention. All this is relevant in considering

what interpretation of pure geometry had better be adopted by the engineer or

the  physicist.  It  shows  that,  in  an  empirical  interpretation,  the  ordering

relation, and not only the terms ordered, must be defined in empirical terms.

  Very similar considerations apply to time, which, however, so far as our

present  question  is  concerned,  is  not  so  difficult  a  problem  as  space.  In

mathematical physics, time is treated as consisting of instants, though the

perplexed  student  is  assured  that  instants  are  mathematical  fictions.  No

attempt is made to show him why fictions are useful, or how they are related

to what is not fictitious. He finds that by the use of these fairy tales it is

possible to calculate what really happens, and after a time he probably ceases

to trouble himself as to why this is the case.

    Instants were not always regarded as fictions; Newton thought them as

“real” as the sun and moon. When this view was abandoned, it was easy to

swing to the opposite extreme, and to forget that a fiction which is useful is

not likely to be a mere fiction. There are degrees of fictiveness. Let us, for the

moment, regard an individual person as something in no degree fictive; what,

then, shall we say of the various aggregates of persons to which he belongs?

Most people would hesitate to regard a family as a fictitious unit, but what

about  a  political  party  or  a  cricket  club?  What  about  the  assemblage  of

persons called “Smith”, to which we will suppose our individual to belong? If

you believe in astrology, you will attach importance to the assemblage of

persons born under a certain planet; if you do not, you will regard such an

assemblage as fictive. These distinctions are not logical; from the logical point

of view, all assemblages of individuals are equally real or equally fictive. The

importance  of  the  distinctions  is  practical,  not  logical:  there  are  some

assemblages about which there are many useful things to be said, and others

about which this is not the case.

  When we say that instants are useful fictions, we must be supposed to

mean that there are entities to which, as to individual people, we feel inclined

to attach a high degree of “reality” (whatever that may mean), and that, in

comparison with them, instants have that lesser degree of “reality” that cricketclubs have in relation to their members; but we wish also to say that about

instants, as about families as opposed to “artificial” aggregates of people, there

are many practically important things to say.

  All  this  is  very  vague,  and  the  problem  of  interpretation  is  that of

substituting something precise, remembering always that, however we define

“instants”, they must have the properties required in mathematical physics.

Given  two  interpretations  which  both  satisfy  this  requisite,  the  choice

between them is one of taste and convenience; there is not one interpretation

which is “right” and others that are “wrong”.

  In classical physics, the technical apparatus consists of points, instants,

and  particles.  It  is  assumed  that  there  is  a  three-term  relation,  that  of

occupying a point at an instant, and what occupies a point at an instant is

called  a  “particle”.  It  is  also  assumed  technically  that  particles  are

indestructible, so that whatever occupies a point at a given instant occupies

some point at every other instant. When I say that this is assumed, I do not

mean that it is asserted to be a fact, but that the technique is based on the

assumption that no harm will come of treating it as a fact. This is still held to

be the case in macroscopic physics, but in microscopic physics “particles” have

been gradually disappearing. “Matter” in the old sense is no longer needed;

what is needed is “energy”, which is not defined except as regards its laws and

the relation of changes in its distribution to our sensations, more especially

the relation of frequencies to colour-perceptions.

    Broadly speaking, we may say that the fundamental technical apparatus of

modern physics is a four-dimensional manifold of “events” ordered by space-

time relations, which can be analysed into a spatial and a temporal component

in a number of ways, the choice between which is arbitrary. Since the calculus

is still used, it is still technically assumed that space-time is continuous, but it

is not clear how far this assumption is more than a mathematical convenience.

Nor is it clear that “events” have that precise location in space-time that used

to characterize a particle at an instant. All this makes the question of the

interpretation of modern physics very difficult, but in the absence of some

interpretation  we  cannot  say  what  is  being  asserted  by  the  quantum

physicists.    “Interpretation”, in its logical aspect, is somewhat different from the rather

vague  and  difficult  concept  which  we  considered  at  the  beginning  of  this

Chapter.  We  were  there  concerned  with  symbolic  statements  which  are

known  to  have  a  connection  with  observable  phenomena,  and  to  lead  to

results  which  observation  confirms,  but  are  somewhat  indeterminate  in

meaning except in so far as their connection with observation defines them. In

this case we can say, as we said at the beginning of this Chapter, that we are

pretty sure our formulae are true, but not at all sure what they mean. In logic,

however, we proceed differently. Our formulae are not regarded as “true” or

“false”, but as hypotheses containing variables. A set of values of the variables

which makes the hypotheses true is an “interpretation”. The word “point”, in

geometry, may be interpreted as meaning “ordered triad of real numbers”, or,

as  we  shall  see,  as  meaning  what  we  shall  call  “complete  complex  of

compresence”; it may also be interpreted in an infinite number of other ways.

What  all  the  ways  have  in  common  is  that  they  satisfy  the  axioms  of

geometry.

  We  often  have,  both  in  pure  and  applied  mathematics,  collections  of

formulae  all  logically  deducible  from  a  small  number  of  initial  formulae,

which may be called “axioms”. These axioms may be regarded as hostages for

the whole system, and we may concentrate our attention exclusively upon

them. The axioms consist partly of terms having a known definition, partly of

terms which, in any interpretation, will remain variables, and partly of terms

which, though as yet undefined, are intended to acquire definitions when the

axioms are “interpreted”. The process of interpretation consists in finding a

constant signification for this class of terms. The signification may be given

by a verbal definition, or may be given ostensively. It must be such that, with

this interpretation, the axioms become true. (Before interpretation, they are

neither true nor false.) It thus follows that all their consequences are also true.

    Suppose, for example, we wish to interpret the formulae of arithmetic. In

Peano’s five axioms (given above) there are: first, logical terms, such as “is a”

and “is identical with”, of which the meaning is supposed known; second,

variables, such as a and s, which are to remain variables after interpretation;

third, the terms “0”, “number”, and “successor of”, for which an interpretationis to find a constant meaning which makes the five axioms true. As we saw,

there are an infinite number of interpretations satisfying these conditions, but

there is only one among them which also satisfies empirical statements of

enumeration, such as “I have 10 fingers”. In this case, therefore, there is one

interpretation which is very much more convenient than any of the others.

  As we saw in the case of geometry, a given set of axioms may be capable

of  two  sorts  of  interpretation,  one  logical  and  one  empirical.  All  nominal

definitions, if pushed back far enough, must lead ultimately to terms having

only  ostensive  definitions,  and  in  the  case  of  an  empirical  science  the

empirical terms must depend upon terms of which the ostensive definition is

given in perception. The astronomer’s sun, for instance, is very different from

what  we  see,  but  it  must  have  a  definition  derived  from  the  ostensive

definition of the word “sun” which we learnt in childhood. Thus an empirical

interpretation of a set of axioms, when complete, must always involve the use

of terms which have an ostensive definition derived from sensible experience.

It will not, of course, contain only such terms, for there will always be logical

terms; but it is the presence of terms derived from experience that makes an

interpretation empirical.

  The question of interpretation has been unduly neglected. So long as we

remain in the region of mathematical formulae, everything appears precise,

but when we seek to interpret them it turns out that the precision is partly

illusory.  Until  this  matter  has  been  cleared  up,  we  cannot  tell  with  any

exactitude what any given science is asserting.                                          II 


                      Minimum Vocabularies


IN the present chapter we shall be concerned with a linguistic technique which

is  very  useful  in  the  analysis  of  scientific  concepts.  There  are  as  a  rule  a

number of ways in which the words used in a science can be defined in terms

of a few among them. These few may have ostensive definitions, or may have

nominal  definitions  in  terms  of  words  not  belonging  to  the  science  in

question, or—so long as the science is not “interpreted” in the sense considered

in  the  last  chapter—they  may  be  left  without  either  ostensive  or  nominal

definition, and regarded merely as a set of terms having the properties which

the science ascribes to its fundamental terms. Such a set of initial words I call

a “minimum vocabulary” for the science in question, provided that (a) every

other word used in the science has a nominal definition in terms of these

words, and (b) no one of these initial words has a nominal definition in terms

of the other initial words.

    Everything  said  in  a  science  can  be  said  by  means  of  the  words  in  a

minimum  vocabulary.  For  whenever  a  word  occurs  which  has  a  nominal

definition, we can substitute the defining phrase; if this contains words with a

nominal definition, we can again substitute the defining phrase, and so on,

until none of the remaining words have nominal definitions. In fact, definable

terms are superfluous, and only undefined terms are indispensable. But the

question  which  terms  are  to  be  undefined  is  in  part  arbitrary.  Take,  for

example,  the  calculus  of  proposition,  which  is  the  simplest  and  most

completed  example  of  a  formal  system.  We  can  take  “or”  and  “not”  as

undefined, or “and” and “not”; instead of two such undefined terms, we can

take one, which may be “not this or not that” or “not this and not that”. Thus

in  general  we  cannot  say  that  such-and-such  a  word must  belong  to  the

minimum vocabulary of such-and-such a science, but at most that there are

one or more minimum vocabularies to which it belongs.

  Let us take geography as an example. I shall assume the vocabulary ofgeometry already established; then our first distinctively geographical need is

a method of assigning latitude and longitude. For this it will suffice to have as

part of our minimum vocabulary “Greenwich”, “the North Pole”, and “West

of”; but clearly any other place would do as well as Greenwich, and the South

Pole would do as well as the North Pole. The relation “west of” is not really

necessary, for a parallel of latitude is a circle on the earth’s surface in a plane

perpendicular to the diameter passing through the North Pole. The remainder

of  the  words  used  in  physical  geography,  such  as  “land”  and  “water”,

“mountain” and “plain”, can now be defined in terms of chemistry, physics, or

geometry.  Thus  it  would  seem  that  it  is  the  two  words  “Greenwich”  and

“North Pole” that are needed in order to make geography a science concerning

the  surface  of  the  earth,  and  not  some  other  spheroid.  It  is  owing  to  the

presence of these two words (or two others serving the same purpose) that

geography is able to relate the discoveries of travellers. It is to be observed

that  these  two  words  are  involved  wherever  latitude  and  longitude  are

mentioned.

  As this example illustrates, a science is apt to acquire a smaller minimum

vocabulary  as  it  becomes  more  systematic.  The  ancients  knew  many

geographical facts before they knew how to assign latitudes and longitudes,

but to express these facts they needed a larger number of undefined words

than we need. Since the earth is a spheroid, not a sphere, “North-Pole” need

not be undefined: we can define the two Poles as the extremities of the earth’s

shortest diameter, and the North Pole as the Pole nearer to Greenwich. In this

way we can manage with “Greenwich” as the only undefined term peculiar to

geography.  The  earth  itself  is  defined  as  “that  spheroid  whose  surface  is

formed of land and water bounded by air, and on whose surface Greenwich is

situated”. But here we seem to reach a dead end in the way of diminishing our

minimum vocabulary: if we are to be sure that we are talking about the earth,

we must mention some place on its surface or having a given geometrical

relation to it, and the place must be one which we can recognize. Therefore

although “New York” or “Moscow” or “Timbuctoo” would do just as well as

“Greenwich”, some place must be included in any minimum vocabulary for

geography.  One further point is illustrated by our discussion of Greenwich, and that

is,  that  the  terms  which  are  officially  undefined  in  a science  may  not  be

identical with those that are undefined for a given person. If you have never

seen Greenwich, the word “Greenwich” cannot, for you, have an ostensive

definition; therefore you cannot understand the word unless it has a nominal

definition. In fact, if you live in a place called “P”, then for you “P” takes the

place of Greenwich, and your official longitude, for you, defines the meridian

of Greenwich, not the longitude of P. Such considerations, however, are pre-

scientific, and are usually ignored in the analysis of scientific concepts. For

certain  purposes,  they  cannot  be  ignored,  particularly  when  we  are

considering the relation of science to sensible experience; but as a rule there is

little danger in ignoring them.

  Let us consider next the question of minimum vocabularies for astronomy.

Astronomy consists of two parts, one a kind of cosmic geography, the other

an application of physics. Statements as to the size and orbits of the planets

belong  to  cosmic  geography,  whereas  Newton’s  and  Einstein’s  theories  of

gravitation belong to physics. The difference is that, in the geographical part,

we are concerned with statements of fact as to what is where, while in the

part which is physics we are concerned with laws. As I shall presently be

considering physics on its own account, let us consider first the geographical

part of astronomy. In this part, so long as it is in an elementary stage, we need

proper names for the sun, the moon, the planets, and all the stars and nebulae.

The number of proper names required can, however, be steadily reduced as

the science of astronomy advances. “Mercury” can be defined as meaning “the

planet nearest the sun”, “Venus” as “the second planet”, “the earth” as “the

third planet”, and so on. Constellations are defined by their co-ordinates, and

the several stars in a constellation by their order of brightness.

  On this system, “the sun” will remain part of our minimum vocabulary,

and we shall need what is necessary for defining celestial co-ordinates. “The

Pole Star” will not be necessary, since it may be defined as “the star without

diurnal revolution”, but we shall need some other heavenly body to fulfil the

function which Greenwich fulfils in terrestrial geography. In this way official

astronomy could get on with (it would seem) only two proper names, “thesun” and (say) “Sirius”. “The moon”, for instance, can be defined as “the body

whose  co-ordinates  on  such-and-such a  date  are  so-and-so.”  With  this

vocabulary we can, in a sense, state everything that the astronomer wishes to

say, just as, with Peano’s three undefined terms, we can state all arithmetic.

  But just as Peano’s system proves inadequate when we come to counting,

so our official astronomy proves inadequate when we attempt to link it to

observation. There are two essential propositions which it fails to include,

namely “that is the sun” and “that is Sirius”. We have, it appears, formed a

vocabulary for astronomy in the abstract, but not for astronomy as a record of

observations.

  Plato, who was interested in astronomy solely as a body of laws, wished it

to be wholly divorced from sense; those who were interested in the actual

heavenly bodies that happen to exist would, he said, be punished in the next

incarnation by being birds. This point of view is not nowadays adopted by

men of science, but it, or something very like it, is to be found in the works of

Carnap and some other logical positivists. They are not, I think, conscious of

holding any such opinion, and would vehemently repudiate it; but absorption

in  words,  as  opposed  to  what  they  mean,  has  exposed  them  to  Platonic

temptation, and led them down strange paths towards perdition, or what an

empiricist must consider such. Astronomy is not merely a collection of words

and sentences; it is a collection of words and sentences chosen, from others

that  were  linguistically  just  as  good,  because  they  described  a  world

connected with sensible experience. So long as sensible experience is ignored,

no reason appears for concerning ourselves with a large body having just so

many  planets  at  just  such  distances  from  it.  And  the  sentences  in  which

sensible experience breaks in are such as “that is the sun”.

  Every advanced empirical science has two aspects: on the one hand, it

consists of a body of propositions interconnected in various ways, and often

containing a small selection from which all the others can be deduced; on the

other hand, it is an attempt to describe some part or aspect of the universe. In

the former aspect, the truth or falsehood of the several propositions is not in

question, but only their mutual connections. For example, if gravitation varied

directly as the distance, planets (if any) would revolve round the sun (if itexisted) in ellipses of which the sun would occupy the centre, not a focus. This

proposition is not part of descriptive astronomy. There is a similar statement,

also  not  part  of  descriptive  astronomy,  saying  that  if  gravitation  varies

inversely as the square of the distance, planets (if any) will go round the sun

(if any) in ellipses of which the sun will occupy a focus. This is different from

the two statements: gravitation varies inversely as the square of the distance,

and planets revolve in ellipses round the sun in a focus. The former statement

is a hypothetical; the two latter assert both the antecedent and the consequent

of the previous hypothetical. What enables them to do this is the appeal to

observation.

  The appeal to observation is made in statements such as “that is the sun”;

such  statements,  therefore,  are  essential  to  the  truth  of  astronomy.  Such

statements never appear in any finished exposition of an astronomical theory,

but they do appear while a theory is being established. For instance, after the

eclipse observations in 1919, we were told that the photographs of certain stars

appeared  with  such-and-such  a  displacement  towards  the  sun.  This  was  a

statement  as  to  the  positions  of  certain  dots  on  a  photographic  plate,  as

observed by certain astronomers at a certain date; it was a statement not

primarily belonging to astronomy, but to biography, and yet it constituted the

evidence for an important astronomical theory.

  The vocabulary of astronomy, it thus appears, is wider if we consider it as

a body of propositions deriving truth, or at least probability, from observation,

than  it  is  if  we  treat  it  as  a  purely  hypothetical  system  whose  truth  or

falsehood does not concern us. In the former case we must be able to say “that

is the sun”, or something of the sort; in the latter case, no such necessity

arises.

  Physics,  which  we  must  next  consider,  is  in  a  different  position  from

geography and astronomy, since it is not concerned to say what exists where,

but only to establish general laws. “Copper conducts electricity” is a law of

physics, but “there is copper in Cornwall” is a fact of geography. The physicist

as such does not care where there is copper, so long as there is enough in his

laboratory.

  In the earlier stages of physics the word “copper” was necessary, but nowit has become definable. “Copper” is “the element whose atomic number is

29”, and this definition enables us to deduce many things about the copper

atom. All the elements can be defined in terms of electrons and protons, or at

any  rate  of  electrons,  positrons,  neutrons,  and  protons.  (Perhaps  a  proton

consists of a neutron and a positron.) These units themselves can be defined

by their mass and electric charge. In the last analysis, since mass is a form of

energy,  it  would  seem  that  energy,  electric  charge,  and  space-time  co-

ordinates  are  all  that  physics  needs;  and  owing  to  the  absence  of  the

geographical  element  the  co-ordinates  can  remain  purely  hypothetical,  i.e.

there need be no analogue of Greenwich. Physics as a “pure” science—i.e.

apart from methods of verification—would seem, therefore, to require only a

four-dimensional continuum containing distributions of varying amounts of

energy and electricity. Any four-dimensional continuum will do, and “energy”

and “electricity” need only be quantities whose mode of change of distribution

is subject to certain assigned laws.

  When physics is brought to this degree of abstraction it becomes a branch

of pure mathematics, which can be pursued without reference to the actual

world, and which requires no vocabulary beyond that of pure mathematics.

The mathematics, however, are such as no pure mathematician would have

thought of for himself. The equations, for instance, contain Planck’s constant

                                                      −27
h, of which the magnitude is about 6 · 55 × 10 erg sees. No one would have

thought of introducing just this quantity if there had not been experimental

reasons for doing so, and as soon as we introduce experimental reasons the

whole picture is changed. The four-dimensional continuum is no longer a

mere mathematical hypothesis, but the space-time continuum to which we

have been led by successive refinements of the space and time with which we

are familiar in experience. Electricity is no longer just any quantity, but the

thing  measured  by  the  observable  behaviour  of  our  electrical  instruments.

Energy, though highly abstract, is a generalization arrived at by means of

completely concrete experiments such as those of Joule. Physics as verifiable,

therefore, uses various empirical concepts in addition to those purely abstract

concepts that are needed in “pure” physics.

  Let us consider in more detail the definition of such a term as “energy”.The  important  point  about  energy  is  its  constancy,  and  the  chief  step  in

establishing its constancy was the determination of the mechanical equivalent

of heat. This was effected by observation, for example of thermometers. If,

then, we mean by “physics” not merely the body of physical laws, but these

together with the evidence for their truth, then we must include in “physics”

Joule’s perceptions when he looked at thermometers. And what do we mean

by “heat”? The plain man means a certain kind of sensation, or its (to him)

unknown cause; the physicist means a rapid agitation of the minute parts of

bodies. But what has led the physicist to this definition? Only the fact that,

when we feel heat, there is reason to think that such agitation is occurring. Or

take the fact that friction causes heat: our primary evidence for this fact is that

when we have seen friction we can feel heat. All the non-mathematical terms

used in physics considered as an experimental science have their origin in our

sensible experience, and it is only on this account that sensible experience can

confirm or confute physical laws.

  It  thus  appears  that,  if  physics  is  regarded  as  a  science  based  on

observation, not as a branch of pure mathematics, and if the evidence for

physical laws is held to be part of physics, then any minimum vocabulary for

physics must be such as to enable us to mention the experiences upon which

our  physical  beliefs  are  based.  We  shall  need  such  words  as  “hot”,  “red”,

“hard”, not only to describe what physics asserts to be the condition of bodies

that give us these sensations, but also to describe the sensations themselves.

Suppose I say, for instance: By “red” light I mean light of such-and-such a

range of wave-lengths. In that case the statement that light of such wave-

lengths makes me see red is a tautology, and until the nineteenth century

people were uttering meaningless noises when they said that blood is red,

because  nothing  was  known  of  the  correlation  of  wave-lengths  with

sensations of colour. This is absurd. It is obvious that “red” has a meaning

independent of physics, and that this meaning is relevant in collecting data for

the physical theory of colours, just as the pre-scientific meaning of “hot” is

relevant in establishing the physical theory of heat.

  The main conclusion of the above discussion of minimum vocabularies is

that every empirical science, however abstract, must contain in any minimumvocabulary words descriptive of our experiences. Even the most mathematical

terms, such as “energy”, must, when the chain of definitions is completed until

we reach terms of which there is only an ostensive definition, be found to

depend for their meaning upon terms directly descriptive of experiences, or

even,  in  what  may  be  called  the  “geographical”  sciences,  giving  names  to

particular  experiences.  This  conclusion,  if  valid,  is  important,  and  affords

great assistance in the work of interpreting scientific theories.                                          III 


                                    Structure


IN the present chapter we shall be concerned with a purely logical discussion

which is essential as a preliminary to any further steps in the interpretation of

science.  The  logical  concept  which  I  shall  endeavour  to  explain  is  that  of

“structure”.

  To exhibit the structure of an object is to mention its parts and the ways in

which they are interrelated. If you were learning anatomy, you might first

learn the names and shapes of the various bones, and then be taught where

each bone belongs in the skeleton. You would then know the structure of the

skeleton in so far as anatomy has anything to say about it. But you would not

have come to an end of what can be said about structure in relation to the

skeleton.  Bones  are  composed  of  cells,  and  cells  of  molecules,  and  each

molecule has an atomic structure which it is the business of chemistry to

study. Atoms, in turn, have a structure which is studied in physics. At this

point orthodox science ceases its analysis, but there is no reason to suppose

that  further  analysis  is  impossible.  We  shall  have  occasion  to  suggest  the

analysis of physical entities into structures of events, and even events, as I

shall try to show, may be regarded with advantage as having a structure.

  Let us consider next a somewhat different example of structure, namely

sentences. A sentence is a series of words, arranged in order by the relation of

earlier and later if the sentence is spoken, and of left to right if it is written.

But these relations are not really between words; they are between instances

of words. A word is a class of similar noises, all having the same meaning or

nearly the same meaning. (For simplicity I shall confine myself to speech as

opposed to writing.) A sentence also is a class of noises, since many people

can utter the  same sentence. We must say, then, not that a  sentence is a

temporal  series  of  words,  but  that  a  sentence  is  a  class  of  noises,  each

consisting of a series of noises in quick temporal succession, each of these

latter  noises  being  an  instance  of  a  word.  (This  is  a  necessary  but  not  asufficient characteristic of a sentence; it is not sufficient because some series

of  words  are  not  significant.)  I  will  not  linger  on  the  distinction between

different parts of speech, but will go on to the next stage in analysis, which

belongs no longer to syntax, but to phonetics. Each instance of a word is a

complex  sound,  the  parts  being  the  separate  letters  (assuming  a  phonetic

alphabet). Behind the phonetic analysis there is a further stage: the analysis of

the complex physiological process of uttering or hearing a single letter. Behind

the  physiological  analysis  is  the  analysis  of  physics,  and  from  this  point

onward analysis proceeds as in the case of the bones.

  In  the  above  account  I  passed  hastily  over  two  points  that  need

elucidation,  namely  that  words  have meaning  and  sentences  have

significance. “Rain” is a word, but “raim” is not, though both are classes of

similar noises. “Rain is falling” is a sentence, but “rain snow elephant” is not,

though both are series of words. To define “meaning” and “significance” is not

easy,  as  we  saw  in  discussing  the  theory  of  language.  The  attempt  is  not

necessary so long as we confine ourselves strictly to questions of structure. A

word acquires meaning by an external relation, just as a man acquires the

property of being an uncle. No post mortem, however thorough, will reveal

whether the man was an uncle or not, and no analysis of a set of noises (so

long as everything external to them is excluded) will show whether this set of

noises has meaning, or significance if the set is a series of what seem to be

words.

  The  above  example  illustrates  that  an  analysis  of  structure,  however

complete, does not tell you all that you may wish to know about an object. It

tells you only what are the parts of the object and how they are related to

each other; it tells you nothing about the relations of the object to objects that

are not parts or components of it.

  The analysis of structure usually proceeds by successive stages, as in both

the above examples. What are taken as unanalysed units in one stage are

themselves exhibited as complex structures in the next stage. The skeleton is

composed of bones, the bones of cells, the cells of molecules, the molecules of

atoms, the atoms of electrons, positrons, and neutrons; further analysis is as

yet conjectural. Bones, molecules, atoms, and electrons may each be treated,for certain purposes, as if they were unanalysable units devoid of structure,

but at no stage is there any positive reason to suppose that this is in fact the

case. The ultimate units so far reached may at any moment turn out to be

capable of analysis. Whether there must be units incapable of analysis because

they  are  destitute  of  parts,  is  a  question  which  there  seems  no  way  of

deciding. Nor is it important, since there is nothing erroneous in an account of

structure which starts from units that are afterwards found to be themselves

complex. For example, points may be defined as classes of events, but that

does  not  falsify  anything  in  traditional  geometry,  which  treated  points  as

simples. Every account of structure is relative to certain units which are, for

the time being, treated as if they were devoid of structure, but it must never

be assumed that these units will not, in another context, have a structure

which it is important to recognize.

  There is a concept of “identity of structure” which is of great importance

in relation to a large number of questions. Before giving a precise definition of

this concept I will give some preliminary illustrations of it.

  Let  us  begin  with  linguistic  illustrations.  Suppose  that,  in  any  given

sentence,  you  substitute  other  words,  but  in  a  way  which  still  leaves  the

sentence  significant;  then  the  new  sentence  has  the  same  structure  as  the

original one. Suppose, e.g., you start with “Plato loved Socrates”; for “Plato”

substitute  “Brutus”,  for  “loved”  substitute  “killed”,  and  for  “  Socrates”

substitute “ Cæsar”. You thus arrive at the sentence “Brutus killed Cæsar”,

which has the same structure as “Plato loved Socrates”. All sentences having

this structure are called “dyadic-relation sentences”. Similarly from “Socrates

is Greek” you could have passed to “Brutus is Roman” without change of

structure;  sentences  having  this  structure  are  called  “subject-predicate

sentences”. In this way sentences can be classified by their structure; there are

in theory an infinite number of structures that sentences may have.

  Logic is concerned with sentences that are true in virtue of their structure,

and that always remain true when other words are substituted, so long as the

substitution does not destroy significance. Take, for example, the sentence: “If

all men are mortal and Socrates is a man, then Socrates is mortal.” Here we

may  substitute  other  words  for  “Socrates”,  “man”,  and  “mortal”,  withoutdestroying the truth of the sentence. It is true that there are other words in the

sentence,’  namely  “if-then”  (which  must  count  as  one  word),  “all”,  “are”,

“and”, “is”, “a”. These words must not be changed. But these are “logical”

words, and their purpose is to indicate structure; when they are changed, the

structure is changed. (All this raises problems, but it is not necessary for our

present purpose to go into them.) A sentence belongs to logic if we can be sure

that it is true (or that it is false) without having to know the meanings of any

of the words except those that indicate structure. That is the reason for the use

of  variables.  Instead  of  the  above  sentence  about  Socrates  and  man  and

mortal, we say: “If all α’s are β’s and x is an α, then x is a β.” Whatever x and

α and β may be, this sentence is true; it is true in virtue of its structure. It is in

order to make this clear that we use “x” and “α” and “β” instead of ordinary

words.

  Let us take next the relation of a district to a map of it. If the district is

small, so that the curvature of the earth can be neglected, the principle is

simple: east and west are represented by right and left, north and south by up

and down, and all distances are reduced in the same proportion. It follows

that from every statement about the map you can infer one about the district,

and vice versa. If there are two towns, A and B, and the map is on the scale of

an inch to the mile, then from the fact that the mark “A” is ten inches from

the mark “B” you can infer that A is ten miles from B, and conversely; and

from the direction of the line from the mark “A” to the mark “B” you can infer

the direction of the line from A to B. These inferences are possible owing to

identity of structure between the map and the district.

  Now  take  a  somewhat  more  complicated  illustration:  the  relation  of  a

gramophone record to the music that it plays. It is obvious that it could not

produce this music unless there were a certain identity of structure between it

and the music, which can be exhibited by translating sound-relations into

space-relations, or vice versa—e.g. what is nearer to the centre on the record

corresponds to what is later in time in the music. It is only because of the

identity of structure that the record is able to cause the music. Very similar

considerations apply to telephones, broadcasting, etc.

  We can generalize such examples so as to deal with the relations of ourperceptual  experiences  to  the  external  world.  A  wireless  set  transforms

electromagnetic  waves  into  sound  waves;  a  human  organism  transforms

sound waves into auditory sensations. The electromagnetic waves and the

sound waves have a certain similarity of structure, and so (we may assume)

have the sound waves and the auditory sensations. Whenever one complex

structure causes another, there must be much the same structure in the cause

and in the effect, as in the case of the gramophone record and the music. This

is  plausible  if  we  accept  the  maxim  “same  cause,  same  effect”  and  its

consequence, “different effects, different causes”. If this principle is regarded

as valid, we can infer from a complex sensation or series of sensations the

structure  of  its  physical  cause,  but  nothing  more,  except  that  relations  of

neighbourhood must be preserved, i.e. neighbouring causes have neighbouring

effects.  This  argument  is  one  which  needs  much  amplification;  for  the

moment I am merely mentioning it by way of anticipation, in order to show

one of the important applications of the concept of structure.

  We can now proceed to the formal definition of “structure”. It is to be

observed that structure always involves relations: a mere class, as such, has no

structure. Out of the terms of a given class many structures can be made, just

as many different sorts of houses can be made out of a given heap of bricks.

Every relation has what is called a “field”, which consists of all the terms that

have the relation to something or to which something has the relation. Thus

the  field  of  “parent”  is  the  class  of  parents  and  children,  and  the  field  of

“husband” is the class of husbands and wives. Such relations have two terms,

and  are  called  “dyadic”.  There  are  also  relations  of  three  terms,  such  as

jealousy and “between”; these are called “triadic”. If I say “A bought B from C

for D pounds”, I am using a “tetradic” relation. If I say “A minds B’s love for C

more than D’s hatred of E”, I am using a “pentadic” relation. To this series of

kinds of relation there is no theoretical limit.

  Let us in the first instance confine ourselves to dyadic relations. We shall

say that a class α ordered by the relation R has the same structure as a class β

ordered  by  the  relation  S,  if  to  every  term  in  α  some  one  term  in  β

corresponds, and vice versa, and if when two terms in α have the relation R,

then the corresponding terms in β have the relation S, and vice versa. We mayillustrate by the similarity between a spoken and a written sentence. Here the

class of spoken words in the sentence is α, the class of written words in the

sentence is β, and if one spoken word is earlier than another, then the written

word corresponding to the one is to the left of the written word corresponding

to the other (or to the right if the language is Hebrew). It is in consequence of

this identity of structure that spoken and written sentences can be translated

into each other. The process of learning to read and write is the process of

learning which spoken word corresponds to a given written word and vice

versa.

  A structure may be defined by several relations. Take, for instance, a piece

of music. One note may be earlier or later than another, or simultaneous with

it.  One  note  may  be  louder  than  another,  or  higher  in  pitch,  or  differing

through a wealth or poverty of harmonics. All the relations of this kind that

are musically relevant must have analogues in a gramophone record if it is to

give  a  good  reproduction.  In  saying  that  the  record  must  have  the  same

structure as the music, we are not concerned with only one relation R between

the  notes  of  the  music  and  one  corresponding  relation  S  between  the

corresponding marks on the record, but with a number of relations such as R

and a number of corresponding relations such as S. Some maps use different

colours for different altitudes; in that case, different positions on the map

correspond  to  different  latitudes  and  longitudes,  while  different  colours

correspond to different elevations. The identity of structure in such maps is

greater than in others; that is why they are able to give more information.

  The definition of identity of structure is exactly the same for relations of

higher orders as it is for dyadic relations. Given, for example, two triadic

relations R and S, and given two classes α and β of which α is contained in the

field of R while β is contained in the field of S, we shall say that α ordered by

R has the same structure as β ordered by S if there is a way of correlating one

member of α to one of β, and vice versa, so that, if a, a, a are correlated
                                                                123

respectively with b, b, b, if R relates a, a, a (in that order), then S relates b,
                      1231231

b, b  (in  that  order),  and  vice  versa.  Here,  again,  there  may  be  several
23

relations such as R, and several such as S; in that case, there is identity of

structure in various respects.  When two complexes have the same structure, every statement about the

one, in so far as it depends only on structure, has a corresponding statement

about the other, true if the first was true, and false if the first was false. Hence

arises the possibility of a dictionary, by means of which statements about the

one complex can be translated into statements about the other. Or, instead of

a dictionary, we may continue to use the same words, but attach different

meanings to them according to the complex to which they are referred. This

sort of thing happens in interpreting a sacred text or the laws of physics. The

“days” in the Biblical account of the Creation are taken to mean “ages”, and in

this way Genesis is reconciled with geology. In physics, assuming that our

knowledge of the physical world is only as to the structure resulting from the

empirically known relation of “neighbourhood” in the topological sense, we

have  immense  latitude  in  the  interpretation  of  our  symbols.  Every

interpretation  that  preserves  the  equations  and  the  connection  with  our

perceptive experiences has an equal claim to be regarded as possibly the true

one, and may be used with equal right by the physicist to clothe the bare

bones of his mathematics.

  Take, for example, the question of waves versus particles. Until recently it

was thought that this was a substantial question: light must consist either of

waves or of little packets called photons. It was regarded as unquestionable

that matter consisted of particles. But at last it was found that the equations

were  the  same  if  both  matter  and  light  consisted  of  particles,  or  if  both

consisted  of  waves.  Not  only  were  the  equations  the  same,  but  all  the

verifiable consequences were the same. Either hypothesis, therefore, is equally

legitimate, and neither can be regarded as having a superior claim to truth.

The reason is that the physical world can have the same structure, and the

same relation to experience, on the one hypothesis as on the other.

    Considerations derived from the importance of structure show that our

knowledge,  especially  in  physics,  is  much  more  abstract  and  much  more

infected with logic than it used to seem. There is however a very definite limit

to the process of turning physics into logic and mathematics; it is set by the

fact that physics is an empirical science, depending for its credibility upon

relations to our perceptive experiences. The further development of this thememust be postponed until we come to the theory of scientific inference.                                          IV 


      Structure and Minimum Vocabularies


THE reader will remember that, in relation to a given body of knowledge, a

minimum vocabulary is defined as one having the two properties (1) that

every proposition in the given body of knowledge can be expressed by means

of words belonging to the minimum vocabulary, (2) that no Word in this

vocabulary can be defined in terms of other words in it. In the present chapter

I wish to show the connection of this definition with structure.

  The first thing to notice is that a minimum vocabulary cannot contain

names for complexes of which the structure is known. Take (say) the name

“France”. This denotes a certain geographical region, and can be defined as

“all  places  within  such-and-such  boundaries”.  But  we  cannot  conversely

define the boundaries in terms of “France”. We want to be able to say “this

place is on the boundaries of France”, which requires a name for this place, or

for constituents which compose it. “This place” enters into the definition of

“France”, but “France” does not enter into the definition of “this place”.

  It follows that every discovery of structure enables us to diminish the

minimum vocabulary required for a given subject-matter. Chemistry used to

need names for all the elements, but now the various elements can be defined

in terms of atomic structure, by the use of two words, “electron” and “proton”

(or perhaps three words, “electron”, “positron”, and “neutron”). Any region in

space-time can be defined in terms of its parts, but its parts cannot be defined

in terms of it. A man can be defined by enumerating, in the right temporal

order, all the events that happen to him, but the events cannot be defined in

terms of him. If you wish to speak both about complexes and about the things

that are in fact their constituents, you can always achieve it without names

for the complexes, if you know their structure. In this way analysis simplifies,

systematizes, and diminishes your initial apparatus.

  The words required in an empirical science are of three sorts. There are,

first, proper names, which usually denote some continuous portion of space-time; such are “Socrates”, “Wales”, “the sun”. Then there are words denoting

qualities  or  relations;  instances  of  qualities  are  “red”,  “hot”,  “loud”,  and

instances of relations are “above”, “before”, “between”. Then there are logical

words, such as “or”, “not”, “some”, “all”. For our present purposes we may

ignore logical words, and concentrate upon the other two kinds.

  It is usually taken for granted that the analysis of something that has a

proper name consists in dividing it into spatio-temporal parts. Wales consists

of counties, the counties consist of parishes, each parish consists of the church,

the school, etc. The church in turn has parts, and so we can continue (it is

thought)  until  we  reach  points.  The  odd  thing  is  that  we  never  do  reach

points, and that the familiar building thus seems to be composed of an infinity

of  unattainable  and  purely  conceptual  constituents.  I  believe  this  view  of

spatio-temporal analysis to be mistaken.

  Qualities and relations are sometimes analysable, sometimes not. I do not

believe that “before”, as we know it in experience, can be analysed; at any rate

I do not know any analysis of it that I am willing to accept. But in some cases

the analysis of a relation is obvious. “Grandparent” means “parent of parent”,

“brother” means “son of parent”, and so on. All family relationships can be

expressed by means of the three words “spouse”, “male”, and “parent”; this is a

minimum vocabulary in this subject-matter. Adjectives (i.e. words denoting

qualities)  are  often  complex  in  their  meaning.  Milton  calls  the  woodbine

“well-attired”, which is a word of which the meaning is very complex. So is

such  a  word  as  “famous”.  Words  such  as  “red”,  which  come  nearer  to

simplicity, do not achieve it; there are many shades of red.

    Whenever the analysis of a quality or relation is known, the word for that

quality or relation is unnecessary in our “basic English”.

  When we have words for every thing, quality, and relation that we cannot

analyse, we can express all our knowledge without the need of any other

words. In practice this would be too lengthy, but in theory nominal definitions

are unnecessary.

  If the world is composed of simples, i.e. of things, qualities, and relations

that are devoid of structure, then not only all our knowledge, but all that of

Omniscience, could be expressed by means of words denoting these simples.We could distinguish in the world a stuff (to use William James’s word) and a

structure. The stuff would consist of all the simples denoted by names, while

the structure would depend on relations and qualities for which our minimum

vocabulary would have words.

  This conception can be applied without assuming that there is anything

absolutely simple. We can define as “relatively simple” whatever we do not

know  to  be  complex.  Results  obtained  by  using  the  concept  of  “relative

simplicity” will still be true if complexity is afterwards found, provided we

have abstained from asserting absolute simplicity.

  If we allow denotative as opposed to structural definitions, we can, at least

apparently, content ourselves with a much smaller apparatus of names. All

places in space-time can be indicated by their co-ordinates, all colours by their

wave-lengths, and so on. We have already seen that the assignment of space-

time co-ordinates requires a few proper names, say “Greenwich”, “the Pole

Star”, and “Big Ben”. But this is a very small apparatus compared to names for

all the different places in the universe. Whether this way of defining spatio-

temporal places enables us to say all that we know about them, is a difficult

question, to which I shall return shortly. Before discussing it, it will be well to

examine more closely the questions that arise concerning qualities.

  Consider the definition of the word “red”. We may define it (1) as any

shade of colour between two specified extremes in the spectrum, or (2) as any

shade of colour caused by wave-lengths lying between specified extremes, or

(3) (in physics) as waves having wave-lengths between these extremes. There

are different things to be said about these three definitions, but there is one

thing to be said about all of them.

  What is to be said about all of them is that they have an artificial, unreal,

and partly illusory precision. The word “red”, like the word “bald”, is one

which has a meaning that is vague at the edges. Most people would admit

that, if a man is not bald, the loss of one hair will not make him so; it follows

by mathematical induction that the loss of all his hairs will not make him so,

which is absurd. Similarly, if a shade of colour is red, a very tiny change will

not make it cease to be red, from which it follows that all shades of colour are

red.  The  same  sort  of  thing  happens  when  we  use  wave-lengths  in  ourdefinition,  since  lengths  cannot  be  accurately  measured.  Given  a  length

which, by the most careful measurements, appears to be a metre, it will still

appear to be a metre if it is very slightly increased or diminished; therefore

every length appears to be a metre, which again is absurd.

  It follows from these considerations that any definition of “red” which

professes to be precise is pretentious and fraudulent.

  We shall have to define “red”, or any other vague quality, by some such

method as the following. When the colours of the spectrum are spread out

before us, there are some that everybody would agree to be red, and others

that everybody would agree to be not red, but between these two regions of

the spectrum there is a doubtful region. As we travel along this region, we

shall begin by saying “I am nearly certain that that is red”, and end by saying

“I am nearly certain that that is not red”, while in the middle there will be a

region  where  we  have  no  preponderant  inclination  either  towards yes  or

towards no. All empirical concepts have this character—not only obviously

vague  concepts  such  as  “loud”  or  “hot”,  but  also  those  that  we  are  most

anxious to make precise, such as “centimetre” and “second”.

  It might be thought that we could make “red” precise by confining the

term to those shades that we are certain are red. This, however, though it

diminishes the area of uncertainty, does not abolish it. There is no precise

point in the spectrum where you are sure that you become uncertain. There

will still be three regions, one where you are certain that you are certain the

shade  is  red,  one  where  you  are  certain  that  you  are  uncertain,  and  an

intermediate region where you are uncertain as to whether you are certain or

uncertain. And these three regions, like the previous ones, will have no sharp

boundaries.  You  have  merely  adopted  one  of  the  innumerable  techniques

which diminish the area of vagueness without ever wholly abolishing it.

  The above discussion has proceeded on the assumption of continuity. If all

change is discrete—and we do not know that it is not—then complete accuracy

is theoretically possible. But if there is discontinuity it lies, for the present, far

below  the  level  of  sensible  discrimination,  so  that  discreteness,  even  if  it

should exist, would be useless as a help in defining empirically given qualities.

  Let  us  now  ignore  the  problem  of  vagueness,  and  revert  to  our  threedefinitions. But we will now adapt them so as to be definitions of a given

shade of colour. This introduces no new difficulties, since, as we have seen,

the definition of “red” as a band of colours requires a definition of the precise

shades that form its boundaries.

  Let us suppose that I am seeing a certain coloured patch, and that I call the

shade of the patch “C”. Physics tells me that this shade of colour is caused by

light of wave-length λ. I may then define “C” as: (1) the shade of any patch

that is indistinguishable in colour from the patch I am seeing now; or (2) as

the  shade  of  any  visual  sensation  caused  by  electromagnetic  waves  of

wavelength λ; or (3) as electromagnetic waves of wave-length λ. When we are

concerned only with physics, without regard to the methods by which its laws

are verified, (3) is the most convenient definition. We use it when we speak of

ultra-violet light, and when we say that the light from Mars is red, and when,

during a sunset, we say that the sun’s light is not really red, but only looks red

because  of  intervening  mist.  Physics, per  se,  has  nothing  to  say  about

sensations, and if it uses the word “colour” (which it need not do), it will wish

to define it in a way that is logically independent of sensation.

  But although physics as a self-contained logical system does not need to

mention sensations, it is only through sensations that physics can be verified.

It  is  an  empirical  law  that  light  of  a  certain  wave-length  causes  a  visual

sensation of a certain kind, and it is only when such laws are added to those

of physics that the total becomes a verifiable system. The definition (2) has the

defect of concealing the force of the empirical law which connects wavelength

with sensation. Names for colours were used for thousands of years before the

undulatory theory of light was invented, and it was a genuine discovery that

wave-lengths grow shorter as we travel along the spectrum from red to violet.

If we define a shade of colour by its wave-length, we shall have to add that

sensations caused by light of the same wave-length all have a recognizable

similarity,  and  that  there  is  a  lesser  degree  of  similarity  when  the  wave-

lengths differ, but only by a little. Thus we cannot express all that we know

on the subject without speaking about shades of colour as known directly in

visual sensation, independently of any physical theory as to light-waves.

  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  if  we  wish  for  clarity  in  exhibiting  theempirical data which lead us to accept physics, we shall do well to adopt our

first definition of a shade of colour, since we shall certainly need some way of

speaking  about  what  this  definition  defines,  without  having  to  make  the

detour through physics that is involved in mentioning wave-lengths.

  It remains, however, an open question whether the raw material in our

definitions of colours should be a given shade of colour (wherever it may

occur), or a given patch of colour, which can only occur once. Let us develop

both hypotheses.

    Suppose I wish to give an account of my own visual field throughout a

certain day. Since we are concerned only with colour, depth may be ignored. I

have therefore at each moment a two-dimensional manifold of colours. I shall

assume that my visual field can be divided into areas of finite size, within

each  of  which  the  colour  is  sensibly  uniform.  (This  assumption  is  not

essential, but saves verbiage.) My visual field, on this assumption, will consist

of a finite number of coloured patches of varying shape. I may start by giving

a name to each patch, or by giving a name to each shade of colour. We have

to consider whether there are any reasons for preferring one of these courses

to the other.

  If I start by giving a name to each patch, I proceed to the definition of a

shade of colour by means of a relation of colour-similarity between patches.

This similarity may be greater or less; we suppose that there is an extreme

degree  of  it  which  may  be  called  “exact  likeness”.  This  relation  is

distinguished by being transitive, which is not the case with minor degrees of

resemblance. For the reasons already given, we can never be sure that, in any

given case, there is exact colour-likeness between two patches, any more than

we can be sure that a given length is exactly a metre. However, we can invent

techniques  which  approximate  more  and  more  closely  to  what  would  be

needed for establishing exact likeness.

  We define the shade of colour of a given patch as the class of patches

having exact colour-likeness to it. Every shade of colour is defined in relation

to a “this”; it is “the shade of colour of this patch”. To each “this”, as we

become aware of it, we give a name, say “P”; then “the shade of P” is defined

as “all patches having exact colour-likeness to P”.  The question now arises: given two patches which are indistinguishable in

colour, what makes me think them two? The answer is obvious: difference of

spatio-temporal  position.  But though  this  answer  is  obvious,  it  does  not

dispose of the problem. For the sake of simplicity, let us suppose that the two

patches are parts of one visual field, but are not in visual contact with each

other.  Spatial  position  in  the  momentary  visual  field  is  a  quality,  varying

according to distance from the centre of the field of vision, and also according

as the region in question is above or below, to the right or to the left, of the

centre. The various qualities that small portions of the visual field may have

are related by relations of up-and-down, right-and-left. When we move our

eyes, the qualities associated with a given physical object change, but if the

various physical objects have not moved, there will be no topological change

in the part of the visual field which is common to both occasions. This enables

common sense to ignore the subjectivity of visual position.

    Concerning  these  visual  positional  qualities  we  have  exactly  the  same

alternatives as in the case of shades of colour. We may give a name to each

quality, considered as something which is the same on different occasions, or

we may give a name to each instance of the quality, and connect it with other

instances  of  the  same  quality  by  the  relation  of  exact  likeness.  Let  us

concentrate on the quality that distinguishes the centre of the field of vision,

and let us call this quality “centrality”. Then on one view there is a single

quality of centrality, which occurs repeatedly, while on the other view there

are many particulars which have exact positional likeness, and the quality of

centrality is replaced by the class of these particulars.

  When we now repeat, in relation to the particulars which are instances of

centrality, the question as to how we distinguish one of these particulars from

another, the answer is again obvious: we distinguish them by their position in

time.  (There  cannot  be  two  simultaneous  instances  of  centrality  in  one

person’s experience.) We must therefore now proceed to analyse difference of

position in time.

  In regard to time, as in regard to space, we have to distinguish objective

and subjective time. Objective space is that of the physical world, whereas

subjective  space  is  that  which  appears  in  our  percepts  when  we  view  theworld from one place. So objective time is that of physics and history, while

subjective time is that which appears in our momentary view of the world. In

my  present  state  of  mind  there  are  not  only  percepts,  but  memories and

expectations; what I remember I place in the past, what I expect I place in the

future.  But  from  the  impartial  stand-point  of  history  my  memories  and

expectations  are  just  as  much now  as  my  percepts.  When  I  remember,

something is happening to me now which, if I remember correctly, has a

certain relation to what happened at an earlier time, but what happened then

is not itself in my mind now. My memories are placed in a time-order, just as

my visual perceptions are placed in a space-order, by intrinsic qualities, which

may  be  called  “degrees  of  remoteness”.  But  however  high  a  degree  of

remoteness a memory may possess, it is still, from the objective historical

point of view, an event which is happening now.

  I said a moment ago that there could not be two simultaneous instances of

centrality in one person’s experience, but in a certain sense this may be false.

If, when my eyes are open, I remember some previous visual experience, there

will be one instance of centrality in my percepts and another in my memory,

and these are both now in historical time. But they are not both now in the

time of my present subjective experience. Thus the correct statement is: two

instances of centrality cannot be simultaneous in historical time if they are

perceptual parts of one man’s experience, and they cannot in any case be

simultaneous  in  the  subjective  time  of  a  single  experience  composed  of

percepts and memories and expectations.

  There is a certain difficulty in the conception of a time which, in a sense,

is  wholly now,  and  a  space  which,  in  a  sense,  is  wholly here.  Yet  these

conceptions seem unavoidable. The whole of my psychological space is here

from the standpoint of physics, and the whole of my psychological time is

now from the standpoint of history. Like Leibniz’s monads, we mirror the

universe,  though  very  partially  and  very  inaccurately;  in  my  momentary

mirroring  there  is  a  mirror-space  and  a  mirror-time,  which  have  a

correspondence, though not an exact one, with the impersonal space and time

of physics and history. From the objective standpoint, the space and time of

my present experience are wholly confined within a small region of physicalspace-time.

  We must now return from this digression to the question whether we are

to assume one quality of centrality which can exist at various times, or a

number of instances of it, each of which exists only once. It begins to be

obvious that the latter hypothesis will entail great unnecessary complications,

which the former hypothesis avoids. We can bring the question to a head by

asking  what  can  be  meant  by  “this”.  Let  us  suppose  “this”  to  be  some

momentary visual datum. There is a sense in which it may be true to say “I

have seen this before”, and there is another sense in which this cannot be true.

If I mean by “this” a certain shade of colour, or even a certain shade of a

certain shape, I may have seen it before. But if I mean something dated, such

as might be called an “event”, then clearly I cannot have seen it before. Just

the same considerations apply if I am asked “do you see this anywhere else”? I

may be seeing the same shade of colour somewhere else, but if in the meaning

of  “this”  I  include  position  in  visual  space,  then  I  cannot  be  seeing  it

somewhere  else.  Thus  what  we  have  to  consider  is  spatio-temporal

particularity.

  If we take the view—which I think the better one—that a given quality,

such as a shade of colour, may exist in different places and times, then what

would otherwise be instances of the quality become complexes in which it is

combined  with  other  qualities.  A  shade  of  colour  combined  with  a  given

positional quality cannot exist in two parts of one visual field, because the

parts of the field are defined by their positional qualities. There is a similar

distinction in subjective time: the complex consisting of a shade of colour

together with one degree of remoteness cannot be identical with the complex

consisting of the same shade of colour and another degree of remoteness. In

this way “instances” can be replaced by complexes, and by this replacement a

great simplification can be effected.

  It results from the above discussion that a possible minimum vocabulary

for  describing  the  world  of  my  experience  can  be  constructed  as  follows.

Names are given to all the qualities of experiences, including such qualities of

visual space and remembered time as we have been considering. We also have

to have words for experienced relations, such as right-and-left in one visualfield, and earlier-and-later in one specious present. We do not need names for

space-time regions, such as “Socrates” or “France”, because every space-time

region can be defined as a complex of qualities or a system of such complexes.

“Events”, which have dates and cannot recur, are capable of being regarded as

always  complex;  whatever  we  do  not  know  how  to  analyse  is  capable  of

occurring repeatedly in various parts of space-time.

  When we pass outside our own experience, as we do in physics, we need

no new words. Definitions of things not experienced must be denotational.

Qualities and relations, if not experienced, can only be known by means of

descriptions in which all the constants denote things that are experienced. It

follows that a minimum vocabulary for what we experience is a minimum

vocabulary for all our knowledge. That this must be the case is obvious from a

consideration of the process of ostensive definition.                                          V 


                    Time, Public and Private


THE purpose of this Part is to provide possible interpretations of the concepts

of science, in terms of possible minimum vocabularies. It will not be asserted

that no other interpretations are possible, but it is hoped that, in the course of

the discussion, certain common characteristics of all acceptable interpretations

will emerge. In the present chapter we shall be concerned to interpret the

word “time”.

  Most people will be inclined to agree with St. Augustine: “What, then, is

time? If no one asks of me, I know: if I wish to explain to him who asks, I

know not.” Philosophers, of course, have learned to be glib about time, but the

rest of mankind, although the subject feels familiar, are apt to be aware that a

few questions can reduce them to hopeless confusion. “Does the past exist?

No. Does the future exist? No. Then only the present exists? Yes. But within

the present there is no lapse of time? Quite so. Then time does not exist? Oh I

wish you wouldn’t be so tiresome.” Any philosopher can elicit this dialogue

by a suitable choice of interlocuter.

  Sir Isaac Newton, who understood the Book of Daniel, also knew all about

time. Let us hear what he has to say on the subject in the Scholium following

the initial definitions in the Principia:

  “I do not define time, space, place and motion, as being well known to all.

Only I must observe, that the vulgar conceive those quantities under no other

notions but from the relation they bear to sensible objects. And thence arise

certain  prejudices,  for  the  removal  of  which,  it  will  be  convenient  to

distinguish them into absolute and relative, true and apparent, mathematical

and common. Absolute, true, and mathematical time, of itself, and from its

own  nature  flows  equably  without  regard  to  anything  external,  and  by

another name is called duration: relative, apparent, and common time, is some

sensible external (whether accurate or unequable) measure of duration by the

means of motion, which is commonly used instead of true time; such as anhour, a day, a month, a year.”

  He  goes  on  to  explain  that  days  are  not  all  of  equal  length,  and that

perhaps there is nowhere in nature a truly uniform motion, but that we arrive

at absolute time, in astronomy, by correction of “vulgar” time.

  Sir Isaac Newton’s “absolute” time, although it remained embedded in the

technique  of  classical  physics,  was  not  generally  accepted.  The  theory  of

relativity has provided reasons, within physics, for its rejection, though these

reasons leave open the possibility of absolute space-time. But before relativity

Newton’s absolute time was already widely repudiated, though for reasons

which  had  nothing  to  do  with  physics.  Whether,  before  relativity,  these

reasons had any validity is a question which I think we shall find it worth

while to examine.

    Although Newton says that he is not going to define time because it is

well known, he makes it clear that only “vulgar” time is well known, and that

mathematical time is an inference. In modern terms, we should rather call it

an adjustment than an inference. The process of arriving at “mathematical”

time is essentially as follows: there are a number of periodic motions—the

rotations and revolutions of the earth and the planets, the tides, the vibrations

of a tuning fork, the heart beats of a healthy man at rest—which are such that,

if one of them is assumed to be uniform, all the others are approximately

uniform.  If  we  take  one  of  them,  say  the  earth’s  rotation,  as  uniform  by

definition, we can arrive at physical laws—notably the law of gravitation—

which explain the phenomena, and show why the other periodic motions are

approximately uniform. But unfortunately the laws so established are only

approximate, and, what is more, they show that the earth’s rotation should

suffer  retardation  by  tidal  friction.  This  is  self-contradictory  if  the  earth’s

rotation  is  taken  as  the  measure  of  time;  we  therefore  seek  a  different

measure, which shall also make our physical laws approximate more nearly to

exact truth. It is found convenient not to take any actual motion as defining

the  measure  of  time,  but  to  adopt  a  compromise  measure  which  makes

physical  laws  as  accurate  as  possible.  It  is  this  compromise  measure  that

serves the purposes for which Newton invoked “absolute” time. There is no

reason, however, to suppose that it represents a physical reality, for the choiceof a measure of time is conventional, like the choice between the Christian

and the Mohammedan eras. We choose, in fact, the measure which gives the

greatest attainable simplicity to the statement of physical laws, but we do so

on grounds of convenience, not because we think that this measure is more

“true” than any other.

  A frequent ground of objection to Newton’s “absolute” time has been that

it could not be observed. This objection, on the face of it, comes oddly from

men who ask us to believe in electrons and protons and neutrons, quantum

transitions in atoms, and what not, none of which can be observed. I do not

think that physics can dispense with inferences that go beyond observation.

The fact that absolute time cannot be observed is not, by itself, fatal to the

view that it should be accepted; what is fatal is the fact that physics can be

interpreted without assuming it. Whenever a body of symbolic propositions

which there is reason to accept can be interpreted without inferring such-and-

such  unobserved  entities,  the  inference  from  the  body  of  propositions  in

question to these supposed entities is invalid, since, even if there are no such

entities, the body of propositions may be true. It is on this ground, and not

merely  because  “absolute”  time  cannot  be  observed,  that  Newton  was

mistaken in inferring it from the laws of physics.

  While the rejection of Newton’s view is a commonplace, few people seem

to  realize  the  problems  that  it  raises.  In  physics  there  is  an  independent

variable t, the values of which are supposed to form a continuous series, and

each to be what is commonly called an “instant”. Newton regarded an instant

as a physical reality, but the modern physicist does not. Since, however, he

continues to use the variable t, he must find some interpretation for its values,

and the interpretation must serve the technical purposes that were served by

Newton’s “absolute” time. This problem of the interpretation of “t” is the one

that concerns us in this chapter. In order to simplify the approach to it, we

will at first ignore relativity and confine ourselves to time as it appears in

classical physics.

  We shall continue to give the name “instant” to a value of the variable t,

but  we  shall  look  for  an  interpretation  of  the  word  “instant”  in  terms  of

physical data, that is to say, we shall expect the word to have a definition, andnot to belong to a minimum physical vocabulary. All that we require of the

definition  is  that  instants,  so  defined,  should  have  the  formal  properties

demanded of them by mathematical physics.

  In seeking a definition of “instant” or “point”, the material to be used

depends upon the theory we adopt as to “particulars” or proper names. We

may take the view that when, for instance, a given shade of colour appears in

two separated locations, there are two separate “particulars”, each of which is

an “instance” of the shade of colour, and is a subject of which qualities can be

predicated, but which is not defined by its qualities, since another precisely

similar particular might exist elsewhere. Or we may take the view that a

“particular”  is  a  bundle  of  coexisting  qualities.  The  discussions  of  the

preceding chapter, as well as the earlier discussion of proper names, inclined

us to the latter view. I shall, however, in this and the two following chapters,

hypothetically adopt the former view, and in Chapter VIII I shall show how to

interpret what has been said in terms of the latter view. For the moment,

therefore, I take as raw material “events”, which are to be imagined as each

occupying a finite continuous portion of space-time. It is assumed that two

events can overlap, and that no event recurs.

  It is clear that time is concerned with the relation of earlier and later; it is

generally held also that nothing of which we have experience has a merely

instantaneous existence. Whatever is earlier or later than something else I

shall call an “event”. We shall want our definition of “instant” to be such that

an event can be said to exist “at” certain instants and not at certain others.

Since  we  have  agreed  that  events,  so  far  as  known  to  us,  are  not  merely

instantaneous, we shall wish to define “instant” in such a way that every

event exists at a continuous stretch of the series of instants. That instants must

form a series defined by means of the relation of earlier and later is one of the

requisites that our definition must fulfil. Since we have rejected Newton’s

theory,  we  must  not  regard  instants  as  something  independent  of  events,

which  can  be  occupied  by  events  as  hats  occupy  hat-pegs.  We  are  thus

compelled  to  search  for  a  definition  which  makes  an  instant  a  structure

composed of a suitable selection of events. Every event will be a member of

many such structures, which will be the instants during which it exists: it is“at” every instant which is a structure of which the event is a member.

  A date is fixed with complete precision if it is known concerning every

event in the world whether it wholly preceded that date, or will wholly come

after it, or was in existence at that date. To this statement some one might

object that, if the world were to remain without change for (say) five minutes,

there would be no way of fixing a date within these five minutes if the above

view were adopted, for every event wholly preceding one part of the five

minutes  would  wholly  precede  every  other  part,  every  event  wholly

subsequent to any part of the five minutes would be wholly subsequent to

every other part, and every event existing at any part of the five minutes

would exist throughout the whole of them. This, however, is not an objection

to our statement, but only to the supposition that time could go on in an

unchanging world. On the Newtonian theory this would be possible, but on a

relational theory of time it becomes self-contradictory. If time is to be defined

in terms of events, it must be impossible for the universe to be unchanging for

more  than  an  instant.  And  when  I  say  “impossible”  I  mean logically

impossible.

    Although we cannot agree with Newton that “time” does not need to be

defined, it is obvious that temporal statements demand some undefined term. I

choose the relation of earlier-and-later, or of wholly-preceding. Between two

events a and b three temporal relations are possible: a may be wholly before b,

or b may be wholly before a, or a and b may overlap. Suppose you wish to fix

as accurately as possible some date within the duration of a. If you say that

your date is also to be within the duration of b, you fix the date somewhat

more accurately than by merely saying that it is within the duration of a,

unless it so happens that a and b both began and ended together. Suppose now

there is a third event c which overlaps with both a and b—that is to say, in

ordinary language (to which we are not yet entitled), there is a period of time

during which a and b and c all exist. This period, in general, will be shorter

than that during which both a and b exist. We now look for a fourth event d

which overlaps with a and b and c, i.e., in ordinary language, exists during

some part of the time during which a and b and c all exist; the time during

which a and b and c and d all exist is, in general, shorter than that duringwhich any three of them all exist. In this way, step by step, we get nearer to

an exact date.

  Let us suppose this process carried on as long as possible, i.e. until there is

no event remaining which overlaps with all the events already in our group. I

say that, when this stage has been reached, the group of events that has been

constructed may be defined as an “instant”. To prove that this assertion is

legitimate  I  only  have  to  show  that  “instants”,  so  defined,  have  the

mathematical properties that physics demands. I do not have to show that this

is  what  people  commonly  mean  when  they  speak  of  “instants”,  though  it

might be desirable to complete the argument by showing that they commonly

mean nothing.

  An “instant”, as I propose to define the term, is a class of events having the

following two properties: (1) all the events in the class overlap; (2) no event

outside  the  class  overlaps  with  every  member  of  the  class.  This  group  of

events, as I shall show, does not persist for a finite time.

  To  say  that  an  event  persists  for  a  finite  time  can  only  mean,  on  a

relational view of time, that changes occur while it exists, i.e. that the events

which exist when it begins are not all identical with the events existing when

it ends. This amounts to saying that there are events which overlap with the

given event but not with each other. That is to say: “a lasts for a finite time”

means “there are two events b and c such that each overlaps with a but b

wholly precedes c”.

  We may apply the same definition to a group of events. If the members of

the group do not all overlap, the group as a whole has no duration, but if they

all overlap, we shall say that the group as a whole lasts for a finite time if

there are at least two events which overlap with every member of the group

although one of them wholly precedes the other. If this is the case, change

occurs while the group persists; if not, not. Now if a group constitutes an

“instant”  as  above  defined,  no  event  outside  the  group  overlaps  all  the

members of the group, and no event inside the group wholly precedes any

other event inside the group. Therefore the group as a whole does not last for

a finite time. And therefore it may suitably be defined as an “instant”.

    Instants will form a series ordered by a relation defined in terms of therelation “wholly preceding” among events. One instant is earlier than another

if there is a member of the first instant which wholly precedes a member of

the second, i.e. if some event “at” the first instant wholly precedes some event

“at” the second instant. It will be observed that being “at” an instant is the

same thing as being a member of the class which is the instant.

  According to the above definition, it is logically impossible for the world

to remain unchanging throughout a finite time. If two instants differ, they are

composed (at least in part) of different members, and that means that some

event existing at the one instant does not exist at the other.

  Our theory makes no assumption as to whether there are or are not events

that  exist  only  at  one  instant.  Such  events,  if  any,  would  have  the

characteristic that any two events overlapping with them would overlap with

each other. In general, the “duration” of an event means “the class of those

instants of which the event in question is a member”. It is generally assumed

that  an  event  occupies  a  continuous  stretch  of  the  series  of  instants;  this

assumption,  formally,  is  embodied  in  the  “axiom”  that  nothing  wholly

precedes itself. But this axiom is not necessary.

    Something  has  already  been  said  concerning  the  quantitative

measurement of time, but it may be well to re-state the view to which we are

led by physics. The quantitative measurement of time is conventional except

to this extent, that a larger measure must be applied to a whole than to a part.

We must assign a larger measure to a year than to any month in that year, but

we  might,  if  convenient,  assign  to  that  year  a  smaller  measure  than  to  a

month in some other year. It turns out, however, that this is not convenient.

Historically, astronomers started with the assumption that the day and the

year were each of constant length; then it turned out that, if the sidereal day

was constant, the solar day was not, but the year was. If the sidereal day was

constant by definition, a large number of other periodic occurrences were

approximately constant; this led to dynamical laws which suggested that it

would be more convenient to treat the sidereal day as not exactly constant

owing to tidal friction. The laws could be formulated with any measure of

time, but naturally astronomers and physicists preferred the measure which

made the statement of the laws simplest. As this so very nearly agreed withthe “natural” measures of days and years, its conventional character was not

perceived,  and  it  could  be  supposed  that  what  was  being  defined  was

Newton’s “true” or “mathematical” time, believed to have physical reality.

  I have been speaking so far as if there were, as used to be thought, one

cosmic time for the whole universe. Since Einstein, we know that this is not

the case. Each piece of matter has its own local time. There is very little

difference between the local time of one piece of matter and that of another

unless their relative velocity is an appreciable fraction of the velocity of light.

The local time of a given piece of matter is that which will be shown by a

perfectly  accurate  chronometer  which  travels  with  it.  Beta-particles  travel

with velocities that do not fall very far short of that of light. If we could place

a chronometer on a beta-particle, and make the particle travel in a closed path,

we should find, when it returned, that the chronometer would not agree with

one  that  had  remained  throughout  stationary  in  the  laboratory.  A  more

curious illustration (which I owe to Professor Reichenbach) is connected with

the possibility of travel to the stars. Suppose we invented a rocket apparatus

which could send a projectile to Sirius with a velocity ten elevenths of that of

light. From the point of view of the terrestrial observer the journey would take

about 55 years, and one might therefore suppose that if the projectile carried

passengers who were young when they started, they would be old when they

arrived. But from their point of view the journey will only have taken about

11 years. This will not only be the time taken as measured by their clocks, but

also the time as measured by their physiological processes—decay of teeth,

loss of hair, etc. If they looked and felt like men of 20 when they started, they

will look and feel like men of 31 when they arrive. It is only because we do

not habitually come across bodies travelling with a speed approaching that of

light that such odd facts remain unnoticed except by men of science.

  If two pieces of matter (say the earth and a comet) meet and part and meet

again, and if in the interval their relative velocity has been very great, the

physicists (if any) who live on the two pieces of matter will form different

estimates of the lapse of time between the two meetings, but they will agree

as to which of the two meetings was the earlier and which the later. “Earlier”

and “later”, therefore, as applied to two events happening to one piece ofmatter, have no ambiguity: if there are several pieces of matter to which both

the given events happen, one of the events will be earlier for all of them, and

the other will be later for all of them.

  The construction of “instants” as classes of events, given above, is to be

held, for the present, as applying only to events happening to one piece of

matter—primarily the body of a given observer. The extension to cosmic time,

which can be made in many ways, all equally legitimate, is a matter which I

shall not deal with at present.

  Instead of basing our construction on the events happening to a given

body, we may base it on those happening to a given mind or forming part of a

given experience. If the mind is mine, I can experience occurrences of the sort

expressed  by  the  words  “A  wholly  precedes  B”,  for  example,  when  I  am

listening to successive strokes of a clock striking the hour. If A is an event that

I experience, everything that overlaps with A or wholly precedes A or wholly

succeeds A will constitute “my” time, and only events belonging to “my” time

                                                                                    1
will be involved in the construction of “instants” belonging to “my” time. The

linking up of my time with yours will thus remain a problem to be considered.

  We may define a “biography” as a collection of events such that, of any

two, either they overlap or there is one that wholly precedes the other. For the

present I shall assume that, when a biography has a psychological definition,

it also has a physical definition—i.e. the time-series constituted out of events

that I experience is identical with the time-series constructed out of events

that happen to my brain, or some part of it. Accordingly, I shall speak of the

“biography” of a piece of matter, not only of the “biography” connected with

some person’s experience.

  What  has  been  said  so  far  can  now  be  summed  up  in  a  series  of

definitions.

  An “event” is something which precedes or follows or overlaps something.

  The  “biography”  to  which  an  event  belongs  is  all  the  events  that  it

precedes or follows or overlaps.

  An “instant” is a collection of events belonging to one biography, and

having the two properties that (a) any two events in the collection overlap, (b)

no  event  outside  the  collection  overlaps  with all  the  members  of  thecollection.

  An event is said to “exist at” an instant if it is a member of that instant.

  One instant is said to be “earlier” than another if there is an event at the

one which wholly precedes some event at the other.

  A “time-series of a given instant” is a series of instants, of which the given

instant is one, and having the property that, of any two, one is earlier than the

other.

  A “time-series” is a time-series of some instant.

  It is not assumed that an instant can only belong to one time-series, nor

that an event can only belong to one biography. But it is assumed that, if a

wholly precedes b, then a and b are not identical. This is an assumption which

we shall have to examine, and perhaps modify, at a later stage.

  As the above construction of time-series is the simplest example of a kind

of procedure which will be frequently employed, I shall spend a few moments

in setting forth the reasons for its adoption.

  We start from the fact that, although physicists reject Newton’s absolute

time, they continue to employ the independent variable t, of which the values

are said to be “instants”. The values of t are held to form a series ordered by a

relation called “earlier-and-later”. It is held also that there are occurrences

called “events”, which include as a sub-class everything that we can observe.

There are two observable temporal relations among events: they may overlap,

as when I hear a clock striking while I see its hands pointing to twelve o’clock;

or one may precede another, as when I still remember the previous stroke of

the clock while I am hearing the present stroke. These are the data of our

problem.

  Now if we are to use the variable t without assuming Newton’s absolute

time, we must find a way of defining the class of values of t, that is to say,

“instants” must not form part of our minimum vocabulary, which, so far as it

is not merely that of logic, must consist of words whose meaning is known by

experience.

    Definitions  are  of  two  sorts,  which  may  be  called  respectively

“denotational” and “structural”. An example of a denotational definition is

“the tallest man in the United States”. This is certainly a definition, since theremust be one and only one person to whom it applies, but it defines the man

merely by his relations. Generally, a “denotational” definition is one which

defines an entity as the only one having a certain relation, or certain relations,

to one or more known entities. On the other hand, when what we want to

define  is  a  structure  composed  of  known  elements,  we  can  define  it  by

mentioning the elements and the relations constituting the structure; this is

what I call a “structural” definition. If what I am defining is a class, it may be

only necessary to mention the structure, since the elements may be irrelevant.

For example, I can define an “octagon” as “a plane figure having eight sides”;

this is a structural definition. But I might also define it as “a polygon of which

all known examples are in the following places”, then giving a list. This would

be a “denotational” definition.

  A denotational definition is not complete without a proof of the existence

of the object denoted. “The man over 10 feet tall” is, in logical form, just as

good as “the tallest man in the United States”, but it probably denotes no one.

“The square root of 2” is a denotational definition, but until our own day there

was no proof that it denoted anything; now we know that it is equivalent to

the structural definition “the class of those rationals whose squares are less

than 2”, and thereby the question of “existence” (in the logical sense) is solved.

Owing to the possible doubt about “existence”, denotational definitions are

often unsatisfactory.

  In  the  particular  case  of  our  variable t,  a  denotational  definition  is

excluded  by  our  rejection  of  absolute  time.  We  must  therefore  seek  a

structural definition. This implies that instants must have a structure, and that

the  structure  must  be  built  out  of  known  elements.  We  have,  as  data  of

experience, the relations “overlapping” and “preceding”, and we find that by

means  of  these  we  can  build  structures  having  the  formal  properties  that

mathematical physicists demand of “instants”. Such structures, therefore, fulfil

all required purposes without the need of any ad hoc assumption. This is the

justification of our definitions.1 “My” time in the above sense is not to be confused with the subjective time of Part III, Chapter V.                                          VI 


                  Space in Classical Physics


IN this chapter we shall be concerned with space as it appears in classical

physics. That is to say, we shall be concerned to find an “interpretation” (not

necessarily the only possible one) for the geometrical terms used in physics.

Much more complicated and difficult problems arise in regard to space than in

regard to time. This is partly because of problems introduced by relativity. For

the present, however, we will ignore relativity, and treat space as separable

from time after the manner of pre-Einsteinian physics.

  For Newton, space, like time, was “absolute”, that is to say, it consisted of

a collection of points, each devoid of structure, and each one of the ultimate

constituents  of  the  physical  world.  Each  point  was  everlasting  and

unchanging; change consisted in its being “occupied” sometimes by one piece

of matter, sometimes by another, and sometimes by nothing. As against this

view, Leibniz contended that space was only a system of relations, the terms

of the relations being material and not merely geometrical points. Although

both physicists and philosophers tended more and more to take Leibniz’s view

rather than Newton’s, the technique of mathematical physics continued to be

Newtonian. In the mathematical apparatus, “space” is still an assemblage of

“points”, each defined by three co-ordinates, and “matter” is an assemblage of

“particles”, each of which occupies different points at different times. If we are

not to agree with Newton in ascribing physical reality to points, this system

requires some interpretation in which “points” have a structural definition.

  I have used the word “physical reality”, which may be held to savour too

much  of  metaphysics.  What  I  mean  can  be  expressed,  in  a  form  more

acceptable  to  modern  taste,  by  means  of  the  technique  of  minimum

vocabularies. Given a collection of names, it may happen that some of the

things named have a structural definition in terms of others; in that case, there

will be a minimum vocabulary not containing the names for which definitions

can  be  substituted.  For  example,  every  French  human  being  has  a propername, and “the French nation” may also be regarded as a proper name, but it

is an unnecessary one, since we can say: “the French nation” is defined as “the

class consisting of the following individuals (here follows the list)”. Such a

method is only applicable to finite classes, but there are other methods not

subject  to  this  limitation.  We  can  define  “France”  by  its  geographical

boundaries, and then define “French” as “born in France”.

  To this process of substituting structural definitions for names there are

obviously  limits  in  practice,  and  perhaps  (though  this  may  be  questioned)

there  are  also  limits  in  theory.  Assuming,  for  the  sake  of  simplicity,  that

matter consists of electrons and protons, we could, in theory, give a proper

name to each electron and each proton; we could then define an individual

human being by mentioning the electrons and protons composing his body at

various  times;  thus  names  for  individual  human  beings  are  theoretically

superfluous. Speaking generally, whatever has a discoverable structure does

not  need  a  name,  since  it  can  be  defined  in  terms  of  the  names  of  its

ingredients and the words for their relations. On the other hand, whatever has

no known structure needs a name if we are to be able to express all our

knowledge concerning it.

  It is to be observed that a denotational definition does not make a name

superfluous.  E.g.  “the  father  of  Alexander  the  Great”  is  a  denotational

definition, but does not enable us to express the fact which contemporaries

could have expressed by “that is Alexander’s father”, where “that” functions

as a name.

  When we deny Newton’s theory of absolute space, while continuing to use

what we call “points” in mathematical physics, our procedure is only justified

if there is a structural definition of “point” and (in theory) of particular points.

Such a definition must proceed by methods similar to those that we employed

in defining “instants”. This, however, is subject to two provisos: first, that our

manifold of points is to be three-dimensional, and second, that we have to

define a point at an instant. To say that a point P at one time is identical with

a point Q at another time is to say something which has no definite meaning

except a conventional one which depends upon a choice of material axes. As

this matter has to do with relativity, I shall not consider it further at present,but shall confine myself to the definition of points at a given instant, ignoring

the difficulties connected with the definition of simultaneity.

  In what follows I lay no stress on the particular method of constructing

points that I have adopted. Other methods are possible, and some of these may

be preferred. What is important is only that such methods can be devised. In

defining instants, we used the relation of “overlapping” in a temporal sense—a

relation which holds between two events when (in ordinary language) there is

a time during which both exist. In defining points, we use the relation of

“overlapping” in a spatial sense, which is to subsist between two simultaneous

events that (in ordinary language) occupy the same region of space, in whole

or in part. It is to be observed that events, unlike pieces of matter, are not to

be thought of as mutually impenetrable. The impenetrability of matter is a

property which results tautologically from its definition. “Events”, however,

are only defined as terms not assumed to possess a structure, and having

spatial  and  temporal  relations  such  as  belong  to  finite  volumes  and  finite

periods  of  time.  When  I  say  “such  as”,  I  mean  “similar  as  regards  logical

properties”.  But  “overlapping”  is  not  itself  to  be  defined  logically;  it  is  an

empirically known relation, having, in the construction which I advocate, only

an ostensive definition.

  In a manifold of more than one dimension, we cannot construct anything

having the properties required of “points” by means of a two-term relation of

“overlapping”. As the simplest illustration, let us take areas on a plane. Three

areas A, B, C, on a plane may each overlap with the other two, without there

being any region common to all three. In the accompanying figure, the circle

A overlaps with the rectangle B and the triangle C, and B overlaps with C, but

there is no region common to A and B and C. The basis of our construction

will have to be a relation of three areas, not of two. We shall say that three

areas are “copunctual” when there is a region common to all three. (This is an

explanation, not a definition.)  We shall assume that the areas with which we are concerned are all either

circles, or such shapes as can result from circles by stretching or compressing

in a manner which leaves them oval. In that case, given three areas A, B, C

which are copunctual, and a fourth area D such that A, B, D are copunctual

and also A, C, D and B, C, D, then A, B, C, D all have a common region.

  We now define a group of any number of areas as “copunctual” if every

triad chosen out of the group is copunctual. A copunctual group of areas is a

“point” if it cannot be enlarged without ceasing to be copunctual, i.e. if, given

any area X outside the group, there are in the group at least two areas A and

B such that A, B, X are not copunctual.

  This definition is only applicable in two dimensions. In three dimensions,

we must start with a relation of copunctuality between four volumes, and the

volumes concerned must all be either spheres or such oval volumes as can

result  from  spheres  by  continuous  stretching  in  some  directions  and

compressing in others. Then, as before, a copunctual group of volumes is one

in which every four are copunctual, and a copunctual group is a “point” if it

cannot be enlarged without ceasing to be co-punctual.

  In n  dimensions  the  definitions  are  the  same,  except  that  the  original

relation of copunctuality has to be between n + 1 regions.

  “Points” are defined as classes of events by the above methods, with the

tacit assumption that every event “occupies” a more or less oval region.

  “Events” are to be taken, in the present discussion, as the undefined raw

material  from  which  geometrical  definitions  are  to  be  derived.  In  another

context we may inquire as to what can be meant by an “event”, and we may

                                                  1
then be able to carry analysis a step further, but for the present we regard the

manifold of “events”, with their spatial and temporal relations, as empirical

data.  The way in which spatial order results from our assumptions is somewhat

complicated.  I  shall  say  nothing  about  it  here,  as  I  have  dealt  with  it  in

Analysis  of  Matter,  where,  also,  there  is  a  much  fuller  discussion  of  the

definition of “points” (Chapters XXVIII and XXIX).

    Something  must  be  said  about  the  metrical  properties  of  space.

Astronomers,  in  their  popular  books,  astound  us  first  by  telling  us  how

immensely distant many of the nebulae are, and then by telling us that after

all the universe is finite, being a three-dimensional analogue of the surface of

a sphere. But in their less popular books they tell us that measurement is

merely  conventional,  and  that  we  could,  if  we  chose,  adopt  a  convention

which would make the furthest known nebula in the northern hemisphere

nearer to us than the antipodes are. If so, the vastness of the universe is not a

fact, but a convenience. I think this is only partially true, but to disentangle

the  element  of  convention  in  measurement  is  by  no  means  easy.  Before

attempting it, something must be said about measurement in its elementary

forms.

    Measurement, even of the distance to remote nebulae, is built up from

measurements  of  distances  on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  and  terrestrial

measurements start with the assumption that certain bodies may be regarded

as approximately rigid. If you measure the size of your room, you assume that

your foot-rule is not growing appreciably longer or shorter during the process.

The ordnance survey of England determines most distances by triangulation,

but this process demands that there shall be at least one distance which is

measured directly. In fact, a base line on Salisbury Plain was chosen, and was

measured carefully in the elementary way in which we measure the size of

our room: a chain, which we may take as by definition of unit length, was

repeatedly applied to the surface of the earth along a line as nearly straight as

possible. This one length having been determined directly, the rest proceeds

by the measurement of angles and by calculation: the diameter of the earth,

the distance of the sun and moon, and even the distances of the nearer fixed

stars, can be determined without any further direct measurement of lengths.

  But when this process is scrutinized it is found to be full of difficulties.

The assumption that a body is “rigid” has no clear meaning until we havealready established a metric enabling us to compare lengths and angles at one

time with lengths and angles at another, for a “rigid” body is one which does

not alter its shape or size. Then again we need a definition of a “straight line”,

for all our results will be wrong if the base line on Salisbury Plain and the

lines  used  in  triangulation  are  not  straight.  It  seems,  therefore,  that

measurement presupposes geometry (to enable us to define “straight lines”)

and  enough  physics  to  give  grounds  for  regarding  some  bodies  as

approximately rigid, and for comparing distances at one time with distances

at  another.  The  difficulties  involved  are  formidable,  but  are  concealed  by

assumptions taken over from common sense.

  Common sense assumes, roughly speaking, that a body is rigid if it looks

rigid. Eels do not look rigid, but steel bars do. On the other hand, a pebble at

the bottom of a rippling brook may look as wriggly as an eel, but common

sense nevertheless holds it to be rigid, because common sense regards the

sense of touch as more reliable than the sense of sight, and if you wade across

the brook in bare feet the pebble feels rigid. Common sense, in so thinking, is

Newtonian: it is convinced that at each moment a body intrinsically has a

certain shape and size, which either are or are not the same as its shape and

size at another moment. Given absolute space, this conviction has a meaning,

but  without  absolute  space  it  is prima  facie  meaningless.  There  must,

however,  be  an  interpretation  of  physics  which  will  account  for  the  very

considerable measure of success resulting from common-sense assumptions.

  As in the case of the measurement of time, three factors enter in: first, an

assumption  liable  to  correction;  second,  physical  laws  which,  on  this

assumption, are found to be approximately true; third, a modification of the

assumption to make the physical laws more nearly exact. If you assume that a

certain steel rod, which looks and feels rigid, preserves its length unchanged,

you will find that the distance from London to Edinburgh, the diameter of the

earth, and the distance of Sirius, are all nearly constant, but are slightly less in

warm weather than in cold. It will then occur to you that it will be simpler to

say that your steel rod expands with heat, particularly when you find that this

enables you to regard the above distances as almost exactly constant, and,

further, that you can see the mercury in the thermometer taking up morespace in warm weather. You therefore assume that apparently rigid bodies

expand with heat, and you do so in order to simplify the statement of physical

laws.

  Let us get clear as to what is conventional and what is physical fact in this

process. It is a physical fact that if two steel rods, neither of which feels either

hot or cold, look as if they were of the same length, and if, then, you heat one

by the fire and put the other in snow, when you first compare them again the

one that has been by the fire looks slightly longer than the one that has been

in the snow, but when both have again reached the temperature of your room

this difference will have vanished. I am here assuming pre-scientific methods

of estimating temperature: a hot body is one that feels hot, and a cold body is

one that feels cold. As a result of such rough pre-scientific observations we

decide that the thermometer gives an exact measure of something which is

measured approximately by our feelings of heat and cold; we can then, as

physicists, ignore these feelings and concentrate on the thermometer. It is then

a tautology that my thermometer rises with an increase of temperature, but it

is a substantial fact that all other thermometers likewise do so. This fact states

a  similarity  between  the  behaviour  of  my  thermometer  and  that  of  other

bodies.

  But the element of convention is not quite as I have just stated it. I do not

assume  that  my  thermometer  is  right  by  definition;  on  the  contrary,  it  is

universally agreed that every actual thermometer is more or less inaccurate.

The ideal thermometer, to which actual thermometers only approximate, is

one which, if taken as accurate, makes the general law of the expansion of

bodies with rising temperature as exactly true as possible. It is an empirical

fact that, by observing certain rules in making thermometers, we can make

them approximate more and more closely to the ideal thermometer, and it is

this fact which justifies the conception of temperature as a quantity having,

for  a  given  body  at  a  given  time,  some  exact  value  which  is  likely  to  be

slightly different from that shown by any actual thermometer.

  The  process  is  the  same  in  all  physical  measurements.  Rough

measurements  lead  to  an  approximate  law;  changes  in  the  measuring

instruments (subject to the rule that all instruments for measuring the samequantity must give as nearly as possible the same result) are found capable of

making the law more nearly exact. The best instrument is held to be the one

that  makes  the  law  most  nearly  exact,  and  it  is  assumed  that  an  ideal

instrument would make the law quite exact.

  This statement, though it may seem complicated, is still not complicated

enough. There is seldom only one law involved, and very often the law itself

is only approximate. Measurements of different quantities are interdependent,

as we have just seen in the case of length and temperature, so that a change in

the way of measuring one quantity may alter the measure of another. Laws,

conventions,  and  observations  are  almost  inextricably  intertwined  in  the

actual procedure of science. The result of an observation is usually stated in a

form  which  assumes  certain  laws and  certain  conventions;  if  the  result

contradicts the network of laws and conventions hitherto assumed, there may

be considerable liberty of choice as to which should be modified. The stock

instance  is  the  Michelson-Morley  experiment,  where  the  simplest

interpretation was found to involve a radical change in temporal and spatial

measurements.

  Let us now return to the measurement of distance. There are a number of

rough pre-scientific observations which suggest the methods of measurement

actually adopted. If you walk or bicycle along a level road with what feels like

constant exertion, you will take roughly equal times for successive miles. If

the road has to be tarred, the amount of material required for one mile will be

about the same as that required for another. If you motor along the road, the

time taken for each mile will be about what your speedometer would lead you

to  expect.  If  you  base  trigonometrical  calculations  on  the  assumption  that

successive miles are equal, the results will be in close agreement with those

obtained  directly  by  measurement.  And  so  on.  All  this  shows  that  the

numbers obtained by the usual processes of measurement have considerable

physical importance, and give a basis for many physical and physiological

laws. But these laws, once formulated, give a basis for amending processes of

measurement, and for regarding the result of the amended processes as more

“accurate”, though in fact they are only more convenient.

  There is, however, one element in the notion of “accuracy” which is notmerely convenient. We are accustomed to the axiom that things that are equal

to the same thing are equal to one another. This axiom has a specious and

deceptive appearance of obviousness, in spite of the fact that the empirical

evidence is against it. You may find that, by the most delicate tests you can

apply, A is equal to B, and B to C, but A is noticeably unequal to C. When this

happens, we say that A is not really equal to B, or B to C. Oddly enough, this

tends to be confirmed when the technique of measurement is improved. But

the real basis of our belief in the axiom is not empirical. We believe that

equality consists in possession of a common property. Two lengths are equal if

they  have  the  same magnitude,  and  it  is  this  magnitude  that  we  seek  to

express when we measure. If we are right in this belief, the axiom is logically

necessary. If A and B have the same magnitude, and B and C have the same

magnitude, then, of necessity, A and C have the same magnitude, provided

that nothing has more than one magnitude.

    Although  this  belief  in  a  magnitude,  as  a  property  which  several

measurable things may have in common, obscurely influences common sense

in its conceptions as to what is obvious, it is not a belief which we ought to

accept until we have evidence of its truth in the particular subject-matter

concerned. The belief that there is such a property of each of a set of terms is

logically equivalent to the belief that there is a transitive symmetrical relation

which holds between any two terms of the set. (This equivalence is what I

formerly called the “principle of abstraction”.) Thus in maintaining that there

is a set of magnitudes called “distances”, what we are maintaining is this:

Between  any  one  point-pair  and  any  other,  there  is  either  a  symmetrical

transitive relation or an asymmetrical transitive relation. In the former case,

we say that the distance between the one pair of points is equal to the distance

between the other pair; in the latter case we say that the first distance is less

or greater than the second, according to the sense of the relation. The distance

between two points may be defined as the class of point-pairs having to it the

relation of equidistance.

  This is as far as we can carry the question of the measurement of distance

without going into the question of the definition of straight lines, which we

must now consider.  The straight line has its common-sense origin as an optical concept. Some

lines look straight. If a straight rod is held, end on, against the eye, the part

nearest the eye hides all the rest, whereas if the rod is crooked some of it will

appear  round  the  corner.  There  are  of  course  also  other  common-sense

reasons for the concept of straight lines. If a body is rotated, there is a straight

line, the axis of rotation, which remains unmoved. If you are standing up in

the Underground, you can tell when it goes round a curve by your tendency

to overbalance one way or the other. It is also possible, up to a point, to judge

straightness  by  the  sense  of  touch;  blind  men  become  almost  as  good  at

judging shapes as men who can see.

  In elementary geometry straight lines are defined as wholes; their chief

characteristic is that a straight line is determinate as soon as two of its points

are given. The possibility of regarding distance as a straightforward relation

between two points depends upon the assumption that there are straight lines.

But in the modern geometry developed to suit the needs of physics there are

no straight lines in the Euclidean sense, and “distance” is only definite when

the two points concerned are very close together. When the two points are far

apart, we must first decide by what route we are to travel from the one to the

other,  and  then  add  up  the  many  small  distances  along  the  route.  The

“straightest” line between the two is the one that makes this sum a minimum.

Instead of straight lines we have to use “geodesies”, which are routes from one

point  to  another  that  are  shorter  than  any  slightly  different  routes.  This

destroys  the  simplicity  of  the  measurement  of  distances,  which  becomes

dependent upon physical laws. The resulting complications in the theory of

geometrical  measurement  cannot  be  dealt  with  without  examining  more

closely the connection of physical laws with the geometry of physical space.1 See Part II, Chapter III and Part IV, Chapter IV.                                        VII 


                                  Space-Time


EVERYBODY knows that Einstein substituted space-time for space and time, but

people unfamiliar with mathematical physics have usually only a very vague

conception as to the nature of the change. As it is an important change in

relation to our attempts to conceive the structure of the world, I shall try, in

this chapter, to explain those parts of it that have philosophical importance.

    Perhaps  the  best  starting-point  is  the  discovery  that  “simultaneity”  is

ambiguous when applied to events in different places. Experiments, especially

the Michelson-Morley experiment, led to the conclusion that the velocity of

light is the same for all observers, however they may be moving. This seemed,

at first sight, to be a logical impossibility. If you are in a train which is moving

at 30 miles an hour, and you are passed by a train which is moving at 60 miles

an hour, its speed relatively to you will be 30 miles an hour. But if it is moving

with the velocity of light, its speed relatively to you will be the same as its

speed relatively to fixed points on the earth. Beta particles sometimes move

with speeds up to 90 per cent of the velocity of light, but if a physicist could

move with such a particle, and be passed by a light-ray, he would still judge

that the light was moving, relatively to him, at the same rate as if he were at

rest  in  relation  to  the  earth.  This  paradox  is  explained  by  the  fact  that

different  observers,  all  equipped  with  perfect  chronometers,  will  form

different  estimates  of  time-intervals  and  different  judgments  as  to

simultaneity in different places.

  It is not difficult to see the necessity for such differences when once it has

been pointed out. Suppose an astronomer observes an event in the sun, and

notes the time of his observation; he will infer that the event happened about

eight minutes before his observation, since that is the length of time that it

takes light to travel from the sun to the earth. But now suppose that the earth

were travelling very fast towards the sun or away from it. Unless you already

knew at what moment, by terrestrial time, the event on the sun took place,you would not know how far the light had had to travel, and therefore your

observation would not enable you to know when the event in the sun had

taken place. That is to say, there would be no definite answer to the question:

what events on earth were simultaneous with the solar event that you had

observed?

  From  the  ambiguity  of  simultaneity  it  follows  that  there  is  a  parallel

ambiguity in the conception of distance. If two bodies are in relative motion,

their distance apart is continually changing, and in pre-relativity physics there

was supposed to be such a quantity as their “distance at a given instant”. But

if there is ambiguity as to what is the same instant for the two bodies, there is

also ambiguity as to “distance at a given instant”. One observer will form one

estimate,  and  another  will  form  another,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  prefer

either estimate. In fact, neither time-intervals nor spatial distances are facts

independent  of  the  movements  of  the  observer’s  body.  There  is  a  kind  of

subjectivity  about  measurements  of  time  and  space  separately—not  a

psychological but a physical subjectivity, since it affects instruments, not only

mental  observers.  It  is  like  the  subjectivity  of  the  camera,  which  takes  a

photograph from a certain point of view. Photographs from other points of

view would look different, and no one among them would have a claim to

special accuracy.

  There is, however, one relation between two events which is the same for

all observers. Formerly there were two, distance in space and lapse of time,

but now there is only one, which is called “interval”. It is because there is only

this one relation of interval, instead of distance and lapse of time, that we

have to substitute the one concept of space-time for the two concepts of space

and time. But although we can no longer separate space and time, there are

still two kinds of interval, one space-like and the other time-like. The interval

is space-like if a light-signal, sent out by the body on which one event occurs,

reaches the body on which the other event occurs after this other event has

taken place. (It is to be observed that there is no ambiguity about the time-

order of events on a given body.) It is time-like if a light-signal sent out from

one event reaches the body on which the other event occurs before this other

event has taken place. Since nothing travels faster than light, we may say thatthe interval is time-like when one event may have an effect upon the other, or

upon something in the same space-time region as the other; when this is not

possible, the interval is space-like.

  In the special theory of relativity the definition of “interval” is simple; in

the general theory it is more complicated.

  In  the  special  theory,  suppose  that  an  observer,  treating  himself  as

motionless, judges the distance between two events to be r, and the lapse of

time between them to be t. Then if c is the velocity of light, the square of the

interval is




  if it is time-like, while if it is space-like it is




  It is usually simpler technically to take it as always one of these, in which

case the square of the other sort of interval is negative, and the interval is

imaginary.

  When neither gravitation nor electromagnetic forces are involved, it is

found that the interval, as above defined, is the same for all observers, and

may therefore be regarded as a genuine physical relation between the two

events.

  The  general  theory  of  relativity  removes  the  above  restriction  by

introducing a modified definition of “interval”.

  In the general theory of relativity there is no longer a definite “interval”

between distant events, but only between events that are very near together.

At a great distance from matter the formula for interval approximates to that

in  the  special  theory,  but  elsewhere  the  formula  varies  according  to  the

nearness  of  matter.  It  is  found  that  the  formula  can  be  so  adjusted  as  to

account for gravitation, assuming that matter which is moving freely moves

in a geodesic, i.e. chooses the shortest or longest route from any one point to a

neighbouring point.

  It is assumed that, independently of interval, space-time points have an

order, so that, along any route, one point can be between two others whichare near it. For example, the interval between two different points on one

light-ray is zero, but the points still have a temporal order: if a ray travels

outward from the sun, the parts near the sun are earlier than the parts farther

from it. The space-time order of events is presupposed in the assignment of

co-ordinates, for although this is to a great extent conventional it must always

be such that neighbouring points have co-ordinates that do not differ much,

and that, as points approach closer to each other, the difference between their

co-ordinates approaches zero as a limit.

  If the physical world is held to consist of a four-dimensional manifold of

events,  instead  of  a  manifold  of  persistent  moving  particles,  it  becomes

necessary to find a way of defining what is meant when we say that two

events are part of the history of one and the same piece of matter. Until we

have such a definition, “motion” has no definite meaning, since it consists in

one  thing  being  in  different  places  at  different  times.  We  must  define  a

“particle”, or material point, as a series of space-time points having to each

other a causal relation which they do not have to other space-time points.

There is no difficulty of principle about this procedure. Dynamical laws are

habitually stated on the assumption that there are persistent particles, and are

used to decide whether two events A and B belong to the biography of one

particle or not. We merely retain the laws, and turn the statement that A and

B belong to the same biography into a definition of a “biography”, whereas

before it seemed to be a substantial assertion.

  This  point  perhaps  needs  some  further  explanation.  Starting  from  the

assumption that there are persistent pieces of matter, we arrive at physical

laws connecting what happens to a piece of matter at one time with what

happens to it at another. (The most obvious of such laws is the law of inertia.)

We now state these laws in a different way: we say that, given an event of a

certain kind in a certain small region of space-time, there will be neighbouring

events in neighbouring regions which will be related to the given event in

certain specific ways. We say that a series of events related to each other in

these specific ways is to be called one piece of matter at different times. Thus

matter and motion cease to be part of the fundamental apparatus of physics.

What is fundamental is the four-dimensional manifold of events, with variouskinds of causal relations. There will be relations making us regard the events

concerned as belonging to one piece of matter, others making us regard them

as belonging to different but interacting pieces of matter, others relating a

piece of matter to its “empty” environment (e.g. emission of light), and yet

others relating events that are both in empty space, e.g. parts of one light-ray.

  The collecting of events into series such as will secure the persistence of

matter is only partially and approximately possible. When an atom is pictured

as  a  nucleus  with  planetary  electrons,  we  cannot  say,  after  a  quantum

transition, that such-and-such an electron in the new state is to be identified

with such-and-such an electron in the old state. We do not even know for

certain that the number of electrons in the universe is constant. Mass is only a

form of energy, and there is no reason why matter should not be dissolved

into other forms of energy. It is energy, not matter, that is fundamental in

physics. We do not define energy; we merely discover laws as to the changes

in its distribution. And these laws are no longer such as to determine a unique

result  where  atomic  phenomena  are  concerned,  though  macroscopic

occurrences remain statistically determinate with an enormously high degree

of probability.

  The continuity of space-time, which is technically assumed in physics, has

nothing in its favour except technical convenience. It may be that the number

of space-time points is finite, and that space-time has a granular structure, like

a  heap  of  sand.  Provided  the  structure  is  fine  enough,  there  will  be  no

observable phenomenon to show that there is not continuity. Theoretically,

there  might  be  evidence  against  continuity,  but  there  could  never  be

conclusive evidence in its favour.

  The theory of relativity does not affect the space and time of perception.

My space and time, as known in perception, are correlated with those that, in

physics, are appropriate to axes that move with my body. Relatively to axes

tied to a given piece of matter, the old separation of space and time still holds;

it is only when we compare two sets of axes in rapid relative motion that the

problems arise which the theory of relativity solves. Since no two human

beings have a relative velocity approaching that of light, comparison of their

experiences will reveal no such discrepancies as would result if aeroplanescould move as fast as beta particles. In the psychological study of space and

time, therefore, the theory of relativity may be ignored.                                        VIII 


              The Principle of Individuation


I SHALL discuss in this Chapter the modern form of a very old problem, much

discussed by the scholastics, but still, in our day, far from being definitively

solved. The problem, in its broadest and simplest terms, is this: “How shall we

define the diversity which makes us count objects as two in a census?” We

may put the same problem in words that look different, e.g. “what is meant by

a ‘particular’?” or “what sort of objects can have proper names?”

  Three views have been influentially advocated.

  First: a particular is constituted by qualities; when all its qualities have

been enumerated, it is fully defined. This is the view of Leibniz.

    Second: a particular is defined by its spatio-temporal position. This is the

view of Thomas Aquinas as regards material substances.

  Third: numerical diversity is ultimate and indefinable. This, I think, would

be the view of most modern empiricists if they took the trouble to have a

definite view.

  The second of the above three theories is reducible to either the first or the

third according to the way in which it is interpreted. If we take the Newtonian

view, according to which there actually are points, then two different points

are exactly alike in all their qualities, and their diversity must be that bare

numerical diversity contemplated in the third theory. If, on the other hand, we

take—as every one now does—a relational view of space, the second theory

will have to say: “If A and B differ in spatio-temporal position, then A and B

are two”. But here there are difficulties. Suppose A is a shade of colour: it may

occur in a number of places and yet be only one. Therefore our A and B must

not be qualities, or, if they are, they must be qualities that never recur. If they

are not qualities or bundles of qualities, they must be particulars of the sort

contemplated in our third theory; if they are qualities or bundles of qualities,

it is the first of our three theories that we are adopting. Our second theory,

therefore, may be ignored.  The construction of points and instants in our three preceding Chapters

used “events” as its raw material. Various reasons, of which the theory of

relativity has been the most influential, have made this procedure preferable

to one which, like Newton’s, allows “points”, “instants”, and “particles” as raw

material. It has been assumed, in our constructions, that a single event may

occupy a finite amount of space-time, that two events may overlap both in

space and in time, and that no event can recur. That is to say, if A wholly

precedes B, A and B are not identical. We assumed also that, if A wholly

precedes B, and B wholly precedes C, then A wholly precedes C. “Events”

were provisionally taken as “particulars” in the sense of our third theory. It

was shown that, if a raw material of this sort is admitted, space-time points

and space-time order can be constructed.

  But we are now concerned with the problem of constructing space-time

points  and  space-time  order  when  our  first  theory  is  adopted.  Our  raw

material will now contain nothing that cannot recur, for a quality can occur in

any number of separate places. We have therefore to construct something that

does not recur, and until we have done so we cannot explain space-time order.

  We have to ask ourselves: what is meant by an “instance”? Take some

definite shade of colour, which we will call “C”. Let us assume that it is a

shade of one of the colours of the rainbow, so that it occurs wherever there is

a rainbow or a solar spectrum. On each occasion of its occurrence, we say that

there is an “instance” of C. Is each instance an unanalysable particular, of

which C is a quality? Or is each instance a complex of qualities of which C is

one? The former is the third of the above theories; the latter is the first.

  There are difficulties in either view. Taking first the view that an instance

of C is an unanalysable particular, we find that we encounter all the familiar

difficulties  connected  with  the  traditional  notion  of  “substance”.  The

particular cannot be defined or recognized or known; it is something serving

the  merely  grammatical  purpose  of  providing  the  subject  in  a  subject-

predicate sentence such as “this is red”. And to allow grammar to dictate our

metaphysic is now generally recognized to be dangerous.

  It is difficult to see how something so unknowable as such a particular

would  have  to  be  can  be  required  for  the  interpretation  of  empiricalknowledge. The notion of a substance as a peg on which to hang predicates is

repugnant, but the theory that we have been considering cannot avoid its

objectionable features. I conclude, therefore, that we must, if possible, find

some other way of defining space-time order.

  But when we abandon particulars in the sense which we have just decided

to  reject,  we  are  faced,  as  observed  above,  with  the  difficulty  of  finding

something that will not be repeated. A simple quality, such as the shade of

colour C, cannot be expected to occur only once. We shall seek to escape this

difficulty by considering a “complex” of qualities. What I mean will be most

easily understood if stated in psychological terms. If I see something and at

the same time hear something else, my visual and auditory experiences have a

relation which I call “compresence”. If at the same moment I am remembering

something  that  happened  yesterday  and  anticipating  with  dread  a

forthcoming visit to the dentist, my remembering and anticipating are also

“corn-present” with my seeing and hearing. We can go on to form the whole

group of my present experiences and of everything compresent with all of

them. That is to say, given any group of experiences which are all compresent,

if I can find anything else which is compresent with all of them I add it to the

group, and I go on until there is nothing further which is compresent with

each and all of the members of the group. I thus arrive at a group having the

two properties: (a) that all the members of the group are compresent, (b) that

nothing outside the group is compresent with every member of the group.

Such a group I shall call a “complete complex of compresence”.

  Such a complex I suppose to consist of constituents most of which, in the

natural  course  of  events,  may  be  expected  to  be  members  of  many  other

complexes. The shade of colour C, we supposed, recurs every time anybody

sees  a  rainbow  distinctly.  My  recollection  may  be  qualitatively

indistinguishable from a recollection that I had yesterday. My apprehension of

dental pain may be just what I felt before my last visit to the dentist. All these

items  of  the  complex  of  compresence  may  occur  frequently,  and  are  not

essentially dated. That is to say, if A is one of them, and A precedes (or

follows) B, we have no reason to suppose that A and B are not identical.

  Have we any reason, either logical or empirical, to believe that a completecomplex of compresence, as a whole, cannot be repeated? Let us, in the first

place, confine ourselves to one person’s experience. My visual field is very

complex, though probably not infinitely complex. Every time I move my eyes,

the  visual  qualities  connected  with  a  given  object  which  remains  visible

undergo changes: what I see out of the corner of my eyes looks different from

what is in the centre of my field of vision. If it is true, as some maintain, that

my memory is coloured by my whole past experience, then it follows logically

that  my  total  recollections  cannot  be  exactly  similar  on  two  different

occasions; even if we reject this doctrine, such exact similarity seems very

improbable.

  From such considerations I think we ought to conclude that the exact

repetition  of  my  total  momentary  experience,  which  is  what,  in  this

connection,  I  call  a  “complete  complex  of  compresence”,  is  not  logically

impossible, but is empirically so exceedingly improbable that we may assume

its non-occurrence. In that case, a complete complex of compresence will, so

far  as  one  person’s  experience  is  concerned,  have  the  formal  properties

required of “events”, i.e.: if A, B, C are complete complexes of compresence,

then if A wholly precedes B, A and B are not identical; and if B also wholly

precedes  C,  then  A  wholly  precedes  C.  We  thus  have  the  requisites  for

defining the time-order in one person’s experience.

  This, however, is only part, and not the most difficult part, of what we

have to accomplish. We have to extend space-time order beyond one person’s

experience to the experiences of different people and to the physical world. In

regard to the physical world, especially, this is difficult.

  So long as we confine ourselves to one person’s experience, we need only

concern ourselves with time. But now we have also to take account of space.

That is to say, we have to find a definition of “events” which shall insure that

each event has, not merely a unique temporal position, but a unique spatio-

temporal position.

  So long as we confine ourselves to experiences, there is no fresh difficulty

of a serious kind. It may be taken as virtually certain, on empirical grounds,

that my visual field, whenever my eyes are open, is not exactly similar to that

of any one else. If A and B are looking simultaneously at the same scene, thereare differences of perspective; if they change places, A will not see exactly

what B was seeing, because of differences of eyesight, changes of lighting

meanwhile,  and  so  on.  In  short,  the  reasons for  supposing  that  no  total

momentary  experience  of  A  is  ever  exactly  like  some  total  momentary

experience of B are of the same kind as the reasons for supposing that no two

total momentary experiences of A are ever exactly alike.

  This being granted, we can establish a spatial order among percipients by

means of the laws of perspective, provided there is any physical object that all

the percipients concerned are perceiving. If there is not, a process by means of

intermediate  links  can  reach  the  same  result.  There  are  of  course

complications and difficulties, but they are not such as concern our subject at

all closely, and we may safely ignore them.

  What can be said about the purely physical world is hypothetical, since

physics gives no information except as to structure. But there are reasons for

supposing  that,  at  every  place  in  physical  space-time,  there  is  at  every

moment  a  multiplicity  of  occurrences,  just  as  there  is  in  a  mind.

“Compresence”, which I take to have a merely ostensive definition, appears in

psychology as “simultaneity in one experience”, but in physics as “overlapping

in space-time”. If, as I maintain, my thoughts are in my head, it is obvious that

these  are  different  aspects  of  one  relation.  However,  this  identification  is

inessential to my present argument.

  When I look at the stars on a clear night, each star that I see has an effect

on me, and has an effect on the eye before it has an effect on the mind. It

follows that, at the surface of the eye, something causally connected with each

visible star is happening. The same considerations apply to ordinary objects

seen in daylight. At this moment I can see white pages covered with writing,

some books, an oval table, innumerable chimneys, green trees, clouds, and

blue sky. I can see these things because there is a chain of physical causation

from them to my eyes and thence to the brain. It follows that what is going on

at the surface of my eye is as complex as my visual field, in fact as complex as

the whole of what I can see. This complexity must be physical, not merely

physiological or psychological; the optic nerve could not make the complex

responses that it does make except under the influence of equally complexstimuli. We must hold that, wherever the light of a certain star penetrates,

something connected with that star is happening. Therefore in a place where a

telescope photographs many millions of stars, many millions of things must be

happening,  each  connected  with  its  own  star. These  things  are  only

“experienced” in places where there is a recording nervous system, but that

they happen in other places also can be shown by cameras and dictaphones.

There  is  therefore  no  difficulty  of  principle  in  constructing  “complexes  of

compresence”, where there are no percipients, on the same principles as we

employed in dealing with momentary experiences.

    Abandoning  speculations  about  the  physical  world,  about  which  our

knowledge is very limited, let us return to the world of experience. The view

which  I  am  suggesting,  as  preferable  to  the  assumption  of  such  wholly

colourless  particulars  as  points  of  space  or  particles  of  matter,  may  be

expressed as follows:

  There is a relation, which I call “compresence”, which holds between two

or  more  qualities  when  one  person  experiences  them  simultaneously—for

example, between high C and vermilion when you hear one and see the other.

We can form groups of qualities having the following two properties: (a) all

members of the group are compresent; (b) given anything not a member of the

group,  there  is  at  least  one  member  of  the  group  with  which  it  is  not

compresent. Any one such complete group of compresent qualities constitutes

a single complex whole, defined when its constituents are given, but itself a

unit,  not  a  class.  That  is  to  say,  it  is  something  which  exists,  not  merely

because its constituents exist, but because, in virtue of being compresent, they

constitute a single structure. One such structure, when composed of mental

constituents, may be called a “total momentary experience”.

  Total momentary experiences, as opposed to qualities, have time relations

possessing the desired characteristics. I can see blue yesterday, red to-day, and

blue again to-morrow. Therefore, so far as qualities are concerned, blue is

before red and red is before blue, while blue, since it occurs yesterday and to-

morrow, is before itself. We cannot therefore construct, out of qualities alone,

such  a  relation  as  will  generate  a  series.  But  out  of  total  momentary

experiences we can do this, provided no total momentary experience everexactly recurs. That this does not happen is an empirical proposition, but, so

far as our experience goes, a well-grounded one. I regard it as a merit in the

above theory that it gets rid of what would otherwise be synthetic a priori

knowledge.  That,  if  A  precedes  B,  B  does  not  precede  A,  and  that,  if  A

precedes B and B precedes C, then A precedes C, are synthetic propositions;

moreover,  as  we  have  just  seen,  they  are  not  true  if  A  and  B  and  C  are

qualities. By making such statements (in so far as they are true) empirical

generalizations, we overcome what would otherwise be a grave difficulty in

the theory of knowledge.

  I  come  back  now  to  the  conception  of  “instance”.  An  “instance”  of  a

quality, as I wish to use the word, is a complex of compresent qualities of

which the quality in question is one. In some cases this view seems natural.

An instance of “man” has other qualities besides humanity: he is white or

black, French or English, wise or foolish, and so on. His passport enumerates

enough of his characteristics to distinguish him from the rest of the human

race. Each of these characteristics, presumably, exists in many other instances.

There are baby giraffes who have the height mentioned in his passport, and

parrots who have the same birthday as he has. It is only the assemblage of

qualities that makes the instance unique. Every man, in fact, is defined by

such an assemblage of qualities, of which humanity is only one.

  But when we come to points of space, instants of time, particles of matter,

and such stock-in-trade of abstract science, we feel as if a particular could be a

“mere”  instance,  differentiated  from  other  instances  by  relations,  not  by

qualities. To some degree, we think this of less abstract objects: we say “as like

as  two  peas”,  suggesting  that  between  two  peas  there  are  no  qualitative

differences. We think also that two patches of colour may be merely two, and

may differ only numerically. This way of thinking, I maintain, is a mistake. I

should say that, when the same shade of colour exists in two places at once, it

is one, not two; there are, however, two complexes, in which the shade of

colour is combined with the qualities that give position in the visual field.

People  have  become  so  obsessed  with  the  relativity  of  spatial  position  in

physics that they have become oblivious of the absoluteness of spatial position

in the visual field. At every moment, what is in the centre of my field ofvision has a quality that may be called “centrality”; what is to the right is

“dexter”,  what  to  the  left  “sinister”,  what  above  “superior”,  what  below

“inferior”.  These  are qualities  of  the  visual  datum,  not  relations.  It  is  the

complex consisting of one such quality combined with a shade of colour that

is distinct from the complex consisting of the same shade elsewhere. In short,

the multiplicity of instances of a given shade of colour is formed exactly as the

multiplicity of instances of humanity is formed, namely by the addition of

other qualities.

  As  for  points,  instants,  and  particles,  in  so  far  as  they  are  not  logical

fictions similar considerations apply. Take first instants. It will be found that

what  I  call  a  “total  momentary  experience”  has  all  the  formal  properties

required of an “instant” in my biography. And it will be found that, where

there is only matter, the “complete complex of compresence” may serve to

define an instant of Einsteinian local time, or to define a “point-instant” in

cosmic space-time. Points in perceptual space are defined without any trouble,

since the qualities of up-and-down, right-and-left, in their various degrees,

have already all the properties that we require of “points”. It is indeed this

fact, together with perception of depth, that has led us to place such emphasis

on the spatial characteristics of the world.

  I do not think “particles” can be dealt with quite in the above manner. In

any case, they are no longer part of the fundamental apparatus of physics.

They are, I should say, strings of events interconnected by the law of inertia.

They  are  no  longer  indestructible,  and  have  become  merely  convenient

approximations.

  I  come  now  to  a  possible  objection  to  the  above  theory,  which  was

advanced by Arnauld against Leibniz. If a “particular” is really a complex of

qualities, then the statement that such-and-such a particular has such-and-

such a quality must, when true, be analytic; at least, so it would seem. Leibniz

held  (1)  that  every  proposition  has  a  subject  and  a  predicate;  (2)  that  a

substance  is  defined  by  the  total  of  its  predicates;  (3)  that  the  soul  is  a

substance. It followed that everything that can be truly said of a given soul

consists in mentioning some predicate which is one of those that constitute

the given soul. “Cæsar”, for example, was a collection of predicates, one ofwhich was “crossing the Rubicon”. He was therefore compelled by logic to

cross the Rubicon, and there is no such thing as contingency or free will.

Leibniz ought, on this point, to have agreed with Spinoza, but he chose not to,

for reasons discreditable either to his intellect or to his moral character. The

question is: Can I avoid agreeing with Spinoza without equal discredit?

  What we have to consider is a subject-predicate proposition expressing a

judgment of perception, such as “this is red”. What is “this”? Clearly it is not

my whole momentary experience; I am not saying “one of the qualities that I

am at present experiencing is “redness”. The word “this” may be accompanied

by a gesture, indicating that I mean what is in a certain direction, say the

centre of my visual field. In that case, the core of what I am saying may be

expressed by “centrality and redness overlap spatially in my present visual

field”.  It  is  to  be  observed  that,  within  the  large  complex  of  my  total

momentary  experience,  there  are  smaller  complexes  constituted  by  spatial

compresence in perceptual space. Whatever quality I see in a certain direction

has perceptual-spatial compresence with the visual quality constituting that

direction. It would seem that the word “this”, accompanied by a gesture, is

equivalent to a description, e.g. “what is occupying the centre of my visual

field”.  To  say  that  this  description  applies  to  redness  is  to  say  something

which clearly is not analytic. But since it employs a description instead of a

name, it is not quite what we set out to consider.

  We were considering what sort of thing could have the formal properties

that are required for space-time order. Such a thing must happen in only one

time and place; it must not recur, either on another occasion or in another

location. So far as time and physical space are concerned, these conditions are

satisfied by the “complete complex of compresence”, whether this consists of

my  momentary  experiences  or  of  a  full  group  of  overlapping  physical

qualities. (I call such a group “full” when, if anything is added, the members

will no longer be all compresent.) But when we come to consider perceptual

space, we have no need of an analogous procedure. If I see simultaneously two

patches of a given shade of colour, they differ as regards the qualities of up-

and-down, right-and-left, and it is by means of these qualities that the patches

acquire particularity.  With these preliminaries, let us examine the question of proper names.

  It seems preposterous to maintain that “Cæsar crossed the Rubicon” is an

analytic proposition. But if it is not, what do we mean by “Cæsar”?

  Taking Cæsar as he was, without the limitations due to our ignorance, we

may say that he was a series of events, each event being a momentary total

experience. If we were to define “Cæsar” by enumerating these events, the

crossing of the Rubicon would have to come in our list, and “Cæsar crossed

the Rubicon” would be analytic. But in fact we do not define “Cæsar” in this

way, and we cannot do so, since we do not know all his experiences. What

happens in fact is more like this: Certain series of experiences have certain

characteristics which make us call such a series a “person”. Every person has a

number of characteristics that are peculiar to him; Cæsar, for example, had

the name “Julius Cæsar”. Suppose P is some property which has belonged to

only one person; then we can say: “I give the name ‘A’ to the person who had

the property P”. In this case, the name “A” is an abbreviation for “the person

who had the property P”. It is obvious that, if this person also had the property

Q,  the  statement  “A  had  the  property  Q”  is  not  analytic  unless  Q  is

analytically a consequence of P.

  This  is  all  very  well  as  regards  a  historical  character,  but  how  about

somebody whom I know more intimately, e.g. myself? How about such a

statement  as  “I  am  hot”?  This  may,  following  our  earlier  analysis,  be

translated into “heat is one of the qualities that make up I-now”. Here “I-now”

may be taken as denoting the same complex that is denoted by “my total

present momentary experience”. But the question remains: how do I know

what is denoted by “I-now”? What is denoted is continually changing; on no

two occasions can the denotation be the same. But clearly the words “I-now”

have  in  some  sense  a  constant  meaning;  they  are  fixed  elements  in  the

language. We cannot say that, in the ordinary sense, “I-now” is a name, like

“Julius Cæsar”, because to know what it denotes we must know when and by

whom it is used. Nor has it any definable conceptual content, for that, equally,

would not vary with each occasion when the phrase is used. Exactly the same

problems arise in regard to the word “this”.

  But although “I-now” and “this” are not names in quite the ordinary sense,I incline to think that there is a sense in which they must count as names. A

proper name, as opposed to a concealed description, can be given to the whole

or to any part of what the speaker is at the moment experiencing. When our

verbal  inventiveness  fails,  we  fall  back  on  “this”  for  the  part  of  our  total

momentary experience to which we are specially attending, and upon “I-now”

for the total momentary experience. I maintain that I can perceive a complex

of  compresent  qualities  without necessarily  perceiving  all  the  constituent

qualities. I can give the name “this” to such a complex, and then, by attention,

observe that redness (say) is one of its constituent qualities. The resulting

knowledge I express in the sentence “this is red”, which, accordingly, is a

judgment of analysis, but not, in the logical sense, an analytic judgment. A

complex can be perceived without my being aware of all its parts; when, by

attention, I become aware that it has such-and-such a part, this is a judgment

of perception which analyses the whole, but is not analytic, because the whole

was defined as “this”, not as a complex of known parts.

  The kind of thing I have in mind is the kind of thing that is emphasized by

the Gestalt psychologists. Suppose I possessed a clock which showed not only

hours and minutes, but the day of the month, the month of the year, and the

year  of  the  Christian  era,  and  suppose  that  this  clock  were  to  function

throughout my life. It would then never twice during my life present the same

appearance.  I  might  perceive  that  two  appearances  of  it  were  different,

without being able to say at once in what the difference consisted. Attention

might lead me to say: “In this appearance the minute-hand is at the top; in

that,  it  is  at  the  bottom”.  Here  “this”  and  “that”  are  merely  names,  and

therefore nothing said about them can be logically analytic.

  There is another way of escaping from the conclusion that judgments are

analytic when in fact they are obviously empirical. Consider again our clock

that never repeats itself. We can define a date unambiguously by means of

this clock. Suppose that, when the clock indicates 10 hours 47 minutes on June

15, 1947, I say “I am hot”. This can be translated into: “Hotness is compresent

with the appearance of the clock that is described as 10 hours 47 minutes, June

15, 1947”. This is certainly not analytic.

  One way of making clear the scope and purport of our discussion is to putit in terms of “minimum vocabularies”. We may ask: “What is, in principle, a

minimum vocabulary for describing the world of my sensible experience?”

We have to ask ourselves: Can I be content with names of qualities, and words

for com-presence and for spatial and temporal relations, or do I need also

proper names? And in the latter case, what sorts of things will need proper

names?

  I have suggested that ordinary proper names, such as “Socrates”, “France”,

or “the sun”, apply to continuous portions of space-time which happen to

interest  us,  and  that  space-time  is  composed  of  “complete  complexes  of

compresence”, which themselves are composed of qualities. According to this

theory, an “instance” of (say) a shade of colour is a complex of which that

shade  is  a  constituent.  The  colour  itself  exists  wherever  (as  we  should

commonly say) there is something that has that colour. Any collection of

compresent qualities may be called a “complex of compresence”, but it is only

a “complete complex” when it cannot be enlarged without ceasing to be a

complex of compresence. Often a complete complex can be rendered definite

by mentioning only some of its components; e.g. in the above case of the

clock, the complex is determined when we are told what appearance of the

clock belongs to it. This is what makes dating convenient.

    Subject-predicate propositions expressing judgments of perception occur

in two ways. First: if a complex is rendered determinate when only some of its

constituent qualities are assigned, we may state that this complex also has

such-and-such other qualities; this is illustrated by the statement “I was hot

when the clock said 10 hours 47 minutes”.

    Second: I may perceive a complex without being aware of all its parts; in

that case, I may, by attention, arrive at a judgment of perception of the form

“P is part of W”, where “W” is the proper name of the perceived complex. If

such  judgments  are  admitted  as  irreducible,  we  need  proper  names  for

complexes. But it would seem that the need for such judgments only arises

through ignorance, and that, with better knowledge, our whole W can always

be described by means of its constituents. I think, therefore, though with some

hesitation, that there is no theoretical need for proper names as opposed to

names of qualities and of relations. Whatever is dated and located is complex,and the notion of simple “particulars” is a mistake.

  As  the  subject  of  this  Chapter  is  somewhat  difficult,  it  will  perhaps

contribute to clarity and to the prevention of misunderstanding to repeat the

main points of the above discussion more briefly and less controversially. Let

us begin with “compresence”.

    “Compresence”, as I wish to understand the term, applies to the physical

world as well as to the world of mind. In the physical world it is equivalent to

“overlapping in space-time”, but this cannot be taken as its definition, since

compresence  is  needed  in  defining  spatio-temporal  position.  I  wish  to

emphasize that the relation is to be the very same in physics as in psychology.

Just as many things happen simultaneously in my mind, so, we must suppose,

many things happen simultaneously in every place in space-time. When we

look at the night sky, each star that we can see produces its separate effect,

and this is only possible if, at the surface of the eye, things are happening that

are  connected  with  each  visible  star.  These  different  things  are  all

“compresent”.

    Wherever several things are compresent, they form what I shall call a

“complex of compresence”. If there are other things compresent with all of

them, they can be added to form a larger complex. When it is no longer

possible to find anything compresent with all the constituents of the complex,

I call the complex “complete”. Thus a “complete complex of compresence” is

one  whose  constituents  have  the  two  properties  (a)  that  all  of  them  are

compresent,  (b)  that  nothing  outside  the  group  is  compresent  with  every

member of the group.

  “I-now” denotes the complete complex of compresence which contains the

present contents of my mind. “This” denotes whatever part of this complex I

am specially noticing.

  Complete complexes of compresence are the subjects of spatiotemporal

relations in physical space-time. For empirical, not logical, reasons, it is highly

probable that none of them recurs, i.e. that none of them precedes itself, or is

north of itself, or west of itself, or above itself.

  A complete complex of compresence counts as a space-time point-instant.

  A complex which is not complete will, in general, be a part of variouscomplete complexes; so will a single quality. A given shade of colour, for

example, is part of every complete complex which is a space-time point at

which this shade exists. To say of a quality or of an incomplete complex that

it “exists at” such-and-such a space-time point is to say that it is part of the

complete complex which is that point.

  An  incomplete  complex  occupies  a  continuous  region  in  space-time  if,

given any two space-time points of which it is part, there is a continuous

route, from the one to the other, consisting wholly of points of which the

incomplete complex is part.

  Such a complex may be called an “event”. It has the property of non-

recurrence, but not that of occupying only one space-time point.

  The occupation of a continuous region by a given incomplete complex

may be defined as follows. A complete complex B is said to be “between” two

not too distant complete complexes A and C if what is common to A and C is

part  of  B.  A  collection  of  complete  complexes  is  “continuous”  (for  our

purposes) if between any two of its members there are other members of the

collection.  This,  however,  is  only  a  rough-and-ready  definition;  a  precise

definition could only be given by means of topology.

  We can never know that a given complex of compresence is complete,

since there may always be something else, of which we are not aware, which

is compresent with every part of the given complex. This is another way of

saying that we cannot, in practice, define a place or a date exactly.

  Certain incomplete complexes have advantages from the point of view of

dating. Take, for example, the date in to-day’s newspaper together with a 24-

hour clock which is going. These two together make a complex which never

recurs, and of which the duration is so brief that for most purposes we do not

need  to  notice  that  it  is  more  than  an  instant.  It  is  by  means  of  such

incomplete complexes that we in fact determine dates.

  For determining spatial position, there are similar advantages in the ocular

qualities of centrality, up-and-down, and right-and-left. These qualities are

mutually  exclusive  as  regards  what  may  be  called  “private  compresence”,

which is a relation between elements in one total momentary experience. The

quality of centrality, for example, has “private compresence” with the colourwhich is occupying the centre of my visual field. The correlation of places in

my private space with places in physical space proceeds on the assumption

that,  if  visual  percepts  are  not  privately  compresent,  the  corresponding

physical objects are not publicly compresent, but if the visual percepts are

privately  compresent,  the  corresponding  physical  objects  may  differ  in

distance  from  the  percipient,  though  they  will  agree  approximately  in

direction.  Thus  private  compresence  of  percepts  is  a  necessary  but  not

sufficient  condition  for  public  compresence  of  the  corresponding  physical

objects.

  It  is  to  be  observed  that,  in  general,  every  increase  in  the  number  of

qualities combined in a complex of compresence diminishes the amount of

space-time that it occupies. A complete complex of compresence will occupy a

portion of space-time which has no parts that are portions of space-time; if we

assume continuity, such a portion will have the properties that we expect of a

point-instant. But there is no reason, either empirical or a priori, to suppose

either that space-time is continuous, or that it is not; everything known can be

explained equally well on either hypothesis. If it is not continuous, a finite

number of complexes of compresence will occupy a finite space-time volume,

and the structure of space-time will be granular, like that of a heap of shot.

  A  complex  of  compresence,  as  I  conceive  it,  is  determinate  when  the

qualities constituting it are given. That is to say, if the qualities q, q, … q are
                                                                            12n

all mutually compresent, there is just one complex of compresence, say C,

which consists of the combination of these qualities. It is always logically

possible for C to occur more than once, but I assume that, if C is sufficiently

complex, there will not in fact be recurrence. A few words are necessary to

explain  what,  logically,  is  meant  by  “recurrence”.  Let  us,  for  simplicity,

confine ourselves to time in one biography, and let us begin by considering

complete complexes.

  I  assume  that,  between  any  two  complete  complexes  belonging  to  the

same  biography,  there  is  a  relation  of  earlier-and-later.  To  suppose  that  a

complete complex can recur is to suppose that a complete complex can have

the relation of earlier-and-later to itself. This, I assume, does not happen, or at

any rate does not happen within any ordinary period of time. I do not mean todeny dogmatically that history may be cyclic, as some Stoics thought, but the

possibility is too remote to need to be taken into account.

  Since  we  can  never  know  that  a  known  complex  of  compresence  is

complete—since,  in  fact,  we  can  be  pretty  sure  that  it  is  not—we  use,  in

practice,  for  purposes  of  chronology  and  geography,  such  incomplete

complexes as either do not recur at all, or recur in a fairly regular manner.

The  date  on  a  calendar  persists  for  twenty-four  hours,  and  then  changes

abruptly. Some clocks have a minute-hand that moves with a jerk once a

minute; the appearance of such a clock persists for a minute and recurs every

twelve hours. If we had sixty such clocks in a circle, and each gave its jerk one

second after the one to the left of it, the complex consisting of the appearance

of  all  the  sixty  would  fix  the  time  within  one  second.  By  such  methods

accuracy  of  dating  may  be  indefinitely increased.  Exactly  similar  remarks

apply to methods of determining latitude and longitude.

  A  complex  of  compresence,  though  defined  when  all  its  constituent

qualities  are  given,  is  not  to  be  conceived,  like  a  class,  as  a  mere  logical

construction, but as something which can be known and named without our

having to know all its constituent qualities. The logical point involved may be

made clear as follows: the relation earlier-and-later holds, primarily, between

two  complete  complexes  of  compresence,  and  only  in  a  derivative  and

definable  sense  between  partial  complexes.  In  the  case  of  a  purely  logical

structure, a statement about the structure can be reduced to one about its

components, but in the case of the time-order this is not possible on the theory

of  “particulars”  adopted  in  this  Chapter.  A  complex  can,  therefore,  be

mentioned in a way which is not reducible to a statement about any or all of

its constituents. It is, in fact, the sort of object that is a “this”, and that can

have a proper name. A given collection of qualities only forms a complex of

compresence if the qualities happen to be all mutually compresent; when they

are,  the  complex  is  something  new,  over  and  above  the  qualities,  though

necessarily unique when the qualities are given.

  According to the above theory, a complex of compresence which does not

recur  takes  the  place  traditionally  occupied  by  “particulars”;  a  single  such

complex, or a string of such complexes causally connected in a certain way, isthe kind of object to which it is conventionally appropriate to give a proper

name. But a complex of compresence is of the same logical type as a single

quality,  that  is  to  say,  any  statement  which  is  significant  about  either  is

significant, though probably not true, about the other.

  We may agree with Leibniz to this extent, that only our ignorance makes

names for complexes necessary. In theory, every complex of compresence can

be  defined  by  enumerating  its  component  qualities.  But  in  fact  we  can

perceive a complex without perceiving all its component qualities; in this case,

if we discover that a certain quality is a component of it, we need a name for

the  complex  to  express  what  it  is  that  we  have  discovered.  The  need  for

proper names, therefore, is bound up with our way of acquiring knowledge,

and would cease if our knowledge were complete.                                          IX 


                                Causal Laws


THE practical utility of science depends upon its ability to foretell the future.

When the atomic bombs were dropped, it was expected that large numbers of

Japanese would die, and they did. Such highly satisfactory results have led, in

our day, to an admiration of science, which is due to the pleasure we derive

from the satisfaction of our lust for power. The most powerful communities

are the most scientific, though it is not the men of science who wield the

power  conferred  by  their  knowledge.  On  the  contrary,  the  actual  men  of

science are rapidly sinking into the position of state prisoners, condemned to

slave labour by brutal masters, like subject djinns in the Arabian Nights. But

we must not waste any more time upon such pleasant topics. The power of

science is due to its discovery of causal laws, and it is causal laws that are to

occupy us in this chapter.

  A  “causal  law”,  as  I  shall  use  the  term,  may  be  defined  as  a  general

principle in virtue of which, given sufficient data about certain regions of

space-time, it is possible to infer something about Certain other regions of

space-time. The inference may be only probable, but the probability must be

considerably more than a half if the principle in question is to be considered

worthy to be called a “causal law”.

  I have purposely made the above definition very wide. In the first place,

the region to which we infer need not be later than those from which we

infer.  There  are,  it  is  true,  some  laws—notably  the  second  law  of

thermodynamics—which  allow  inferences  forwards  more  readily  than

backwards, but this is not a general characteristic of causal laws. In geology,

for example, the inferences are almost all backwards. In the second place, we

cannot lay down rules as to the number of data that may be involved in

stating  a  law.  If  it  should  ever  become  possible  to  state  the  laws  of

embryology in terms of physics, enormously complex data would be required.

In the third place, the inference may be only to some more or less generalcharacteristic of the inferred event or events. In the days before Galileo it was

known that unsupported heavy bodies fall, which was a causal law; but it was

not known how fast they fall, so that when a weight was dropped it was

impossible to say accurately where it would be after a given lapse of time. In

the fourth place, if the law states a high degree of probability it may be almost

as satisfactory as if it stated a certainty. I am not thinking of the probability of

the  law  being  true;  causal  laws,  like  the  rest  of  our  knowledge,  may  be

mistaken. What I am thinking of is that some laws state probabilities, for

example the statistical laws of quantum theory. Such laws, supposing them

completely true, make inferred events only probable, but this does not prevent

them from counting as causal laws according to the above definition.

  One advantage of admitting laws which only confer probability is that it

enables  us  to  incorporate  in  science  the  crude  generalizations  from  which

common sense starts, such as “fire burns”, “bread nourishes”, “dogs bark”, or

“lions are fierce”. All these are causal laws, and all are liable to exceptions, so

that in a given case they confer only probability. The fire on a plum pudding

does not burn you, poisoned bread does not nourish, some dogs are too lazy to

bark, and some lions grow so fond of their keepers that they cease to be fierce.

But in the great majority of cases the above generalizations will be a sound

guide in action. There are a large number of such approximate regularities

which are assumed in our every-day behaviour, and it is from them that the

conception of causal laws arose. Scientific laws, it is true, are no longer so

simple: they have become complicated in the endeavour to give them a form

in which they are not liable to exceptions. But the old simpler laws remain

valid so long as they are only regarded as asserting probabilities.

  Causal laws are of two sorts, those concerned with persistence and those

concerned with change. The former kind are often not regarded as causal, but

this is a mistake. A good example of a law of persistence is the first law of

motion. Another example is the persistence of matter. After the discovery of

oxygen,  when  the  process  of  combustion  came  to  be  understood,  it  was

possible to regard all matter as indestructible. It has now become doubtful

whether this is quite true, but it remains true for most practical purposes.

What appears to be more exactly true is the persistence of energy. The gradualdevelopment of laws stating persistence started from the common-sense belief,

based on pre-scientific experience, that most solid objects continue to exist

until they crumble from old age or are destroyed by fire, and that, when this

happens,  it  is  possible  to  suppose  that  their  small  parts  survive  in  a  new

arrangement. It was this pre-scientific point of view that gave rise to the belief

in material substance.

  Causal laws concerned with change were found by Galileo and Newton to

demand  statement  in  terms  of  acceleration,  i.e.  change  of  velocity  in

magnitude or direction or both. The greatest triumph of this point of view was

the law of gravitation, according to which every particle of matter causes in

every other an acceleration directly proportional to the mass of the attracting

particle  and  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  distance  between

them. But Einstein’s form of the law of gravitation made it more analogous to

the law of inertia, and, in a sense, a law of persistence rather than a law of

change. According to Einstein, space-time is full of what we may call hills;

each hill grows steeper as you go up, and has a piece of matter at the top. The

result is that the easiest route from place to place is one which winds round

the hills. The law of gravitation consists in the fact that bodies always take the

easiest route, which is what is called a “geodesic”. There is a law of cosmic

laziness called the “principle of least action”, which states that when a body

moves from one place to another it will choose the route involving least work.

By means of this principle gravitation is absorbed into the geometry of space-

time.

  The essential laws of change in modern physics are those of quantum

theory, which govern transitions from one form of energy to another. An

atom can emit energy in the form of light, which then travels on unchanged

until it meets another atom, which may absorb the energy of the light. Such

interchanges are governed by certain rules, which do not suffice to say what

will happen on a given occasion, but can predict, with a very high degree of

probability, the statistical distribution of possible happenings among a very

large number of interchanges. This is as near as physics can get at present to

the ultimate character of causal laws.

    Everything that we believe ourselves to know about the physical worlddepends entirely upon the assumption that there are causal laws. Sensations,

and what we optimistically call “perceptions”, are events in us. We do not

actually see physical objects, any more than we hear electromagnetic waves

when we listen to the wireless. What we directly experience might be all that

exists, if we did not have reason to believe that our sensations have external

causes. It is important, therefore, to inquire into our belief in causation. Is it

mere superstitition, or has it a solid foundation?

  The  question  of  the  justification  of  our  belief  in  causality  belongs  to

theory of knowledge, and I shall therefore postpone it for the present. My

purpose in this Part is the interpretation of science, not an inquiry into the

grounds for supposing science valid. Science assumes causality in some sense,

and our present question is: in what sense is causality involved in scientific

        1
method?

    Broadly  speaking,  scientific  method  consists  in  inventing  hypotheses

which fit the data, which are as simple as is compatible with this requirement,

and which make it possible to draw inferences subsequently confirmed by

observation. The theory of probability shows that the validity of this process

depends upon an assumption which may be roughly stated as the postulate

that there are general laws of certain kinds. This postulate, in a suitable form,

can make scientific laws probable, but without it they do not even achieve

probability. We have therefore to examine this assumption, to find out the

most plausible form in which it is both effective and possibly true.

  If there is no limit to the complexity of possible laws, every imaginable

course of events will be subject to laws, and therefore the assumption that

there are laws will become a tautology. Take, for example, the numbers of all

the taxis that I have hired in the course of my life, and the times when I have

hired  them.  We  have  here  a  finite  set  of  integers  and  a  finite  number  of

corresponding times. If n is the number of the taxi that I hired at the time t, it

is certainly possible, in an infinite number of ways, to find a function f such

that the formula  is true for all the values of n and t that have hitherto occurred. An infinite

number of these formulae will fail for the next taxi that I hire, but there will

still  be  an  infinite  number  that  remain  true.  By  the  time  I  die,  it  will  be

possible to close the account, and there will still remain an infinite number of

possible formulae, each  of  which  might  claim  to  be  a  law  connecting  the

number of a taxi with the time when I hire it.

  The  merit  of  this  example,  for  my  present  purpose,  is  its  obvious

absurdity. In the sense in which we believe in natural laws we should say that

there is no law connecting the n and t of the above formula, and that, if any

suggested formula happens to work, that is a mere chance. If we had found a

formula that worked in all cases up to the present, we should not expect it to

work  in  the  next  case.  Only  a  superstitious  person  whose  emotions  are

involved  will  believe  an  induction  of  this  sort;  gamblers  at  Monte  Carlo

practise inductions which no man of science would sanction. But it is not

altogether  easy  to  state  the  difference  between  the  inductions  of  the

superstitious  gambler  and  the  inductions  of  the  prudent  man  of  science.

Obviously  there  is  a  difference,  but  in  what  does  it  consist?  And  is  the

difference such as to affect logical validity, or does it consist merely in a

difference as to the obviousness of the appeal to the emotions? Is the faith in

scientific method merely the scientist’s superstition appropriate to his kind of

gambling? These questions, however, belong to the theory of knowledge. For

the present I want to discover not why we believe, but what we believe, when

we believe in natural laws.

  It is customary to speak of induction as what is needed to make the truth

of scientific laws probable. I do not think that induction, pure and simple, is

fundamental. The above example of the numbers of taxis illustrates this. All

past observations as to these numbers are compatible with a number of laws

of the form n = f (t), and these will, as a rule, give different values for the next

n. We cannot therefore use them all for prediction, and in fact we have no

inclination to believe in any of them. Generalizing, we may say: Every finite

set of observations is compatible with a number of mutually inconsistent laws,

all  of  which  have  exactly  the  same  inductive  evidence  in  their  favour.

Therefore pure induction is invalid, and is, moreover, not what we in factbelieve.

    Whenever inductive evidence seems to us to make a suggested law very

probable, the law is one which had suggested itself more or less independently

of the evidence, and had seemed to us in some way likely to be true. When

this  is  the  case,  subsequent  confirmatory  evidence  is  found  astonishingly

convincing.

  This, however, is only partially true. If a law is suggested of which the

consequences are very different from what we should expect, and it then is

confirmed by observation, we are more prone to believe in it than if its results

were commonplace. But in such a case the law itself may seem plausible,

although its consequences, when mentioned, are found surprising. Perhaps

one  of  the  most  important  effects  of  scientific  education  is  to  modify  the

hypotheses that appear prima facie  probable.  It  was  this  cause,  not  direct

negative evidence, that led the belief in witchcraft to decay. If you had a

number of outwardly similar boxes, of which some contained gyrostats, and

you showed them to a savage, saying that by uttering a magic formula you

could make any one of them impossible to turn round, the inductive evidence

would  soon  persuade  him  that  you  were  right,  but  a  man  of  educated

scientific outlook would search for some other explanation in spite of repeated

apparent verifications of your “law”.

    Induction, moreover, does not validate many of the inferences in which

science feels most confidence. We are all convinced that, when a number of

people hear a sound simultaneously, their common experience has an external

source, which is propagated through the intervening medium by sound waves.

There  cannot  be  inductive  evidence  (unless  in  some  extended  sense)  for

something outside human experience, such as a sound wave. Our experience

will be the same whether there really are sound-waves, or, though there are

none, auditory sensations occur as they would if there were sound-waves; no

inductive evidence can ever favour one of these hypotheses rather than the

other. Nevertheless every one in fact accepts the realist alternative—even the

idealist  philosopher  except  in  his  professional  moments.  We  do  this  on

grounds that have nothing to do with induction—partly because we like laws

to be as simple as possible, partly because we believe that causal laws musthave spatio-temporal continuity, i.e. must not involve action at a distance.

  In the establishment of scientific laws experience plays a twofold part.

There is the obvious confirming or confuting of a hypothesis by observing

whether  its  calculated  consequences  take  place,  and  there  is  the  previous

experience which determines what hypotheses we shall think antecedently

probable. But behind these influences of experience there are certain vague

general expectations, and unless these confer a finite a priori probability on

certain kinds of hypotheses, scientific inferences are not valid. In clarifying

scientific method it is essential to give as much precision as possible to these

expectations, and to examine whether the success of science in any degree

confirms  their  validity.  After  being  made  precise  the  expectations  are,  of

course, no longer quite what they were while they remained vague, but so

long as they remain vague the question whether they are true or false is also

vague.

  It seems to me that what may be called the “faith” of science is more or

less of the following sort: there are formulae (causal laws) connecting events,

both  perceived  and  unperceived;  these  formulae  exhibit  spatio-temporal

continuity,  i.e.  involve  no  direct  unmediated  relation  between  events  at  a

finite  distance  from  each  other;  a  suggested  formula  having  the  above

characteristics becomes highly probable if, in addition to fitting in with all

past  observations,  it  enables  us  to  predict  others  which  are  subsequently

confirmed and which would be very improbable if the formula were false.

  The justification of this “faith”, if any, belongs to theory of knowledge.

Our present task is completed in having stated it. But there is still need of

some discussion as to the origin and growth of this “faith”.

  There are various possible postulates which can be taken as the basis of

scientific method, but it is difficult to state them with the necessary precision.

There is the law of causality; there is the uniformity of nature; there is the

reign of law: there is the belief in natural kinds, and Keynes’s principle of

limited  variety;  and  there  is  structural  constancy  with  spatio-temporal

continuity.  It  ought  to  be  possible,  out  of  all  these  somewhat  vague

assumptions,  to  distil  some  definite  axiom  or  axioms  which,  if  true,  will

confer the desired degree of probability on scientific inferences.  The principle of causality appears in the works of almost all philosophers

in an elementary form which it never takes in any advanced science. They

suppose science to assume that, given any suitable class of events A, there is

always some other class of events B such that every A is “caused” by a B;

moreover every event belongs to some such class.

  Most philosophers have held that “cause” means something different from

“invariable antecedent”. The difference may be illustrated by Geulincx’s two

clocks, which both keep perfect time; when one points to the hour, the other

strikes, but we do not think that the one has “caused” the other to strike. A

non-scientific  Fellow  of  my  College  lately  remarked  in  despair:  “The

barometer has ceased to have any effect on the weather”. This was felt to be a

joke,  but  if  “cause”  meant  “invariable  antecedent”  it  would  not  be.  It  is

supposed that when A is caused by B the sequence is not merely a fact, but is

in some sense necessary. This conception is bound up with the controversy

about free will and determinism, summed up by the poet in the following

lines:


  There was a young man who said: Damn !


  I learn with regret that I am


  A creature that moves


  In predestinate grooves,


  In short, not a bus, but a tram.

  As  against  this  view  most  empiricists  have  held  that  “cause”  means

nothing but “invariable antecedent”. The difficulty of this view, and indeed of

any suggestion that scientific laws are of the form “A causes B”, is that such

sequences  are  seldom  invariable,  and,  even  if  they  are  invariable  in  fact,

circumstances can easily be imagined which would prevent them from being

so. As a rule, if you tell a man he is a silly fool he will be angry, but he may be

a saint, or may happen to die of apoplexy before he has time to lose his

temper. If you strike a match on a box it usually lights, but sometimes it

breaks or is damp. If you throw a stone in the air it usually falls down again,but it may be swallowed by an eagle under the impression that it is a bird. If

you will to move your arm it usually moves, but not if you are paralysed. In

such ways all laws of the form “A causes B” are liable to exceptions, since

something may intervene to prevent the expected result.

    Nevertheless, there are reasons, of which the strength will appear in Part

VI, for admitting laws of the form “A causes B”, provided that we do so with

suitable safeguards and limitations. The concept of more or less permanent

physical objects, in its common-sense form, involves “substance”, and when

“substance”  is  rejected  we  have  to  find  some  other  way  of  defining  the

identity of a physical object at different times. I think this must be done by

means of the concept “causal line”. I call a series of events a “causal line”, if

given some of them, we can infer something about the others without having

to  know  anything  about  the  environment.  For  example,  if  my  doors  and

windows are shut, and at intervals I notice my dog asleep on the hearthrug, I

infer that he was there, or at least somewhere in the room, at the times when I

was not noticing him. A photon which travels from a star to my eye is a series

of  events  obeying  an  intrinsic  law,  but  ceasing  to  obey  this  law  when  it

reaches my eye. When two events belong to one causal line, the earlier may

be said to “cause” the later. In this way laws of the form “A causes B” may

preserve  a  certain  validity.  They  are  important  in  connection  both  with

perception and with persistence of material objects.

  It is the possibility of something intervening that has led physics to state

its  laws  in  the  form  of  differential  equations,  which  may  be  regarded  as

stating what is tending to happen. And as already explained, classical physics,

when  presented  with  several  causes  acting  simultaneously,  represents  the

resultant as a vector sum, so that, in a sense, each cause produces its effect as

if no other cause were acting. But in fact the whole conception of “cause” is

resolved into that of “law”. And laws, as they occur in classical physics, are

concerned  with  tendencies  at  an  instant.  What  actually  happens  is  to  be

inferred by taking the vector sum of all the tendencies at an instant, and then

integrating to find out the result after a finite time.

  All empirical laws are inferred from a finite number of observations, eked

out by interpolation and extrapolation. The part played by interpolation is notalways adequately realized. Take for example the apparent motions of the

planets. We assume that, during the day-time, they pursue a smooth course

which  fits  in  easily  with  their  observed  courses  during  the  preceding  and

succeeding nights. It would be a possible hypothesis that planets only exist

when they are observed, but this would make the laws of astronomy very

complicated.  If  it  is  objected  that  planets  can  be  photographed  fairly

continuously, the same problem arises as regards the photographs: do they

exist  when  no  one  is  looking  at  them?  This  again  is  a  question  of

interpolation, and the interpolation is justified by the fact that it gives the

simplest laws compatible with what has been observed.

  Exactly  the  same  principle  applies  to  extrapolation.  Astronomy  makes

assertions, not only about what planets have done at all times since there were

astronomers, but about what they will do and what they did before there was

any one to notice them. This extrapolation is often spoken of as if it involved

some  principle other  than  that  involved  in  interpolation,  but  in  fact  the

principle is one and the same: to choose the simplest law that fits the known

facts.

  As a postulate, however, this is open to grave objections. “Simple” is a

vague conception. Moreover it often happens that a simple law turns out, after

a time, to be too simple, and that the correct law is more complicated. But in

such cases the simple law is usually approximately right. If, therefore, we only

assert that a law is approximately right, we cannot be convicted of error when

some other law is found to be a still better approximation.

  The uniformity of nature, which is a principle sometimes invoked, has no

definite  meaning  except  in  connection  with  natural  laws.  If  it  is  already

granted that there are natural laws, the principle of the uniformity of nature

states that time and place must not appear explicitly in the formulation of

laws: the laws must be the same in one part of space-time as in another. This

principle  may  or  may  not  be  true,  but  in  any  case  it  is  insufficient  as  a

postulate, since it presupposes the existence of laws.

  The  existence  of  natural  kinds  underlies  most  pre-scientific

generalizations,  such  as  “dogs  bark”  or  “wood  floats”.  The  essence  of  a

“natural kind” is that it is a class of objects all of which possess a number ofproperties that are not known to be logically interconnected. Dogs bark and

growl and wag their tails, while cats mew and purr and lick themselves. We

do not know why all the members of an animal species should share so many

common qualities, but we observe that they do, and base our expectations on

what we observe. We should be amazed if a cat began to bark.

    Natural kinds are not only of biological importance. Atoms and molecules

are natural kinds; so are electrons, positrons, and neutrons. Quantum theory

has introduced a new form of natural kinds in its discrete series of energy

levels. It is now possible to conceive the ultimate structure of the physical

world  not  as  a  continuous  flux,  in  the  manner  of  conventional

hydrodynamics,  but  in  a  more  Pythagorean  fashion,  in  which  models  are

derived from analogy with a heap of shot. Evolution, which in Darwin’s time

“broadened  slowly  down  from  precedent  to  precedent”,  now  takes

revolutionary  leaps  by  means  of  mutants  or  freaks.  Perhaps  wars  and

revolutions have made us impatient of gradualness; however that may be,

modern scientific theories are much more jolty and jagged than the smooth

cosmic stream of ordered progress imagined by the Victorians.

  The bearing of all this on induction is of considerable importance. If you

are dealing with a property which is likely to be characteristic of a natural

kind, you can generalize fairly safely after very few instances. Do seals bark?

After hearing half a dozen do so, you confidently answer “yes”, because you

are persuaded in advance that either all seals bark or no seals bark. When you

have found that a few pieces of copper are good conductors of electricity, you

unhesitatingly  assume  that  this  is  true  of  all  copper.  In  such  cases  a

generalization has a finite a priori probability, and induction is less precarious

than in other problems.

  Keynes  has  a  postulate  by  which,  in  his  opinion,  inductive  arguments

might be justified; he calls it the principle of limited variety. It is a form of the

assumption of natural kinds. This is one of the expedients in the way of a

general assumption which, if true, validates scientific method. I shall have

more to say about it at a later stage. What has been said in this chapter is only

by way of anticipation.1 The following pages anticipate, in an abbreviated form, the fuller discussions of Parts V and VI.                                          X 


                    Space-Time and Causality


PHYSICAL events are arranged by physics in a four-dimensional manifold called

space-time.  This  manifold  is  an  improvement  on  the  older  manifold  of

“things” arranged in varying spatial patterns at varying times; and this, in

turn, was an improvement upon the manifold resulting from assuming an

accurate  correspondence  between  percepts  and  “things”.  No  doubt  physics

would like to forget its early history, which, like that of many established

institutions, is not so creditable as could be wished. But unfortunately its title

to our allegiance is difficult to disentangle from its early association with

naive  realism;  even  in  its  most  sophisticated  form,  it  still  appears  as  an

emendation, for which naive realism supplies the text.

  Perceptual  space  is  a  common-sense  construction,  composed  of  diverse

raw materials. There are visual space-relations: up-and-down, right-and-left,

depth  up  to  a  certain  distance  (after  which  differences  of  depth  become

imperceptible). There are the differences in sensations of touch which enable

us to distinguish a touch on one part of the body from a touch on another.

There is the somewhat vague power of estimating the direction of a sound.

Then there are experienced correlations, of which the most important is the

correlation of sight and touch; there are observations of movement, and the

experience of moving parts of our own body.

  Out of such raw materials (the above list does not claim to be complete)

common  sense  constructs  a  single  space  containing  objects  perceived  and

unperceived, the perceived objects being identified with percepts, according to

the principles of naive realism. The unperceived objects, for common sense,

are those which we should perceive if we were in the right position and with

suitably adjusted sense-organs, together with objects only perceived by others,

and objects, such as the interior of the earth, which are perceived by no one

but inferred by common sense.

  In the passage from the common-sense world to that of physics, certaincommon-sense  assumptions  are  retained,  though  in  a modified  form.  For

instance, we assume that the furniture of our room continues to exist when

we do not see it. Common sense supposes that what continues is just what we

see when we look, but physics says that what continues is the external cause

of what we see, i.e. a vast assemblage of atoms undergoing frequent quantum

transformations. In the course of these transformations they radiate energy,

which, when it comes in contact with a human body, has various effects, some

of  which  are  called  “perceptions”.  Two  simultaneous  parts  of  one  visual

percept have a certain visual spatial relation which is a component of the total

percept;  the  physical  objects  which  correspond  to  these  parts  of  my  total

percept have a relation roughly corresponding to this visual spatial relation.

When I say that the relation “corresponds”, I mean that it is part of a system

of  relations  having,  to  some  extent,  the  same  geometry  as  that  of  visual

percepts,  and  that  the  location  of  physical  objects  in  physical  space  has

discoverable relations to the location of perceptual objects in perceptual space.

  But this correspondence is by no means exact. Let us take, to simplify our

problem, the heavenly bodies as they are and as they appear. As they appear,

they do not obviously differ as regards distance from us; they look like bright

points or patches on the celestial sphere. That is to say, their position in visual

space is defined by only two co-ordinates. But eclipses and occultations soon

led to the view that they are not in fact all equi-distant from the earth, though

it was a long time before differences of distance among the fixed stars were

admitted. To fix the position of a heavenly body relatively to ourselves we

need three polar coordinates, r, θ, φ. It was assumed that θ and φ could be the

same for the physical star as for the perceived star, but r must be computed; in

fact a great deal of astronomy has been concerned with computing r. The

assumption  that θ  and φ  are  the  same  in  visual  and  physical  space  is

equivalent  to  the  assumption  that  light  travels  in  straight  lines.  This

assumption, after a time, came to be thought not exactly true, but it is still

sufficiently true for a first approximation.

  The θ and φ of astronomical space, though they have approximately the

same numerical measure as the θ and φ of visual space, are not identical with

the  latter.  If  they  were  identical,  the  hypothesis  that  light  does  not  moveexactly in straight lines would be meaningless. This illustrates at once the

connection and the difference between visual space when we look at the night

sky  and  astronomical  space  as  constructed  by  the  astronomers.  The

connection  is  kept  as  close  as  may  be,  but  beyond  a  point  it  has  to  be

abandoned if we are to believe in comparatively simple laws governing the

real and apparent movements of the heavenly bodies.

  Small distances from ourselves are not estimated by the elaborate methods

required  in  astronomy.  We  can  roughly  “see”  small  distances,  though  the

stereoscope produces this effect deceptively. We judge things that touch our

body to be close to the part they touch. When things are not touching us, we

sometimes  can  move  so  as  to  come  in  contact  with  them;  the  amount  of

movement required measures, roughly, their initial distance from us. We have

thus three common-sense ways of estimating the distance of visual objects on

the surface of the earth. Scientific ways of estimating distance use these ways

as their foundation, but correct them by means of physical laws inferred by

assuming  them.  The  whole  process  is  one  of  tinkering.  If  common-sense

estimates of distances and sizes are roughly correct, then certain physical laws

are  roughly  correct.  If  these  laws  are  quite  correct,  the  common-sense

estimates  must  be  slightly  amended.  If  the  various  laws  are  not  exactly

compatible,  they  must  be  adjusted  until  the  inconsistency  ceases.  Thus

observation  and  theory  interact;  what,  in  scientific  physics,  is  called  an

observation  is  usually  something  involving  a  considerable  admixture  of

theory.

  Let us now abandon the consideration of the stages towards theoretical

physics, and compare the finished physical world with the world of common

sense. I see, let us suppose, a buttercup and a bluebell; common sense says the

buttercup is yellow and the bluebell is blue. Physics says that electromagnetic

waves of many different frequencies start from the sun and reach the two

flowers;  when  they  reach  them,  the  buttercup  scatters  the  waves  whose

frequency produces a yellow sensation, and the bluebell those that produce a

blue sensation. This difference in the effect of the two flowers is assumed to

be due to some difference in their structure. Thus although yellow and blue

exist only where there is an eye, the difference between them allows us toinfer differences between the physical objects in the directions in which we

see yellow and blue respectively.

  Common  sense  constructs  a  single  space  containing  “things” which

combine properties revealed by different senses, such as hot and hard and

bright. These “things” are placed by common sense in a three-dimensional

space,  in  which  distance  cannot  be  estimated  by  common-sense  methods

unless it is small. Physics until recently retained something like “things”, but

called it “matter”, and robbed it of all properties except position in space. The

position of a piece of matter in space was roughly identical with that of the

corresponding “thing”, except that the distance, if great, had to be calculated

by rather elaborate scientific methods.

  In this picking and choosing among common-sense beliefs, physics has

acted without formulated principles, but nevertheless on a subconscious plan

which we must try to make explicit. Part of this plan is to retain always as

much  of  the  common-sense  world  as  is  possible  without  intolerable

complication; another part is to make such non-refutable assumptions as will

lead to simple causal laws. This latter procedure is already implicit in the

common-sense belief in “things”: we do not believe that the visible world

ceases to exist when we shut our eyes, and we hold that the cat exists when it

is secretly stealing the cream as well as when we are punishing it for doing so.

All this is “probable” inference: it is logically possible to suppose that the

world consists only of my percepts, and the inference to the common-sense

world, as to that of physics, is non-demonstrative. But I do not wish to go

behind common sense at present; I wish only to consider the transition from

common sense to physics.

    Modern physics is further from common sense than the physics of the

nineteenth century. It has dispensed with matter, substituting series of events;

it has abandoned continuity in microscopic phenomena; and it has substituted

statistical averages for strict deterministic causality affecting each individual

occurrence.  But  it  has  still  retained  a  great  deal  of  which  the  source  is

common  sense.  And  there  are  still  continuity  and  determinism  so  far  as

macroscopic phenomena are concerned, and for most purposes there is still

matter.  The world of physics contains more than the world of percepts, and in

some respects contains more than the world of common sense. But while it

exceeds both in quantity, it falls short of both in known qualitative variety.

Both common sense and physics supplement percepts by the assumption that

things do not cease to exist when unperceived, and by the further assumption

that things never perceived can often be inferred. Physics supplements the

common-sense world by the whole theory of microscopic phenomena; what it

asserts about atoms and their history surpasses what common sense allows

itself to infer.

  There are two specially important kinds of chains of events: first, those

which constitute the history of a given piece of matter; second, those which

connect  an  object  with  the  perception  of  it.  The  sun,  for  instance,  has  a

biography  consisting  of  all  that  happens  in  the  part  of  space-time  that  it

occupies; this biography may be said to be the sun. It also emits radiations,

some of which reach eyes and brains, and cause the sort of occurrence which

is called “seeing the sun”. Broadly speaking, the former set of events consists

of quantum transitions, the latter of radiant energy. There are correspondingly

two sets of causal laws, one set connecting events belonging to the same piece

of matter, the other connecting parts of the same radiation. There is also a

third set of laws, concerning the transition from energy in the atom to radiant

energy and vice versa.

    Perceiving, as we know it introspectively, appears to be something quite

different from the events that physics considers. Therefore if there is to be

inference from percepts to physical occurrences, or from physical occurrences

to percepts, we need laws which, prima facie, are not physical. I incline to

think that physics can be so interpreted as to include these laws, but for the

present I shall not consider this possibility. Our problem is, therefore: taking

percepts as we know them in experience, and physical occurrences as asserted

by physics, what laws do we know that inter-connect the two and therefore

allow inference from one to the other?

  In part, the answer is already patent to common sense. We see when light

strikes the eye, we hear when sound strikes the ear, we have sensations of

touch when the body is in contact with something else, and so on. These lawsare not laws of physics or physiology, unless physics is subjected to a radical

re-interpretation.  They  are  laws  stating  the  physical  antecedents  of

perceptions. These antecedents are partly outside the percipient’s body (except

when he is perceiving something in his own body), partly in his sense-organs

and nerves, partly in his brain. A failure in any of these antecedents prevents

the perception. But conversely, if one of the later antecedents is caused in an

unusual way, the percept will be what it would have been if the causation had

been  usual,  and  the  percipient  is  liable  to  be  deceived—for  example  by

something seen in a mirror or heard on the wireless, if he is unaccustomed to

mirrors and wireless.

  Each single inference from a perception to a physical object is therefore

liable  to  be  erroneous  in  the  sense  of  causing  expectations  that  are  not

fulfilled.  It  will  not usually  be  erroneous  in  this  sense,  since  the  habit  of

making  that  sort  of  inference  must  have  been  generated  by  a  number  of

occasions when the inference was justified. But here a little further precision

is necessary. From a practical point of view, an inference from a percept is

justified if it gives rise to expectations that are verified. This, however, is all

within the realm of percepts. All that strictly follows is that our inferences as

to physical objects are consistent with experience, but there may be other

hypotheses that are equally consistent.

  The  justification  of  our  inferences  from  perception  to  physical  objects

depends  upon  the  consistency  of  the  whole  system.  First,  from  ordinary

perceptions, we arrive at an elementary kind of physics; this suffices to cause

us to put in a separate category dreams, mirages, etc., which contradict our

elementary physics. We then set to work to improve our elementary physics

so as to include the exceptional phenomena; there is, for instance, a perfectly

good physical theory of mirages. We learn in this way to be critical, and we

form the concept of a “trained observer”. We are critical of percepts in the

name of laws, and of laws in the name of percepts; gradually, as physics

improves,  a  closer  and  closer  harmony  between  percepts  and  laws  is

established.

  But when I say that we become critical of percepts, I must guard against a

misunderstanding. Percepts certainly occur, and a theory which has to denyany  of  them  is  faulty;  but  some,  being  caused  in  an  unusual  way,  lead

common  sense  into  erroneous  inferences.  Of  this  the  mirage  is  a  good

example. If I see a lake which is only a mirage, I see what I see just as truly as

if there were a physical lake; I am mistaken, not as to the percept, but as to

what  it  implies.  The  percept  makes  me  think  that  if  I  walk  in  a  certain

direction, I shall reach water that I can drink, and in this I am deceived; but

my visual percept may be exactly what it would be if there really were water.

My physics, if adequate, must explain not only that there is no water, but also

why there seems to be water. A mistaken perception is mistaken, not as to the

percept itself, but as to its causal correlates and antecedents and consequents;

frequently  the  mistake  is  in  an  animal  inference.  The  fact  that  animal

inferences may be mistaken is one reason for classifying them as inferences.

  The  relation  of  physical  laws  to  experience  is  not  altogether  simple.

Broadly speaking, laws can be disproved by experience, but not proved by it.

That is to say, they assert more than experience alone would warrant. In the

case of the mirage, if I have believed it real, and have also assumed that a

large lake will not dry up in a few hours, I can discover that the mirage caused

me to have a false belief. But the false belief may have been the belief that the

lake could not dry up so quickly. The belief in the persistence of material

objects  throughout  the  interval  between  two  occasions  when  they  are

observed is one which, as a matter of logic, cannot be proved by observation.

Suppose  I  were  to  set  up  the  hypothesis  that  tables,  whenever  no  one  is

looking,  turn  into  kangaroos;  this  would  make  the  laws  of  physics  very

complicated, but no observation could refute it. The laws of physics, in the

form  in  which  we  accept  them,  must  not  only  be  in  agreement  with

observation,  but  must,  as  regards  what  is  not  observed,  have  certain

characteristics  of  simplicity  and  continuity  which  are  not  empirically

demonstrable. In general, we think that physical phenomena are not affected

by being observed, although this is not thought to be strictly true as regards

the minute phenomena upon which quantum theory is based.

  Physics, assuming it perfected, would have two characteristics. In the first

place, it would be able to predict percepts; no perception would be contrary to

what  physics  had  led  us  to  expect.  In  the  second  place,  it  would  assumeunobserved physical occurrences to be governed by causal laws as similar as

possible  to  those  that  we  infer  from  cases  of  continuous  observation.  For

example,  if  I  watch  a  moving  body,  the  motion  that  I  see  is  sensibly

continuous; I therefore assume that all motion, whether observed or not, is

approximately continuous.

  This brings us to the question of causal laws and physical space-time.

Physical space-time, as we have seen, is an inference from perceptual space

and  time;  it  contains  all  observed  occurrences,  and  also  all  unobserved

occurrences. But since it is inferential, the location of an occurrence in it is

also inferential. The locating of events in physical space-time is effected by

two methods. First, there is a correlation between perceptual space and time

and  physical  space-time,  though  this  correlation  is  only  rough  and

approximate. Second, the causal laws of physics assign an order to the events

concerned,  and  it  is  partly  by  means  of  them  that  unobserved  events  are

located in space-time.

  A causal law, as I use the term, is any law which, if true, makes it possible,

given a certain number of events, to infer something about one or more other

events. For example, “planets move in ellipses” is a causal law. If this law is

true, since five points determine an ellipse, five data (theoretically) should

enable us to calculate the orbit of the planet. Most laws, however, have not

this simplicity; they are usually expressed in differential equations. When they

are  so  expressed  they  assume  an  order:  each  event  must  have  four  co-

ordinates,  and  neighbouring  events  are  those  whose  co-ordinates  are  very

nearly the same. But the question arises: how do we assign co-ordinates to

events in physical space-time? I maintain that, in doing so, we make use of

causal laws. That is to say, the relation of causal laws to space-time order is a

reciprocal one. The correct statement is: Events can be arranged in a four-

dimensional order such that, when so arranged, they are interconnected by

causal  laws  which  are  approximately  continuous,  i.e.  events  whose  co-

ordinates differ very little also differ very little. Or rather: Given any event,

there is a series of closely similar events, in which the time-co-ordinate varies

continuously from rather less to rather more than that of the given event, and

in which the space-co-ordinates vary continuously about those of the givenevent. This principle, apparently, does not hold for quantum transitions, but it

holds for macroscopic events, and for all events (such as light-waves) where

there is no matter.

  The correlation between physical and perceptual space-time, which is only

approximate, proceeds as follows. In visual space, if objects are near enough

for differences of depth to be perceptible, every visual percept has three polar

co-ordinates, which may be called distance, up-and-downness, and right-and-

leftness. All these are qualities of the percept, and all are measurable. We may

assign the same numerical co-ordinates to the physical object which we are

said to be seeing, but these co-ordinates no longer have the same meaning as

they have in visual space. It is because they do not have the same meaning

that it is possible for the correlation to be only rough—for example, if the

object is seen through a refracting medium. But although the correlation is

rough,  it  is  very  useful  in  establishing  a  first  approximation  to  the  co-

ordinates  of  events  in  physical  space-time.  The  subsequent  corrections  are

effected by means of causal laws, of which the refraction of light may again

serve as an example.

  There is no logical reason why there should be such causal laws, or a

known relation establishing such a four-dimensional order among events. The

usual  argument  for  the  acceptance  of  physical  laws  is  that  they  are  the

simplest  hypotheses  hitherto  devised  that  are  consistent  with  observation

wherever observation is possible. They are not, however, the only hypotheses

consistent with observation. Nor is it clear by what right we objectify our

preference for simple laws.

  What physics says about the world is much more abstract than it seems to

be, because we imagine that its space is what we know in our own experience,

and that its matter is the kind of thing that feels hard when we touch it. In

fact, even assuming physics true, what we know about the physical world is

very little. Let us first consider theoretical physics in the abstract, and then in

relation to experience.

  As an abstract system, physics, at present, says something like this: there

is a manifold, called the manifold of events, which has a system of relations

among its terms by means of which it acquires a certain four-dimensionalgeometry. There is an extra-geometrical quantity called “energy”, which is

unevenly  distributed  throughout  the  manifold,  but  of  which  some  finite

amount exists in every finite volume. The total of energy is constant. The laws

of physics are laws as to the changes in the distribution of energy. To state

these laws, we have to distinguish two kinds of regions, those that are called

“empty”, and those that are said to contain “matter”. There are very small

material systems called “atoms”; each atom may contain any one of a certain

discrete  denumerable  series  of  amounts  of  energy.  Sometimes  it  suddenly

parts  with  a  finite  amount  of  energy  to  the  non-material  environment,

sometimes it suddenly absorbs a finite amount from the environment. The

laws  as  to  these  transitions  from  one  energy  level  to  another  are  only

statistical. In a given period of time, if not too short, there will be, in a given

state of the environment, a calculable number of transitions of each possible

kind, the smaller transitions being commoner than the greater.

  In “empty space” the laws are simpler and more definite. Parcels of energy

that leave an atom spread outward equally in all directions, travelling with

the velocity of light. Whether a parcel travels in waves or in little units or in

something  which  is  a  combination  of  both,  is  a  matter  of  convention.

Everything proceeds simply until the radiant energy hits an atom, and then

the  atom  may  absorb  a  finite  amount  of  it,  with  the  same  individual

indeterminancy and statistical regularity as applies to the emission of energy

by atoms.

  The amount of energy emitted by an atom in a given transition determines

the “frequency” of the radiant energy that results. And this in turn determines

the kinds of effects that the radiant energy can have upon any matter that it

may encounter. “Frequency” is a word associated with waves, but if the wave

theory of light is discarded “frequency” may be taken as a measurable but

undetermined quality of a radiation. It is measurable by its effects.

  So much for theoretical physics as an abstract logical system. It remains to

consider how it is connected with experience.

  Let us begin with the geometry of space-time. We assume that the position

of a point in space-time can be determined by four real numbers, called co-

ordinates; it is also generally supposed, though this is not essential, that toevery set of four real numbers as co-ordinates (if not too great) a position in

space-time corresponds. It will simplify exposition to adopt this supposition. If

we do, the number of positions in space-time is the same as the number of real

numbers, which is called c. Now of every class of c entities we can assert

every kind of geometry in which there is a one-one correspondence between a

position and a finite ordered set of real numbers (co-ordinates). Therefore to

specify  the  geometry  of  a  manifold  tells  us  nothing  unless  the  ordering

relation  is  given.  Since  physics  is  intended  to  give  empirical  truth,  the

ordering  relation  must  not  be  a  purely  logical  one,  such  as  might  be

constructed  in  pure  mathematics,  but  must  be  a  relation  defined  in  terms

derived from experience. If the ordering relation is derived from experience,

the statement that space-time has such-and-such a geometry is one having a

substantial empirical content, but if not, not.

  I suggest that the ordering relation is contiguity or compresence, in the

sense in which we know these in sensible experience. Something must be said

about these.

    Contiguity is a property given in sight and touch. Two portions of the

visual field are contiguous if their apparent distances and their angular co-

ordinates  (up-and-down,  right-and-left)  differ  very  little.  Two  parts  of  my

body are contiguous if the qualities by which I locate a touch in the two parts

differ very little. Contiguity is quantitative, and therefore enables us to make

series of percepts: if A and B and C are contiguous, but B is more contiguous

to both A and C than they are to each other, B is to be put between A and C.

There  is  also  contiguity  in  time.  When  we  hear  a  sentence,  the  first  and

second words are more contiguous than the first and third words. In this way,

by means of spatial and temporal contiguity, our experiences can be arranged

in an ordered manifold. We may assume that this ordered manifold is a part

of  the  ordered  manifold  of  physical  events,  and  is  ordered  by  the  same

relation.

  For my part, however, I prefer the relation of “compresence”. If we use this

relation, we suppose that every event occupies a finite amount of space-time,

that is to say, no event is confined to a point of space or an instant of time.

Two events are said to be “compresent” when they overlap in space-time; thisis the definition for abstract physics. But we need, as we saw, a definition

derived from experience. As an ostensive definition from experience I should

give the following: Two events are “compresent” when they are related in the

way in which two simultaneous parts of one experience are related. At any

given moment, I am seeing certain things, hearing others, touching others,

remembering  others,  and  expecting  yet  others.  All  these  percepts,

recollections, and expectations are happening to me now; I shall say that they

are mutually “compresent”. I assume that this relation, which I know in my

own experience, can also hold between events that are not experienced, and

can be the relation by which space-time order is constructed. This will have as

a consequence that two events are compresent when they overlap in space-

time, which, if space-time order is taken as already determined, may serve,

within physics, as the definition of compresence.

    Compresence is not the same thing as simultaneity, though it implies it.

Compresence, as I mean it, is to be taken as known through experience, and

having only an ostensive definition. Nor should I define “compresence” as

“simultaneity in one person’s experience”. I should object to this definition on

two  grounds:  first,  that  it  could  not  be  extended  to  physical  occurrences

experienced by no one; second, that “experience” is a vague word. I should say

that an event is “experienced” when it gives rise to a habit, and that broadly

speaking this only happens if the event occurs where there is living matter. If

this is correct, “experience” is not a fundamental concept.

  The  question  now  arises:  can  we  construct  space-time  order  out  of

compresence alone, or do we need something further? Let us take a simplified

hypothesis.  Suppose  there  are n  events, a, a,  … a,  and  suppose a  is
                                                    12n1

compresent only with a, a is compresent with a and a, a, with a and a,
                            2213324

and so on. We can then construct the order a, a, … a. We shall say that an
                                                      12n

event is “between” two others if it is compresent with both, but they are not

compresent with each other; and, more generally, if a, b, c are three different

events, we shall say that b is “between” a and c if the events compresent with

both a and c are a proper part of the events compresent with b. This may be

taken as the definition of “between”. Supplemented by suitable axioms, it will

generate the kind of order we want.  It should be observed that we cannot construct space-time order out of

Einstein’s relation of “interval”. The interval between two parts of a light-ray

is zero, and yet we have to distinguish between a light-ray that goes from A to

B and one that goes from B to A. This shows that “interval” alone does not

suffice.

  If the above point of view is adopted, points in space-time become classes

of events. I have dealt with this subject in “The Analysis of Matter”, and in

Chapters VI and VIII of this Part, and will therefore say no more about it.

  So much for the definition of space-time order in terms of experience. It

remains to restate the connection of physical events in the outer world with

percepts.

  When energy emitted by matter as a result of quantum transitions travels,

without further quantum transitions, to a given part of a human body, it sets

up a train of quantum transitions which ultimately reach the brain. Assuming

the maxim “same cause, same effect”, with its consequence, “different effects,

different causes”, it follows that, if two trains of radiant energy, falling on the

same point of the body, cause different percepts, there must be differences in

the two trains, and therefore in the quantum transitions that gave rise to

them.  Assuming  the  existence  of  causal  laws,  this  argument  seems

unobjectionable, and gives a basis for the inference from perceptions to the

material source of the process by which they are caused.

  I think—though I say this with hesitation—that the distinction between

spatial and temporal distance requires the consideration of causal laws. That is

to say, if there is a causal law connecting an event A with an event B, then A

and B are separated in time, and it is a matter of convention whether we shall

also consider them separated in space. There are, however, some difficulties

about  this  view.  A  number  of  people  may  hear  or  see  something

simultaneously, and in this case there is a causal connection with no time-

interval. But in such a cape the connection is indirect, like that connecting

brothers or cousins; that is to say, it travels first from effect to cause and then

from cause to effect. But how are we to distinguish cause from effect before

we have established the time-order? Eddington says we do so by means of the

second law of thermodynamics. In a spherical radiation, we take it that ittravels from a centre, not to it. But I, since I wish to connect physics with

experience, should prefer to say that we establish time-order by means of

memory  and  our  immediate  experience  of  temporal  succession.  What  is

remembered is, by definition, in the past; and there are earlier and later within

the specious present. Anything compresent with something remembered, but

not with my present experience, is also in the past. From this starting-point

we can extend the definition of time-order, and the distinction of past and

future, step by step to all events. We can then distinguish cause from effect,

and say that causes are always earlier than effects.

  According to the above theory, there are certain elements that are carried

over unchanged from the world of sense to the world of physics. These are:

the relation of compresence, the relation of earlier and later, some elements of

structure, and differences in certain circumstances—i.e. when we experience

different sensations belonging to the same sense, we may assume that their

causes differ. This is the residue of naive realism that survives in physics. It

survives primarily because there is no positive argument against it, because

the resulting physics fits the known facts, and because prejudice causes us to

cling to naive realism wherever it cannot be disproved. Whether there are any

better reasons than these for accepting physics remains to be examined.                                      part V


                                  Probability                                Introduction


IT is generally recognized that the inferences of science and common sense

differ from those of deductive logic and mathematics in a very important

respect, namely, that, when the premisses are true and the reasoning correct,

the conclusion is only probable. We have reasons for believing that the sun

will rise to-morrow, and everybody is agreed that, in practice, we can behave

as if these reasons justified certainty. But when we examine them we find that

they leave some room, however little, for doubt. The doubt that is justified is

of three sorts. As regards the first two: on the one hand there may be relevant

facts of which we are ignorant; on the other hand, the laws that we have to

assume in order to predict the future may be untrue. The former reason for

doubt does not much concern us in our present inquiry, but the latter is one

which  demands  detailed  investigation.  But  there  is  a  third  kind  of  doubt,

which  arises  when  we  know  a  law  to  the  effect  that  something  happens

usually, or perhaps in an overwhelming majority of instances, though not

always; in this case we have a right to expect what is usual, though not with

complete confidence. For example, if a man is throwing dice, it very seldom

happens that he throws double sixes ten times running, although this is not

impossible; we have therefore a right to expect that he will not do so, but our

expectation ought to be tinged with doubt. All these kinds of doubt involve

something  that  may  be  called  “probability”,  but  this  word  is  capable  of

different meanings, which it will be important to us to disentangle.

    Mathematical  probability  arises  always  from  a  combination  of  two

propositions,  of  which  one  may  be  completely  known,  while  the  other  is

completely unknown. If I draw a card from a pack, what is the chance that it

will be an ace? I know completely the constitution of a pack of cards, and I am

aware that one card in thirteen is an ace; but I am completely ignorant as to

which card I shall draw. But if I say “probably Zoroaster existed”, I am saying

something about the degree of uncertainty, or of credibility, attaching to the

one proposition “Zoroaster existed”. This is quite a different concept from thatof mathematical probability, although in many cases the two are correlated.

    Science is concerned to infer laws from particular facts. An inference of

this sort cannot be deductive, unless, in addition to particular facts, there are

general laws among our premisses; as a matter of pure logic this is fairly

evident. It is sometimes thought that, though particular facts cannot make a

general law certain, they can make it probable. Particular facts can certainly

cause belief in a general proposition; it is our experience of particular men

dying that has caused us to believe that all men are mortal. But if we are

justified  in  believing  that  all  men  are  mortal,  that  must  be  because,  as  a

general principle, certain kinds of particular facts are evidence of general laws.

And since deductive logic knows no such principle, any principle which will

justify inference from the particular to the general must be a law of nature, i.e.

a statement that the actual universe has a certain character which it would be

possible for it not to have. I shall undertake the search for some such principle

or principles in Part VI; in Part V I shall only contend that induction by simple

enumeration  is not  such  a  principle,  and  unless  severely  restricted  is

demonstrably invalid.

  We infer, in science, not only laws, but also particular facts. If we read in

the newspaper that the King is dead, we infer that he is dead; if we find that

we shall have to make a long railway journey without a chance of a meal, we

infer that we shall be hungry. All such inferences can only be justified if it is

possible  to  ascertain laws.  If  there  were  not  general  laws,  every  man’s

knowledge would be confined to what he himself has experienced. It is more

necessary that there should be laws than that they should be known. If A is

always followed by B, and an animal, seeing A, expects B, the animal may be

said to know that B is coming without having knowledge of the general law.

But although some knowledge of facts as yet unperceived can be acquired in

this way, it is impossible to get far without knowledge of general laws. Such

laws, in general, state probabilities (in one sense), and are themselves only

probable (in another). E.g. it is probable (in one sense) that if you have cancer

it is probable (in another sense) that you will die. This state of affairs makes it

evident  that  we  cannot  understand  scientific  method  without  a  previous

investigation of the different kinds of probability.    Although  such  an  investigation  is  necessary,  I  do  not  think  that

probability  has  quite  the  importance  attached  to  it  by  some  authors.  The

importance that it has arises in two ways. On the one hand, we need, among

the premisses of science, not only data derived from perception and memory,

but also certain principles of synthetic inference, which cannot be established

by  deductive  logic  or  by  arguments  from  experience,  since  they  are

presupposed in all inference from experienced facts to other facts or to laws.

These premisses may be admitted to be in some degree uncertain, i.e. to have

not the highest “degree of credibility”. It will be part of our analysis of this

form of probability to maintain, in spite of Keynes’s adverse opinion, that data

and inferential premisses may be uncertain. This is one way in which the

theory of probability is relevant, but there is also another. It appears that we

frequently know (in some sense of the word “know”) that something happens

usually, but perhaps not always—e.g. that lightning is followed by thunder. In

that case, we have a class of cases A, of which we have reason to believe that

most  belong  to  the  class  B.  (In  our  illustration,  A  is  times  shortly  after

lightning, and B is times when thunder is audible.) In such circumstances,

given an instance of the class A concerning which we do not know whether it

is an instance of the class B, we have a right to say that it is “probably” a

member of the class B. Here “probably” has not the meaning that it has when

we are speaking of degrees of credibility, but the quite different meaning that

it has in the mathematical theory of probability.

  For these reasons, and also because probability-logic is much less complete

and  incontrovertible  than  elementary  logic,  it  is  necessary  to  develop  the

theory of probability in some detail, and to examine various controversial

questions of interpretation. It is to be remembered that the whole discussion

of  probability  is  of  the  nature  of  prolegomena  to  the  investigation  of  the

postulates of scientific inference.                                          I 


                        Kinds of Probability


ATTEMPTS to establish a logic of probability have been numerous, but to most

of them there have been fatal objections. One of the causes of faulty theories

has  been  failure  to  distinguish—or  rather,  determination  to  confound—

essentially different concepts which, so far as usage goes, have an equal right

to be called “probability”. I propose, in this Chapter, to make a preliminary

exploration of these different concepts in a discursive manner, leaving to later

Chapters the attempt to reach precise definitions.

  The first large fact of which we have to take account is the existence of

the mathematical theory of probability. There is, among mathematicians who

have concerned themselves with this theory, a fairly complete agreement as to

everything  that  can  be  expressed  in  mathematical  symbols,  but  an  entire

absence of agreement as to the interpretation of the mathematical formulae. In

such  circumstances,  the  simplest  course  is  to  enumerate  the  axioms  from

which  the  theory  can  be  deduced,  and  to  decide  that  any  concept  which

satisfies these axioms has an equal right, from the mathematician’s point of

view, to be called “probability”. If there are many such concepts, and if we are

determined  to  choose  between  them,  the  motives  of  our  choice  must  lie

outside mathematics.

  There is one very simple concept which satisfies the axioms of the theory

of probability, and which is on other accounts advantageous. Given a finite

class B which has n members, and given that m of these belong to some other

class A, then we say that, if a member of B is chosen at random, the chance

that it will belong to the class A is m/n. Whether this definition is adequate to

the uses that we wish to make of the mathematical theory of probability, is a

question which we shall have to investigate at a later stage; if it is not, we

shall have to look for some other interpretation of mathematical probability.

  It must be understood that there is here no question of truth or falsehood.

Any concept which satisfies the axioms may be taken to be mathematicalprobability. In fact, it might be desirable to adopt one interpretation in one

context, and another in another, for convenience is the only guiding motive.

This is the usual situation in the interpretation of a mathematical theory. For

example, as we have seen, all arithmetic can be deduced from five axioms

enumerated by Peano, and therefore, if all we want of numbers is that they

should obey the rules of arithmetic, we may define as the series of natural

numbers  any  series  satisfying  Peano’s  five  axioms.  Now  these  axioms  are

satisfied  by  any  progression,  and,  in  particular,  by  the  series  of  natural

numbers  starting,  not  with  0,  but  with  100,  or  1,000,  or  any  other  finite

integer.  It  is  only  if  we  decide  that  we  want  our  numbers  to  serve  for

enumeration, not only for arithmetic, that we have a motive for choosing the

series that starts with 0. Similarly, in the case of the mathematical theory of

probability, the interpretation to be chosen may depend upon the purpose we

have in view.

  The word “probability” is often used in ways that are not, or at least not

obviously, capable of interpretation as the ratio of the numbers of two finite

classes. We may say: Probably Zoroaster existed, probably Einstein’s theory of

                                                                                1
gravitation is better than Newton’s, probably all men are mortal. In these

cases, we might maintain that there is evidence of a certain kind, which is

known to be conjoined with a conclusion of a certain kind in a large majority

of cases; in this way, theoretically, the definition of probability as the ratio of

the numbers of two classes might become applicable. It is possible, therefore,

that  instances  such  as  the  above  do  not  involve  a  new  meaning  of

“probability”.

  There are, however, two dicta which we are all inclined to accept without

much  examination,  but  which,  if  accepted,  involve  an  interpretation  of

“probability” which it seems impossible to reconcile with the above definition.

The first of these dicta is Bishop Butler’s maxim that “probability is the guide

of life”. The second is the maxim that all our knowledge is only probable,

which has been specially emphasized by Reichenbach.

  Bishop Butler’s maxim is obviously valid according to one very common

interpretation of “probability”. When—as is usually the case—I am not certain

what is going to happen, but I must act upon one or other hypothesis, I amgenerally  well  advised  to  choose  the  most  probable  hypothesis,  and  I  am

always well advised to take account of probability in making my decision. But

there is an important logical difference between this kind of probability and

the mathematical kind, namely that the latter is concerned with propositional

        1
functions and the former with propositions. When I say that the chance of a

coin coming heads is a half, that is a relation between the two propositional

functions “x is a toss of the coin” and “x is a toss of the coin which comes

heads”. If I am to infer that, in a particular case, the chance of heads is a half, I

must state that I am considering the particular case solely as an instance. If I

could consider it in all its particularity, I should, in theory, be able to decide

whether it will fall heads or fall tails, and I should no longer be in the domain

of probability. When we use probability as a guide to conduct, it is because

our knowledge is inadequate; we know that the event in question is one of a

class B of events, and we may know what proportion of this class belongs to

some  class  A  in  which  we  are  interested.  But  the  proportion  will  vary

according  to  our  choice  of  the  class  B;  we  shall  thus  obtain  different

probabilities, all equally valid from the mathematical standpoint. If probability

is  to  be  a  guide  in  practice,  we  must  have  some  way  of  selecting  one

probability  as the  probability.  If  we  cannot  do  this,  all  the  different

probabilities remain equally valid, and we shall be left without guidance.

  Let  us  take  an  instance,  in  which  every  sensible  man  is  guided  by

probability,  I  mean  life  insurance.  I  ascertain  the  terms  on  which  some

company is willing to insure my life, and I have to decide whether insurance

on these terms is likely to prove an advantageous bargain, not to insurers in

general, but to me.

  My problem is different from that of the insurance company, and much

more difficult. The insurance company is not interested in my individual case:

it  offers  insurance  to  all  members  of  a  certain  class,  and  need  only  take

account of statistical averages. But I may believe that I have special reasons to

expect a long life, or that I am like the Scotchman who died the day after

completing  his  insurance,  remarking  with  his  last  breath  “I  always  was  a

lucky fellow”. Every circumstance of my health and my way of life is relevant,

but some of these may be so uncommon that I can get no reliable help fromstatistics. At last I decide to consult a medical man, who, after a few questions,

remarks genially: “Oh, I expect you’ll live to be 90”. I am painfully aware, not

only that his judgment is slap-dash and unscientific, but also that he wishes to

please me. The probability at which I finally arrive is thus something quite

vague  and  quite  incapable  of  numerical  measurement;  but  it  is  upon  this

vague probability that, as a disciple of Bishop Butler, I have to act.

  The probability which is the guide of life is not the mathematical kind, not

only because it is not relative to arbitrary data, but to all data that bear on the

question at issue, but also because it has to take account of something which

lies wholly outside the province of mathematical probability, and which may

be called “intrinsic doubtfulness”. This is what is relevant when it is said that

all our knowledge is only probable. Consider for example a distant memory

which has grown so dim that we can no longer trust it with any confidence, a

star so faint that we are not sure whether we really see it, or a noise so slight

that we think it may be only imagined. These are extreme cases, but in a

lesser degree the same sort of doubtfulness is very common. If we assert, as

Reichenbach does, that all our knowledge is doubtful, we cannot define this

doubtfulness in the mathematical way, for in the compiling of statistics it is

assumed that we know whether or not this A is a B, e.g. whether this insured

person has died. Statistics are built up on a structure of assumed certainty as

to past instances, and a doubtfulness which is universal cannot be merely

statistical.

  I think, therefore, that everything we feel inclined to believe has a “degree

of  doubtfulness”,  or,  inversely,  a  “degree  of  credibility”.  Sometimes  this  is

connected with mathematical probability, sometimes not; it is a wider and

vaguer conception. It is not, however, purely subjective. There is a cognate

subjective conception, namely, the degree of conviction that a man feels about

any of his beliefs, but “credibility”, as I mean it, is objective in the sense that it

is the degree of credence that a rational man will give. When I add up my

accounts, I give some credence to the result the first time, considerably more if

I get the same result the second time, and almost full conviction if I get it a

third time. This increase of conviction goes with an increase of evidence, and

is  therefore  rational.  In  relation  to  any  proposition  about  which  there  isevidence, however inadequate, there is a corresponding “degree of credibility”,

which is the same as the degree of credence given by a man who is rational.

(This latter may perhaps be regarded as a definition of the word “rational”.)

The  importance  of  probability  in  practice  is  due  to  its  connection  with

credibility, but if we imagine this connection to be closer than it is, we bring

confusion into the theory of probability.

  The connection between credibility and subjective conviction is one that

can be studied empirically; we need not, therefore, have any views on this

subject  in  advance  of  the  evidence.  A  conjurer,  for  instance,  can  arrange

circumstances in a manner known to himself but calculated to deceive his

audience; he can thus acquire data as to how to cause untrue convictions,

which are likely to be useful in advertising and propaganda. We cannot so

easily study the relation of credibility to truth, because we commonly accept a

high degree of credibility as sufficient evidence of truth, and if we do not do

so  we  can  no  longer  discover  any  truths.  But  we  can  discover  whether

propositions having high credibility form a mutually consistent set, since the

set contains the propositions of logic.

  I  suggest,  as  a  result  of  the  above  preliminary  discussion,  that  two

different concepts each, on the basis of usage, have an equal claim to be called

“probability”.  The  first  of  these  is  mathematical  probability,  which  is

numerically measurable and satisfies the axioms of the probability-calculus;

this is the sort that is involved in the use of statistics, whether in physics, in

biology, or in the social sciences, and is also the sort that we hope is involved

in induction. This sort of probability has to do always with classes, not with

single cases except when they can be considered merely as instances.

  But there is another sort, which I call “degree of credibility”. This sort

applies  to  single  propositions,  and  takes  account  always  of  all  relevant

evidence. It applies even in certain cases in which there is no known evidence.

The  highest  degree  of  credibility  to  which  we  can  attain  applies  to  most

perceptive  judgments;  varying  degrees  apply  to  judgments  of  memory,

according  to  their  vividness  and  recentness.  In  some  cases  the  degree  of

credibility can be inferred from mathematical probability, in others it cannot;

but even when it can it is important to remember that it is a different concept.It is this sort, and not mathematical probability, that is relevant when it is said

that all our knowledge is only probable, and that probability is the guide of

life.

  Both  kinds  of  probability  demand  discussion.  I  shall  begin  with

mathematical probability.1 Not to be confused with “all men are probably mortal”.

1 I.e. with sentences containing an undefined variable—e.g. “A is a man”—which become propositions

  when we assign a value to the variable—in the above case “A”.                                          II 


                    Mathematical Probability


IN this Chapter I propose to treat the theory of probability as a branch of pure

mathematics, in which we deduce the consequences of certain axioms without

                                                  1
seeking to assign this or that interpretation to them. It is to be observed that,

while interpretation, in this field, is controversial, the mathematical calculus

itself  commands  the  same  measure  of  agreement  as  any  other  branch  of

mathematics. This situation is in no way peculiar. The interpretation of the

infinitesimal calculus was for nearly two hundred years a matter as to which

mathematicians and philosophers debated; Leibniz held that it involved actual

infinitesimals, and it was not till Weierstrass that this view was definitely

disproved. To take an even more fundamental example: there has never been

any dispute as to elementary arithmetic, and yet the definition of the natural

numbers is still a matter of controversy. We need not be surprised, therefore,

that there is doubt as to the definition of probability though there is none (or

very little) as to the calculus of probability.

  Following Johnson and Keynes, we will denote by “p/h” the undefined

notion:  “The  probability  of p  given h”.  When  I  say  that  this  notion  is

undefined, I mean that it is only defined by the axioms or postulates about to

be enumerated. Anything satisfying these axioms is an “interpretation” of the

calculus  of  probability,  and  it  is  to  be  expected  that  there  will  be  many

possible interpretations. No one of these is more correct or more legitimate

than another, but some may be more important than others. So, in finding an

interpretation  of  Peano’s  five  axioms  for  arithmetic,  the  interpretation  in

which the first number is o is more important than that in which it is 3781; it

is more important because it enables us to identify the interpretation of the

formalist conception with the conception recognized in enumeration. But for

the present we will ignore all questions of interpretation, and proceed with the

purely formal treatment of probability.

  The axioms or postulates required are given in much the same way bydifferent  authors.  The  following  statement  is  taken  from  Professor  C.  D.

      1
Broad. The axioms are:


I.  Given p and h, there is only one value of p/h. We can therefore speak of

  “the probability of p given h”.

II.  The possible values of p/h are all the real numbers from 0 to 1, both

  included.  (In  some  interpretations  we  confine  the  possible  values  to

  rational numbers; this is a question I shall discuss later.)

III.  If h implies p, then p/h = 1. (We use “1” to denote certainty.)

IV.  If h implies not-p, then p/h = 0. (We use “o” to denote impossibility.)

V.  The probability of both p and q given h is the probability of p given h

  multiplied by the probability of q given p and h, and is also the probability

  of q given h multiplied by the probability of p given q and h.

•  This is called the “conjunctive” axiom.

VI.  The probability of p and/or q given h is the probability of p given h plus

  the probability of q given h minus the probability of both p and q given h.

•  This is called the “disjunctive” axiom.


  It is immaterial, for our purposes, whether these axioms are all necessary;

what concerns us is only that they are sufficient.

  Some observations are called for as regards these axioms. It is obvious that

II, III, and IV embody, in part, conventions which might easily be changed. If,

when they are adopted, the measure of a given probability is x, we might

equally  well  adopt  as  its  measure  any  number f (x)  which  increases  as x

increases; for i and o in III and IV we should then substitute f (1) and f (0).

  According to the above axioms, a proposition which must be true if the

data are true is to have the probability i in relation to the data, and one which

must be false if the data are true is to have the probability o in relation to the

data.

  It is important to observe that our fundamental concept p/h is a relation of

two propositions (or conjunctions of propositions), not a property of a single

proposition p. This distinguishes probability as it occurs in the mathematical

calculus from probability as required as a guide to practice, for the latter kindhas to belong to a proposition in its own right, or, at least, in relation to data

which are not arbitrary, but determined by the problem and the nature of our

knowledge. In the calculus, on the contrary, the choice of the data h is wholly

arbitrary.

  Axiom V is the “conjunctive” axiom. It gives the chance that each of two

events will happen. For example: if I draw two cards from a pack, what is the

chance that they are both red? Here “h” represents the datum that the pack

consists of 26 red cards and 26 black ones; “p” stands for the statement “the

first card is red” and “q” for the statement “the second card is red”. Then “(p

and q)/h” is the chance that both are red, p/h is the chance that the first is red,

“q/(p and h)” is the chance that the second is red, given that the first is red.

Obviously p/h = 1/2, q/(p and h) = 25/51. Thus by the axiom the chance that


both are red is .

  Axiom VI is the “disjunctive” axiom. In the above illustration, it gives the

chance that at least one of the cards is red. It says that the chance that at least

one is red is the chance that the first is red plus the chance that the second is

red (when it is not given whether the first is red or not) minus the chance that


both  are  red.  This  is ,  using  the  result

obtained above by the use of the conjunctive axiom.

  It  is  obvious  that,  by  means  of  Axioms  V  and  VI,  given  the  separate

probabilities of any finite collection of events, we can calculate the probability

of their all happening, or of at least one of them happening.

  From the conjunctive axiom it follows that







  This  is  called  the  “principle  of  inverse  probability”.  Its  utility  may  be

illustrated as follows. Let p be some general theory, and q an experimental

datum  relevant  to p.  Then p/h  is  the  probability  of  the  theory p  on  thepreviously known data, q/h is the probability of q on the previously known

data, and q/(p and h) is the probability of q ifp is true. Thus the probability of

the theory p after q has been ascertained is got by multiplying the previous

probability of p by the probability of q given p, and dividing by the previous

probability of q.  In  the  most  useful  case,  the  theory p  will  be  one  which

implies q, so that q/(p and h) = 1. In that case,







  That  is  to  say,  the  new  datum q  increases  the  probability  of p  in

proportion to the antecedent improbability of q. In other words, if our theory

implies something very astonishing, and the astonishing thing is then found to

happen, that greatly increases the probability of our theory.

  This principle may be illustrated by the discovery of Neptune regarded as

a confirmation of the law of gravitation. Here p = the law of gravitation, h =

all relevant facts known before the discovery of Neptune, q = the fact that

Neptune  was  found  in  a  certain  position.  Thus q/h  was  the  antecedent

probability that a hitherto unknown planet would be found in a certain small

region of the heavens. Let us take this to be m/n. Then after the discovery of

Neptune the probability of the law of gravitation was n/m times as great as

before.

  It  is  obvious  that  this  principle  is  of  great  importance  in  judging  the

bearing of new evidence on the probability of a scientific theory. We shall

find, however, that it proves somewhat disappointing, and does not yield such

good results as might have been hoped.

  There  is  an  important  proposition,  sometimes  called  Bayes’s  theorem,

which is as follows. Let p, p, . … p be n mutually exclusive possibilities, of
                              12n

which some one is known to be true; let h be the general data, and q some

relevant fact. We wish to know the probability of one possibility p, given q,
                                                                                r

when we know the probability of each p before q was known, and also the
                                                r

probability of q given p, for every r. We have
                          r  This proposition enables us, for example, to solve the following problem:

We are given n + 1 bags, of which the first contains n black balls and no white

                                                                                          th
ones, the second contains n — 1 black balls and one white one, the (r + 1)

contains n − r black balls and r white ones. One bag is chosen, but we do not

know which; m balls are drawn from it, and are found to be all white; what is

                            th
the probability that the r bag has been chosen? Historically, this problem is

important in connection with Laplace’s pretended proof of induction.

  Take next Bernoulli’s law of large numbers. This states that if, on each of

a number of occasions, the chance of a certain event occurring is p, then,

given  any  two  numbers  δ  and  ε,  however  small,  the  chance  that,  from  a

certain number of occasions onward, the proportion of occasions on which the

event occurs will ever differ from p by more than ε, is less than δ.

  Let us illustrate by the case of tossing a coin. We suppose that heads and

tails are equally probable. I say that, in all likelihood, after you have tossed

often enough, the proportion of heads will never again depart from 1/2 by

more than ε, however small ε may, be; I say further that, however small δ

                                                                      th
may be, the chance of such a departure anywhere after the n toss is less than

δ, provided n is sufficiently great.

  As  this  proposition  is  of  great  importance  in  the  applications  of

probability,  for  instance  to  statistics,  let  us  spend  a  little  longer  in

familiarizing  ourselves  with  exactly  what  it  asserts  in  the  above  case  of

tossing a coin. I assert first, let us say, that from some point onwards, the

percentage of heads will always remain between 49 and 51. You dispute my

assertion, and we decide to test it empirically as far as this is possible. The

theorem then asserts that, the longer we go on, the more likely we are to find

my assertion borne out by the facts, and that, as the number of tosses is

increased, this likelihood approaches certainty as a limit. You are convinced

by experiment, we will suppose, that from some point onwards the percentage

of heads remains always between 49 and 51, but I now assert that, from some

further point onwards, it will always remain between 49 · 9 and 50 · 1. Werepeat  our  experiment,  and  again  you  are  convinced  after  a  time,  though

probably after a longer time than before. After any given number of throws,

there  is  a  chance  that  my  assertion  may  not  be  verified,  but  this  chance

diminishes as the number of throws increases, and can be made less than any

assigned chance, however small, by going on long enough.

  The above proposition is easy to deduce from the axioms, but cannot, of

course, be adequately tested empirically, since it involves infinite series. If the

tests we can make seem to confirm it, the opponent can always say they

would not have done so if we had gone on longer; and if they seem not to

confirm it, the supporter of the theorem can equally say that we have not

gone  on  long  enough.  The  theorem  cannot,  therefore,  be  either  proved  or

disproved by empirical evidence.

  The above are the principal propositions in the pure theory of probability

that are important in our inquiry. I will, however, say something more on the

subject of the n + 1 bags, containing n balls each, some white and some black,

        th
the r + 1 bag containing r white balls and n − r black balls. The data are as

follows: I know that the bags have these varying numbers of white and black

balls, but there is no way of distinguishing them from the outside. I choose

one bag at haphazard, and draw from it, one by one, m balls which I do not

replace after drawing them. They turn out to be all white. In view of this fact,

I want to know two things: first, what is the chance that I have chosen the bag

that has only white balls? second, what is the chance that the next ball I draw

will be white?

  We proceed as follows. Let h be the fact that the bags are constituted in

the above manner, and q the fact that m white balls have been drawn; also let

p be the hypothesis that we have chosen the bag containing r white balls. It is
r

obvious that r must be at least as great as m, i.e.


  If r is less than m, then p/qh = 0 and q/ph = 0.
                                rr

  After some calculation, it turns out that the chance that we have chosenthe bag in which all the balls are white is .

  We now want to know the chance that the next ball will be white. After





some further calculation, it turns out that this chance is .

  Note that this is independent of n, and that, if m is large, it is very nearly

1.

  I have not, in the above outline, included any arguments on the subject of

induction, which I postpone to a later stage. I shall first consider the adequacy

of a certain interpretation of probability, in so far as this can be considered

independently of the problems connected with induction.1 As to “interpretation”, see Part IV, Chapter I.

1 Mind, N.S. No. 210, p. 98.                                          III 


              The Finite-Frequency Theory


IN this Chapter we are concerned with a certain very simple interpretation of

“probability”. We have, first, to show that it satisfies the axioms of Chapter II,

and then to consider, in a preliminary way, how far it can be made to cover

ordinary uses of the word “probability”. I shall call it “the finite frequency

theory”, to distinguish it from another form of frequency theory which we

shall consider later.

  The finite frequency theory starts from the following definition:

  Let B be any finite class, and A any other class. We want to define the

chance that a member of B chosen at random will be a member of A, e.g. that

the first person you meet in the street will be called Smith. We define this

probability as the number of B’s that are A’s divided by the total number of

B’s. We denote this by the symbol A/B.

  It is obvious that a probability so defined must be a rational fraction or 0

or 1.

  A few illustrations will make the purport of this definition clear. What is

the chance that an integer less than 10, chosen at random, will be a prime?

There are 9 integers less than 10, and 5 of them are primes; therefore the

chance is 5/9. What is the chance that it rained in Cambridge on my birthday

last year, assuming that you do not know when my birthday is? If m was the

number of days on which it rained, the chance is m/365. What is the chance

that a man whose name occurs in the London telephone book will be called

Smith? To solve this problem, you must first count the entries under the name

“Smith”, and then count all the entries, and divide the former number by the

latter. What is the chance that a card drawn at random from a pack will be a

spade? Obviously 13/52, i.e. 1/4. If you have drawn a spade, what is the chance

that you will draw another? The answer is 12/51. In a throw of two dice, what

is the chance that the numbers will add up to 8? There are 36 ways in which

the dice may fall, and in 5 of these the numbers add up to 8, so the chance is5/36.

  It is obvious that, in a number of elementary cases, the above definition

gives results that accord with usage. Let us now inquire whether probability,

so defined, satisfies the axioms.

  The letters p and q and h, which occur in the axioms, must now be taken

to stand for classes or propositional functions, not for propositions. Instead of

“h implies p” we shall have “h is contained in p”; “p and q” will stand for the

common part of the two classes) and q, while “p or q” will be the class of all

terms that belong to either or both of the two classes p and q.

  Our axioms were:


I.  There is only one value of p/h. This will be true unless h is null, in which

  case p/h = 0/0. We shall therefore assume that h is not null.

II.  The possible values of p/h are all the real numbers from 0 to 1. In our

  interpretation, they will be only the rational numbers, unless we can find a

  way of extending our definition to infinite classes. This cannot be done

  simply, since division does not yield a unique result when the numbers

  concerned are infinite.

III.  If h is contained in p, then p/h= 1. In this case, the common part of h and

  p is h, therefore the above follows from our definition.

IV.  If h is contained in not -p, then p/h = 0. This is obvious on our definition,

  since in this case the common part of h and p is null.

V.   The  conjunctive  axiom.—This  states,  on  our  interpretation,  that  the

  proportion of members of h which are members of both p and q is the

  proportion  of  members  of h  that  are  members  of p  multiplied  by  the

  proportion of members of p and h that are members of q. Suppose the

  number of members of h is a, the number of members common to p and h

  is b, and the number of members common to p and q and h is c. Then the

  proportion of members of h that are members of both p and q is c/a; the

  proportion  of  members  of h  that  are  members  of p  is b/a,  and  the

  proportion of members of p and k that are members of q is c/b. Thus our

  axiom is verified, since c/a = b/a × c/b.

VI.  The disjunctive axiom. This says, on our present interpretation, keeping  the above meanings of a, b, and c, and adding that d is the number of

  members of h that are members of p or q or both, while e is the number of

  members of h that are members of q, that







•  which again is obvious.


  Thus our axioms are satisfied if h is a finite class which is not null, except

that the possible values of a probability are confined to rational fractions.

  It follows that the mathematical theory of probability is valid on the above

interpretation.

  We have, however, to inquire as to the scope of probability so defined,

which is, prima facie, much too narrow for the uses that we wish to make of

probability.

  In the first place, we wish to be able to speak of the chance that some

definite event will have some characteristic, not only of the chance that an

unspecified member of a class will have it. For example: You have already

made a throw with two dice, but I have not seen the result. What is, for me,

the probability that you have thrown double sixes? We want to be able to say

that  it  is  1/36,  and  if  our  definition  does  not  allow  us  to  say  so,  it  is

inadequate. In such a case, we should say that we are considering an event

merely as an instance of a certain class; we should say that, if a is considered

merely as a member of the class B, the chance that it belongs to the class A is

A/B. But it is not very clear what is meant by “considering a definite event

merely as a member of a certain class”. What is involved in such a case is this:

We  are  given  some  characteristic  of  an  event  which,  to  more  complete

knowledge than ours, is sufficient to determine it uniquely; but relatively to

our knowledge, we have no way of finding out whether it belongs to the class

A, though we do know that it belongs to the class B. You, who have thrown

the dice, know whether the throw belongs to the class of double sixes, but I do

not know this. My only relevant knowledge is that it is one of the 36 possiblekinds of throws. Or take the following question: What is the chance that the

tallest man in the United States lives in Iowa? Somebody may know who he

is; at any rate there is a known method of finding out who he is. If this

method  has  been  successfully  employed,  there  is  a  definite  answer  not

involving probability, namely, either that he does live in Iowa or that he does

not. But I have not this knowledge. I can ascertain that the population of Iowa

is m and that of the United States is n, and say that, relative to these data, the

probability  that  he  lives  in  Iowa  is m/n.  Thus  when  we  speak  of  the

probability of a definite event having some characteristic, we must always

specify the data relative to which the probability is to be estimated.

  We may say generally: Given any object a, and given that a is a member

of the class B, we say that, in relation to this datum, the probability that a is

an A is A/B as previously defined. This conception is useful because we often

know enough about some object to enable us to define it uniquely, without

knowing enough to determine whether it has this or that property. “The tallest

man in the United States” is a definite description, which applies to one and

only one man, but I do not know what man, and therefore for me it is an open

question whether he lives in Iowa. “The card I am about to draw” is a definite

description, and in a moment I shall know whether this description applies to

a  red  or  a  black  card,  but  as  yet  I  do  not  know.  It  is  this  very  common

condition of partial ignorance as to definite objects that makes it useful to

apply  probability  to  definite  objects,  and  not  only  to  wholly  undefined

members of classes.

    Although partial ignorance is what makes the above form of probability

useful, ignorance is not involved in the concept of probability, which would

still have the same meaning for omniscience as for us. Omniscience would

know whether a is an A, but would still be able to say: Relative to the datum

that a is a B, the probability that a is an A is A/B.

  In  the  application  of  our  definition  to  a  definite  instance,  there  is  a

possible  ambiguity  in  certain  cases.  To  make  this  clear,  we  must  use  the

language of properties rather than classes. Let the class A be defined by the

property φ and the class B by the property ψ. Then we say:

  The probability that a has the property φ given that it has the property ψis defined as the proportion of things having both the properties φ and ψ to

those having the property ψ We denote “a has the property φ“ by “φa”. But if

a occurs more than once in “φa”, there will be an ambiguity. E.g. suppose “φa”

is “a commits suicide”, i.e. “a kills a”. This is a value of “x kills x”, which is the

class of suicides; also of “a kills x”, which is the class of persons whom a kills;

also of “x kills a”, which is the class of persons who kill a. Thus in defining the

probability of φa, if “a” occurs more than once in “φa”, we must indicate

which of its occurrences are to be regarded as values of a variable and which

not.

  It  will  be  found  that  we  can  interpret  all  elementary  theorems  in

accordance with the above definition.

  Take, for example, Laplace’s supposed justification of induction:

  There are N + 1 bags, each containing N balls.

                            th
  Of the bags, the r + 1 contains r white balls and N − r black balls. We

have drawn from one bag n balls, all white. What is the chance


(a)  that we have chosen the bag in which all are white?

(b)  that the next ball will be white?


  Laplace says that (a) is (n + 1)/(N + 1) and (b) is (n + 1)/(n + 2).

  Let us illustrate by some numerical instances. First: Suppose there are 8

balls altogether, of which 4 have been drawn, all white. What are the chances

(a) that we have chosen the bag consisting only of white balls, and (b) that the

next ball drawn will be white?

  Let p represent the hypothesis that we have chosen the bag with r white
        r

balls. The data exclude p, p, p, p. If we have p, there is only one way in
                            01234

which we can have drawn 4 whites, and there remain 4 ways of drawing a

black, none of drawing a white. If we have p, there were 5 ways in which we
                                                    5

could have drawn 4 whites, and for each of these there was 1 way of drawing

another white, and 3 of drawing a black; thus from p we get a contribution of
                                                            5

5 cases where the next is white and 15 where it is black. If we have p, there
                                                                                  6

were 15 ways of choosing 4 whites, and when they had been chosen there

remained 2 ways of choosing a white and 2 of choosing a black; thus we getfrom p 30 cases of another white and 30 where the next is black. If we have
      6

p, there are 35 ways of drawing 4 whites, and after they have been drawn
7

there remain 3 ways of drawing a white and one of drawing a black; thus we

get 105 ways of drawing another white and 35 of drawing a black. If we have

p, there are 70 ways of drawing 4 whites, and when they have been drawn
8

there are 4 ways of drawing another white and none of drawing a black; thus

we get from p 280 cases of a fifth white and none of a black. Adding, we have
              8

5 + 30 + 105 + 280, i.e. 420, cases in which the fifth ball is white, and 4 + 15 +

30 + 35, i.e. 84, cases in which the fifth ball is black. Therefore the odds in

favour of white are 420 to 84, i.e. 5 to 1; that is to say, the chance of the fifth

ball being white is 5/6.

  The chance that we have chosen the bag in which all the balls are white is

the ratio of the number of ways of choosing 4 white balls from this bag to the

total number of ways of choosing 4 white balls. The former, we have seen, is

70; the latter is 1 + 5 + 15 + 35 + 70, i.e. 126. Therefore the chance is 70/126, i.e.

5/9.

  Both these results are in accordance with Laplace’s formula.

  To take one more numerical example: suppose there are 10 balls, of which

5 have been drawn, and have been found to be all white. What is the chance

of p, i.e. of our having chosen the bag with only white balls? And what is the
  10

chance that the next ball will be white?

  p possible in 1 ways; if p, no way of another white, 5 of a black.
    55

  p ” ” 6 ways; ” p 1 ” ” ”, 4 ” ”
    66

    p ” ” 21 ”; ” p, 2 ways ” ”, 3 ” ”
    77

      p ” ” 56 ”; ” p, 3 ” ” ”, 2 ” ”
    88

      p ” ” 126 ”; ” p, 4 ” ” ”, 1 ” ”
    99

      p ” ” 252 ”; ” p, 5 ” ” ”, 0 ” ”
    1010

  Thus the chance of p is 252/[1 + 6 + 21 + 56 + 126 + 252], i.e. 252/462, i.e.
                            10

6/11.

  The ways in which the next ball can be white are



•  and the ways in which it can be black are    Therefore the odds in favour of white are 1,980 to 330, i.e. 6 to 1, so that

the chance of another white is 6/7. This again is in accordance with Laplace’s

formula.

  Let us now take Bernoulli’s law of large numbers. We may illustrate it as

follows: suppose we toss a coin n times, and put 1 for every time it comes

heads, 2 for every time it comes tails, thus forming a number of n digits. We

will suppose every possible sequence to come just once. Thus if n = 2, we have

the four numbers 11, 12, 21, 22; if n = 3, we have the 8 numbers 111, 112, 121,

122, 211, 212, 221, 222; if n = 4, we have 16 numbers, 1111, 1112, 1121, 1122,

1211, 1212, 1221, 1222, 2111, 2112, 2121 2122, 2211, 2212, 2221, 2222;

  and so on. Taking the last of the above lists, we find


•  1 number all 1’s

•  4 numbers with three 1 ‘s and one 2

•  6 ” ” two 1’s ” two 2’s

•  4 ” ” one 1 ” three 2’s

•  1 number all 2’s.


                                                                          4
  These numbers, 1, 4, 6, 4, 1, are the coefficients in (a + b). It is easy to

prove that, for n digits, the corresponding numbers are the coefficients in (a +

n
b). All that Bernoulli’s theorem amounts to is that, if n is large, the sum of the

coefficients  near  the  middle  is  very  nearly  equal  to  the  sum  of  all  the

                          n
coefficients (which is 2). Thus if we take all possible series of heads and tails

in a large number of tosses, the immense majority have very nearly the same

number  of  both;  the  majority  and  the  nearness,  moreover,  increase

indefinitely as the number of throws increases.

  Though Bernoulli’s theorem is more general and more precise than the

above statements with equi-probable alternatives, it is to be interpreted, on

our present definition of “probability”, in a manner analogous to the above. It

is a fact that, if we form all numbers that consist of 100 digits, each of which is

either 1 or 2, about a quarter have 49 or 50 or 51 digits that are 1, nearly a half

have 48 or 49 or 50 or 51 or 52 digits that are 1, more than half have from 47 to